
THE ADOPTED CHARTER OF THE CITY OF FOLSOM
Preamble and Boundaries of the City

Article I. Powers of the City

1.01    Powers of the City

Article II. Mayor and City Council

2.01    City Council

2.02    General Powers of the City Council

2.03    Mayor

2.04    Duties of Mayor

2.05    Vice Mayor

2.06    City Council Compensation and Expenses

2.07    Prohibitions on City Council

2.08    Council Vacancies and Forfeiture of Office

2.09    Public Participation

2.10    Council Organization, Meetings and Rules

2.11    Independent Audit

2.12    Ordinances in General

2.13    Emergency Ordinances

Article III. City Manager

3.01    City Manager Appointment

3.02    Restriction on Dismissal

3.03    Powers and Duties of City Manager

3.04    City Manager's Office

Article IV. Departments, Agencies and Employees

4.01    Departments and Department Heads

4.02    City Clerk

4.03    City Attorney

4.04    Personnel System

4.05    Planning Commission

4.06    Parks and Recreation Commission

4.07    Boards and Commissions

Article V. Financial Procedures

5.01    General Tax Limits and Procedure

5.02    Special Funds

5.03    Investments

5.04    Purchasing and Contracting

5.05    Budgeting and Accounting

5.06    Debt

5.07    Depositories

5.08    Miscellaneous Fiscal Procedures

Article VI. Elections

6.01    Election Procedures

Article VII. General Provisions

7.01    Conflicts of Interest

7.02    Franchises

7.03    Definitions

7.04    Violations

7.05    American Bridge Crossing Site

7.07    Meter Retrofits and Metered Rates

7.08    Local Control of Land South of Highway 50

Article VIII. Charter Amendment

8.01    Charter Amendment

Article IX. Transition/Severability

9.01    Transition/Severability Provision

9.02    Transition of Current Elected Officials

9.03    Continuity of Laws, Officers and Employees

CHARTER OF THE CITY OF FOLSOM,
CALIFORNIA

March 6, 1990

Preamble:
The citizens of the City of Folsom do enact and establish this Charter in order to form a better City government for all citizens of Folsom, to provide for the public health, safety, welfare and morals, to improve the means of cooperation and assistance with neighboring governmental jurisdictions, and to preserve and enhance the quality of life for Folsom's citizens, their children, and their neighbors.

Through adoption and enactment of this City Charter the citizens of the City of Folsom hereby do declare their express intent and purpose to be and to remain forever a separate and independent City.

Boundaries of City:
The boundaries of the City of Folsom shall be as now established and as may be changed in the future as provided by law.

ARTICLE I. POWERS OF THE CITY
1.01 Powers of the City:
The City shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the Constitution and laws of the State of California as fully and as completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter.

A.    General Law Powers. Nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent or restrict the City from exercising or consenting to, and the City is hereby authorized any and all rights, powers and privileges heretofore or hereafter granted or prescribed by general laws of the state.

B.    Municipal Affairs. The City may make and enforce all ordinances and regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to restrictions and limitations provided in this Charter and in respect to other matters subject to applicable general laws. As regards municipal affairs, this Charter shall supersede all laws inconsistent therewith.

C.    Intergovernmental Powers. The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any 1 or more states and the State of California, or any state civil division or agency, or the United States or any of its agencies.

D.    Construction. The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers granted in this Article or by this Charter.

ARTICLE II. MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
2.01 City Council:
There shall be a City Council of 5 members elected by the voters of the City at large.

A.    Registered Voters Eligible. Only resident registered voters of the City shall be eligible to hold the office of Councilmember.

B.    Regular Election. The regular election of Councilmembers shall be held on the second Tuesday of November in even-numbered years, in the manner provided by state law.

C.    Councilmember Term. The terms of Councilmembers shall be 4 years and shall begin the second Monday in December following their election and qualification.

D.    Staggered Terms. The terms of Councilmembers shall be staggered, with 3 Councilmembers being elected in 1990 and each 4 years thereafter, and 2 Councilmembers in 1992 and each 4 years thereafter.

E.    Term Limit. A person serving on the City Council may serve no more than 4 consecutive 4-year terms, and thereafter shall be ineligible to hold the office of Councilmember again until 4 consecutive years have passed. For purpose of the term limit, the counting of the term shall start and apply to Councilmembers elected at and after the November 6, 2018 municipal election. (Amended by a vote of the people, Nov. 6, 2018 election).

2.02 General Powers of the City Council:
All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, and the Council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law.

2.03 Mayor:
There is hereby created the office of Mayor. Only a member of the City Council shall be eligible to hold the office of Mayor. The Council shall select the Mayor, who shall serve as Mayor at the pleasure of the Council.

2.04 Duties of Mayor:
The Mayor shall be the representative of the City. The Mayor shall:

A.    Recommend City policy;

B.    Recommend to the Council appropriate and necessary legislation;

C.    Recommend programs for the physical, economic, social and cultural development of the City;

D.    Be responsible for public relations activities and represent the City for ceremonial purposes;

E.    Represent the City in intergovernmental relations, personally or by a representative designated by him/ her with the concurrence of the Council;

F.    Preside at meetings of the Council;

G.    Establish and dissolve ad hoc committees, subject to the approval of the Council, but no such committee shall exist for more than 1 year;

H.    Possess the authority to suspend implementation of any action taken by the Council, excepting an emergency ordinance, by filing with the City Clerk, within 3 days after such Council action, a notice of suspension thereof. Such suspension shall constitute a motion for reconsideration of the action taken, to be voted on by the Council at its next regular meeting, provided, however, that this authority shall be applied only once per specific action item;

I.    Provide leadership and marshal citizen participation in City activities and civic affairs;

J.    Report to the public from time to time on the affairs of the City;

K.    Be, and possess the authority and attributes of a Councilmember;

L.    Meet regularly and as appropriate with the City Manager for the purpose of providing policy guidance relative to the actions of the Council, expressing the desires of the Council and its members, and to monitor the administrative implementation of Council policies;

M.    Together with the Council, at least annually evaluate the performance of the City Manager;

N.    Possess such authority and perform such duties as are granted or required by this Charter or by the Council, which additional duties shall not conflict with any other provision of this Charter.

2.05 Vice Mayor:
There is hereby created the office of Vice Mayor. The City Council shall select the Vice Mayor, who shall serve as Vice Mayor at the pleasure of the Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall possess and perform the duties of the Mayor.

2.06 City Council Compensation and Expenses:
The City Council may determine the annual salary of the Mayor, Vice Mayor, and Councilmembers by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of Councilmembers elected at the next regular election. The Mayor, Vice Mayor and Councilmembers shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office.

2.07 Prohibitions on City Council:
A.    Restriction on Holding 2 Offices. Except where authorized by state law, no Councilmember shall hold any other elected public office during the term for which the member was elected to the Council. No Councilmember shall hold any other City office or City employment during the term for which the member was elected to the Council. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the Council from selecting any current or former Councilmember to represent the City on the governing board of any regional or other intergovernmental agency.

B.    Restriction on Personnel Powers. Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner control or demand the appointment or removal of any City department head or employee whom the City Manager or any subordinate of the City Manager is empowered to appoint. But the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such department heads and employees.

C.    Restriction on Interference With City Manager. Neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember shall interfere with the execution of the powers and duties of the City Manager. Except for purposes of inquiry, the Mayor and Councilmembers shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.

D.    Restriction on City Utility or Enterprise. No City owned utility or enterprise, or any portion thereof, which lies within the corporate boundaries of the City may be sold, leased for more than 2 years, contracted to, or put to franchise to any non-governmental party without complying with the procedures set out in Section 7.02 hereof, and being approved by a majority vote at an election.

2.08 Council Vacancies and Forfeiture of Office:
A.    Vacancy. The office of a Councilmember shall become vacant upon the member's death, resignation, removal from office or forfeiture of office in any manner authorized by state law. The method of filling vacancies on the City Council shall be as provided by state law.

B.    Forfeiture of Office. A Councilmember shall forfeit that office if the Councilmember:

1.    Lacks at any time during the term of office for which elected any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law,

2.    Violates any express prohibition of this Charter,

3.    Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or

4.    Fails to attend 3 consecutive regular meetings of the Council without being excused by the Council.

2.09 Public Participation:
No one shall be denied the right, personally or through counsel, to present grievances or offer suggestions for the betterment of municipal affairs at any regular meeting of the City Council, nor to speak to the subject of any special meeting.

The Council shall by ordinance encourage the organization of and communication with representative neighborhood groups throughout the City to:

A.    Encourage citizen participation;

B.    Seek advice and input on and provide information to the public relative to City matters and affairs.

2.10 Council Organization, Meetings and Rules:
Selection of officers of the City Council, the time and place of regular meetings, the method of calling meetings, the rules of order for the conduct of proceedings by the Council, and the order of succession in the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor and Vice Mayor shall be as established by ordinance.

2.11 Independent Audit:
The City Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all City accounts and financial documents and may provide for more frequent or more specialized audits as it deems necessary.

A.    Auditor To Have No Interest in City Affairs. All audits shall be made by a certified public accountant firm experienced in City auditing. The audit firm shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City government or any of its officers, and may not provide services to the City other than audit services.

B.    Designation of Auditor. The Council shall, through a request for qualifications and proposal process, designate such audit firm annually or for a period not exceeding 3 years, but the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than 30 days before the beginning of such fiscal year.

C.    Comprehensive Audit and Evaluation. The annual audit shall be comprehensive of all departments and agencies, and shall include an evaluation of the city budgeting and accounting system as to compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and modern practices for an integrated and computerized city financial management system utilizing all possible modern accounting and control techniques and procedures.

D.    Audit Submitted at Regular Meeting. The annual audit shall be submitted to the Council at a regular meeting and shall be open to public inspection.

2.12 Ordinances in General:
Ordinances adopted by the City Council shall be enacted or repealed in the form: "The City Council of the City of Folsom hereby does ordain."

A.    Form of Ordinance. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. An ordinance may be read by Title only at the time of its introduction, and must be available to the public in full text when introduced.

No ordinance shall contain more than 1 subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title.

B.    Adoption of Ordinance. An ordinance may be introduced by any Councilmember at any regular or special meeting of the Council. The second reading and adoption of the introduced ordinance shall be conducted at a regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the Council, which meeting shall be not less than 5 calendar days after its introduction. The ordinance may be read by title only at second reading.

C.    Ordinance Availability. The public shall have an opportunity to be heard on the proposed ordinance at any meeting the proposed ordinance is considered. The City Clerk shall be provided a copy of any proposed ordinance prior to its introduction and adoption. Copies of proposed ordinances shall be made available to the public or interested persons at a reasonable cost.

D.    Ordinance Effect. All ordinances other than emergency ordinances shall go into effect 30 days after adoption, or such later date as may be specified in the ordinance or state law.

E.    Publication of Ordinance. The City Clerk shall publish every ordinance adopted by the City Council within 20 days following such adoption in a newspaper of general circulation in the City or, in the case where there is no newspaper of general circulation in the City, by posting in 3 public places accessible to the public. The ordinance may be published in full text or as a brief summary thereof.

2.13 Emergency Ordinances:
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, public welfare, property or the public peace, the City Council may adopt emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided herein for emergency appropriations.

A.    Form and Manner of Emergency Ordinance. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it plainly shall be designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms.

B.    Four Votes Required. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least 4 of the members of the Council shall be required for adoption.

C.    Publication of Emergency Ordinance. After adoption an emergency ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. An emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify.

D.    Automatic Repeal of Emergency Ordinances. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the 121st day following the date on which it was adopted, but this requirement shall not prevent re- enactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.

ARTICLE III. CITY MANAGER
3.01 City Manager Appointment:
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term through the mechanism of an employment agreement the same as those afforded department heads under this Charter. The City Manager:

A.    Serve At Pleasure. Shall serve at the pleasure of the Council;

B.    Chief Executive. Shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City;

C.    How Chosen. Shall be chosen solely on the basis of administrative qualifications and, at time of appointment need not be a resident of the State or City;

D.    Salary. Shall be paid a salary fixed by the Council commensurate with the responsibilities of the position;

E.    Dismissal Hearing. Shall have the right to a public hearing on any motion to remove or to suspend his/her employment, which public hearing shall be held only after provision of 10 days' published notice prior to the Council voting on the motion to remove or to suspend the City Manager.

3.02 Restriction on Dismissal.
During a period of 90 days immediately following the date of installation of any person newly elected to the Council at a regular or special City election, or of any person newly appointed to the Council, the Council shall take no action, whether immediate or prospective, to remove, suspend, request the resignation of, or to reduce the duties, salary or benefits of the City Manager.

3.03 Powers and Duties of City Manager:
The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City and:

A.    Appointment of Employees. Shall appoint, remove and discipline all employees of the City pursuant to requirements set out in this Charter;

B.    Delegation of Authority. May delegate the appointment, removal and discipline of subordinate employees to the department heads to which those employees are assigned, but shall approve, modify or disapprove all recommendations for such appointment, removal, and disciplinary actions to be taken against employees by department heads or other employees of the City;

C.    Supervision of Departments. Shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City;

D.    Annual Budget. Shall annually prepare, submit, and administer the budget and capital improvement plan of the City as set out in this Charter;

E.    Keep Council Informed. Shall keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as are deemed necessary or desirable;

F.    Enforce Laws and Contracts. Shall provide for enforcement and faithful execution of all laws, regulations and rules of the City, all provisions of this Charter, and all acts of the Council, and shall administer all contracts of which the City is a party;

G.    Submit Reports. Shall submit to the Council and make available to the public a comprehensive annual financial and administrative report on the finances and activities of all City departments and agencies, which report shall be filed with the City Council within 6 months of the end of each fiscal year;

H.    Make Reports. Shall make such other reports to the Council as it may require or the City Manager may desire, concerning the operations of City departments, offices and agencies;

I.    Restrictions. Shall engage in no incompatible business, occupation or activities;

J.    Attend Meetings. Shall attend all Council meetings and have the right to take part in discussion but shall have no vote, except the City Manager may not be entitled to attend closed sessions of the Council when dismissal of or other disciplinary actions involving the City Manager are discussed;

K.    Participation. Shall be entitled to participate in the deliberations of any City board, committee, and commission, but shall not have a vote therein;

L.    Receive Notices. Shall receive notice of all meetings of the City Council, boards, committees, and commissions;

M.    Other Duties. Shall perform such other duties consistent with this Charter as may be required by the Council.

3.04 City Manager's Office:
The City Manager shall appoint such professional assistants as he/she shall determine to be needed to positions authorized by the Council.

A.    Service of Assistants. Such assistants shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and, for the purposes of terms and conditions of employment, shall be considered to be department heads.

B.    Duties of Assistants. Such assistants shall have such powers and perform such duties as are specified by the City Manager.

C.    Secretary. The Secretary to the City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager but shall have permanent status subject to all rights and limitations in the City merit system.

D.    Acting City Manager. The City Manager shall in writing by letter filed with the City Clerk designate an Acting City Manager on those occasions the City Manager will be absent from the City for longer than 48 hours. The Council shall designate an Acting City Manager in the event of the disability of or at the request of the City Manager.

ARTICLE IV. DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES AND EMPLOYEES
4.01 Departments and Department Heads:
The City Manager shall recommend and the City Council shall by ordinance create, reorganize and abolish departments and divisions thereof as necessary for the effective management of the City's affairs, in addition to those created by this Charter.

A.    Department Head Appointments. The City Manager shall appoint a head of each department, which department head shall be qualified in the field of expertise encompassed within the department of assignment.

B.    Department Head Removal. All department heads shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and be subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager.

C.    Requirements. Department heads shall be City employees for the purposes of powers and duties, and shall be provided employment agreements by the City Manager setting out the terms and conditions of employment, pay, benefits, goals and objectives, a requirement for periodic and regular performance evaluations, obligations, and termination.

4.02 City Clerk:
The office of City Clerk is hereby created. The duties of the City Clerk shall be to act as Clerk to the City Council, to fulfill all duties thereof enumerated in this Charter, to maintain the integrity of and to provide for public access to and inspection of City public records, and to perform all duties required of a City Clerk by state law. The City Clerk shall be a department head.

4.03 City Attorney:
The office of City Attorney is hereby created. The City Attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the City, and:

A.    Duties. Shall advise the City Council, individual Councilmembers, the City Manager and his/her assistants, and department heads regarding the law relating to City affairs.

B.    Additional Duties. Shall represent the City in all legal proceedings, prepare all ordinances and other needed legal documents, select and retain specialist counsel where there is a need for such specialized legal services, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.

C.    Department Head. May be a full time department head of the City, or may be contracted as a department head.

D.    Approval of Contracts. Shall review and approve all City contracts as to legal form.

E.    Special Counsel. The City Council may retain special counsel in any matter where representation by the City Attorney would create an impermissible conflict, including the discipline or dismissal of the City Manager.

4.04 Personnel System:
The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment, regulation and maintenance of a merit system governing personnel policies necessary to effective administration of the employees of the City's departments and offices.

A.    Merit System Components. Such merit system of personnel administration shall include, but not be limited to classification and pay plans, selection processes, force reduction, working conditions, provisional and exempt appointments, discipline and dismissal, in-service training, grievances, relationships with employee organizations, regular and periodic employee performance evaluations, and incentive plans.

B.    Employee Selection. The merit system shall provide for open, publicly posted, and competitive employee selection processes utilizing, where and when feasible, validated examinations at entry level and objective evaluative processes for all other classifications.

4.05 Planning Commission:
There shall be a Planning Commission of 7 members, each of whom must be a resident and registered voter of the City. Each member of the Council shall appoint 1 member whose term shall run concurrent with that of the Councilmember so appointing. Two members shall be appointed by the Council for 2-year terms. The powers, duties, qualifications, removal, and compensation, if any, of the Commission shall be set by ordinance.

4.06 Parks and Recreation Commission:
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Commission consisting of 7 members, each of whom must be a resident and registered voter of the City. Each member of the Council shall appoint 1 member whose term shall run concurrent with that of the Councilmember so appointing. Two members shall be appointed by the Council for 2-year terms. The powers, duties, qualifications, removal, and compensation, if any, of the Commission shall be set by ordinance.

4.07 Boards and Commissions:
The City Council may by ordinance create other Boards and Commissions and prescribe their powers and duties, determine the number and qualification of the members, their method of selection, term of office and removal, and fix their compensation, if any. All boards and commissions only shall be advisory to the Council. Each member of any Board or Commission shall be a resident and registered voter of the City.

ARTICLE V. FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
5.01 General Tax Limits and Procedure:
The City Council may not levy a property tax for general municipal purposes in excess of the maximum rate applicable to the City on the effective date of this Charter provided, however, that a tax in excess thereof may be levied if authorized by state general law, or if authorized by the affirmative votes of a majority of the City's voters voting on a proposition to increase such levy.

A.    Statement on Years of Levy. The number of years that any such additional levy is to be made shall be specified in such proposition.

B.    Separate Taxing Areas. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Council from establishing separate taxing areas within the City for the levy of a tax in excess of such maximum rate if authorized by state law, by ordinance, or by the affirmative votes of a majority of the voters within the area voting on a proposition to impose or to increase such levy.

C.    Procedure for Assessment. The procedure and authority for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes may be prescribed by ordinance and, in the absence of such an ordinance the procedure and authority applicable thereto shall be that prescribed by state law.

5.02 Special Funds:
The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish capital outlay and reserve funds for specified capital improvement and replacement purposes, and such other special funds as it may deem necessary.

A.    Inviolate Funds. Such special funds shall remain inviolate for the purpose for which they were created unless the use of such funds for some other purpose is authorized by an ordinance adopted by a four-fifths vote of the Council after holding of a public hearing.

B.    Disposition of Special Funds. Any unexpended and unencumbered balance remaining in any such special fund after the purpose for which the special fund was created has been accomplished shall be transferred by the Council to the General Fund or to the most appropriate other special fund.

5.03 Investments:
Investment of monies held by the City and any of its agencies shall be made pursuant to policy set by ordinance. Such policy shall comply with guidelines for the investment of public monies as recommended by Moody's and Standard and Poor's credit rating services.

5.04 Purchasing and Contracting:
The City Council shall by ordinance provide for a purchasing and contracting system assuring a maximum of competition for the lowest price consistent with a stated level of quality. The purchasing and contracting system shall provide for:

A.    Delegation of Authority. Control of the system by the City Manager, who shall be empowered to make purchases and to award contracts for amounts of $10,000 or less, adjusted in amount annually as set out herein in Subsection C;

1.    Delegation of responsibility by the City Manager to any appointed subordinate;

2.    A requirement that should contracts or purchases in amount of $10,000 or less be awarded to any 1 vendor or contractor cumulatively totalling $100,000 in any 3-year period then, in that event, the competitive process set out herein shall be followed should such process otherwise be required hereunder;

3.    An informal bid solicitation process for purchases and contracts in amount between $10,001 and $24,999;

B.    Award of Contracts and Purchases. Award of contracts and purchases to the lowest responsible bidder or vendor meeting specifications, except as provided herein and in the ordinance;

C.    Sealed Competitive Bids. Sealed bids for competitive purchases involving the expenditure of $25,000 or more, but this amount and all dollar amounts set out in this section shall be revised by the Council annually as part of the annual budget by a revision factor determined by utilizing reliable indicators or indices of price changes;

D.    Waiver of Bids. Waiver of competitive bidding for purchase of non-competitive items and contracting for services, in emergencies, for copyrighted and patented items and services, and for professional or specialized services for which a written finding is filed with the City Clerk regarding the reason for non-competitive, emergency or sole source acquisition;

E.    Other Procedures. Provision for step procurement involving request for information, request for proposal, request for technical services, and joint contract or purchase awards for subcontracts, and joint bidding with or purchasing through other governmental jurisdictions;

F.    Prohibition. Prohibition of splitting contracts or purchases to avoid dollar limits;

G.    Rejections. Rejection by the Council of any and all bids;

H.    Bid Bonds. Requirement of a bid bond or certified check for all sealed bids;

I.    Public Notification. Full public notification of all calls for sealed bids by provision of 10 days' notice through appropriate publications;

J.    Public Works Determinations. Determination of which public works or improvement projects are to be performed by City forces and which are to be let to contract;

K.    Other Matters. Other matters as shall be determined to be required by the Council.

5.05 Budgeting and Accounting:
The City Council shall by ordinance provide for an integrated budgeting and financial management system for the City. The ordinance shall provide for the following, which shall be required:

A.    Fiscal Year. Establishment of a fiscal year;

B.    Annual Budget. An annual budget and budget message by the City Manager for the ensuing fiscal year shall be submitted on or before the first working day of the last month of the current fiscal year;

C.    Budget Message. The budget shall include a budget message by the City Manager, which message shall provide an explanation of the budget, both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, revenues or financial position, together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the City's debt position, and include such other material as the City Manager deems desirable;

D.    Comprehensive Financial Plan. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds, agencies and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or that the Council may require. The budget shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated revenues of all funds and agencies; all carry-over fund balances and reserves; and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall contain sufficient salaries to provide a comprehensive and consolidated view of the city's financial position;

E.    Contents of Budget. Sections of the budget shall contain:

1.    The proposed goals and objectives and appropriations for current operations during the ensuing year, detailed for each fund by organization unit, and program, purpose or activity, and the method of financing such proposed appropriations;

2.    Comparative amounts for actual and estimated income and expenditures for the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures for the preceding fiscal year;

3.    Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by organization unit when practicable, and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and

4.    Anticipated income, expense, profit, loss, and reserves, and the purpose of said reserves, for each utility and enterprise fund;

F.    Overexpenditures Prohibited. The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated revenues plus carried forward fund balance, exclusive of reserves, for any fund;

G.    Budget Adoption. The Council shall adopt the annual budget by affirmative vote of at least 3 members, on or before the last working day of the last month of the current fiscal year. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date the budget proposed by the City Manager shall be deemed adopted;

H.    Supplemental Appropriations. Prior to the City Council making any supplemental appropriation the City Manager shall certify that monies in excess of those estimated in the budget are available for appropriation. Any such supplemental appropriation shall be made for the fiscal year by resolution up to the amount of any excess;

I.    Emergency Appropriations. A process shall be devised by which the Council can, by four-fifths vote only, make emergency appropriations to respond to a public emergency affecting life, health, public welfare, property or the public peace;

J.    Appropriations Reductions. Appropriations may be reduced any time during the fiscal year by the Council or City Manager if it appears probable to either that the revenues or fund balances available will be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropriations have been authorized. When appropriations are reduced the City Manager shall report to the Council at its next meeting, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial actions taken, and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken;

K.    Budgetary Transfers. The City Manager may transfer monies between departments and divisions, and programs and accounts within departments and divisions, but only the Council by resolution may transfer monies between funds and from unappropriated balances or fund balances to any fund or appropriation account. All such transfers made by the City Manager shall be reported in writing quarterly to the Council;

L.    Lapse of Appropriations. All appropriations, except for capital expenditures, shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until expended, revised, or repealed. The purpose of any such capital appropriation shall be deemed abandoned after 3 years pass without disbursement from or encumbrance against the appropriation;

M.    Capital Improvement Plan. A capital improvement plan and budget encompassing 5 or more years shall be prepared and presented, or updated, by the City Manager and presented to the Council each year. The capital improvement plan shall include:

1.    A general summary of its contents;

2.    A list of all capital improvements and other proposed capital projects which are proposed to be undertaken during the term of the capital improvement plan, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each proposed project or acquisition;

3.    Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditure;

4.    Method of financing for each proposed capital project;

5.    The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired;

N.    Capital Plan Adoption. The Council shall adopt the capital improvement plan by resolution on or before the beginning of the first fiscal year covered by the plan;

O.    Public Document. Copies of the annual budget, annual financial report, the capital improvement plan, and all appropriate summarizing documents, shall be made available to the public for inspection and review;

P.    Public Hearing Required. Each of the annual budgets in the capital improvement plans shall be the subject of a public hearing before the City Council. Ten days' posted notice shall be provided for said hearing;

Q.    Two Year Budget. A 2-year operational budget may be substituted for the required annual budget, in which case the budget shall be prepared and presented in 2 annual increments and all uses of the term "annual" in this Section may be revised by ordinance to permit the creation of the 2-year budget;

R.    Quarterly Reports. Within 30 days after the end of each quarter during the fiscal year, and more often if required, the City Manager shall submit to the Council a financial and management report showing the relation between budgeted and actual revenues and appropriations, expenditures and encumbrances to date.

5.06 Debt:
The City by ordinance or resolution may issue all manner of securities and incur all manner of indebtedness, but within the following limits:

A.    General Obligation Bond Limit. Indebtedness of the City as evidenced by issued general obligation bonds shall at no time exceed 10 percent of the assessed valuation of all property taxable by the City;

B.    Other Debt Limit. Indebtedness of the City other than voted general obligation bonds shall at no time exceed 10 percent of the assessed valuation of all property taxable by the City;

C.     Definition and Exemption. The term "indebtedness" as used in subsections A and B of this Section shall not include bonds or other obligations denoting indebtedness which are issued for the purpose of financing or refinancing the acquisition, construction, or completion of public improvements or projects, the payment of which is not a general obligation of the City, and which is secured by a lien upon or levy of a special tax on real property within an identified district.

5.07 Depositories:
The City Council shall designate a depository or depositories for City monies and shall provide for the regular deposit of City monies therein The Council shall require such security for City deposits as it deems desirable and as is authorized or permitted by law, except that personal surety bonds, of themselves, shall not be deemed proper security.

5.08 Miscellaneous Fiscal Procedures:
The City Council shall by ordinance provide for the following, which procedures shall comply with state law unless the ordinance specifies otherwise:

A.    Petty Cash. The creation and administration of petty cash funds;

B.    Claims and Demands. Claims and demands against the City;

C.    Warrants and Cheeks. Issuance and redemption of warrants and the use of checks drawn on the City treasury; and

D.    Actions. Actions against the City.

ARTICLE VI. ELECTIONS
6.01 Election Procedures:
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, all elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the State Elections Code for the holding of municipal elections so far as the same are not in conflict with this Charter.

A.    Special Elections. The Council may call special elections for such purposes as the Council may prescribe. A special election may be held on any date specified by the Council.

B.    Initiative, Referendum and Recall. The electors of the City reserve to themselves the powers of initiative and referendum and the recall of elective officers, to be exercised in the manner prescribed by the State Elections Code.

ARTICLE VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7.01 Conflicts of Interest:
The use of public office for private gain is prohibited. The City Council shall implement this prohibition by ordinance adopting and assuring compliance with the laws of the State of California regarding such conflicts, which ordinance also shall prohibit the following:

A.    Appearances For Influence. Appearances by or statements made to, or influence exercised by City officials or employees before or to other City agencies on behalf of private interests;

B.    Compensated Influence. A former Councilmember or City officer or employee being compensated in any way for attempting to influence any action of the Council or City for 1 year after the end of service on the Council or with the City;

C.    Violations. In addition to any fines or other punishments for violations of conflicts of interest regulations any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be ineligible for a period of 5 years following such conviction to hold any City office or position and if an officer or employee of the City shall immediately forfeit his or her office or position.

7.02 Franchises:
The City Council may grant a franchise to any person partnership, corporation or other legal entity capable of exercising the privilege conferred whether operating under an existing franchise or not and may prescribe the terms conditions and limitations of such grant, including the compensation to be paid to the City therefor.

A.    Franchise Ordinance. The Council may prescribe by ordinance the method and procedure for granting franchises together with additional terms and conditions for making such grants.

B.    Franchise Procedure. No person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity shall furnish the City or its inhabitants or properties lying within the City limits or any portion of the City with any service which uses any portion of the public streets, ways, easements, alleys or places in the City as the same now exist or may hereafter exist, for any purpose without a City franchise secured under the procedures set out hereunder, except insofar as he/she or it may be entitled to do so by direct authority of the California Constitution, the Constitution or laws of the United States, or final decisions of courts of competent jurisdiction.

C.    Franchise Term. No franchise shall be granted for a period of longer than 25 years unless there be reserved to the City the right to take over at any time the works, plant and property constructed under the grant at their physical valuation and without compensation for franchise or goodwill.

D.    Acquisition of Properties. No franchise shall in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the City to acquire the property of the possessor thereof by purchase or condemnation, and nothing therein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of eminent domain with respect to the property of the possessor of any franchise.

E.    Franchise Condition. Every franchise granted by the City is granted upon the condition, whether expressed in the grant or not, that such franchise shall not be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character in excess of any amount actually paid by the grantee to the City at the time of the grant.

F.    Resolution of Intent. Before granting any franchise, the Council shall adopt a resolution declaring its intention to grant same and stating the name of the proposed grantee, the character of the proposed franchise, and the terms and conditions upon which it is proposed to be granted. Such resolution shall fix the day, hour and place when and where any person having an interest in or objecting to the granting of such franchise may appear before the Council to be heard thereon. Said resolution shall be published at least once, not less than 10 days prior to said hearing, in the official newspaper.

G.    Franchise Adoption. After hearing all persons desiring to be heard, the Council may by ordinance deny or grant the franchise on the terms and conditions specified in the resolution. No ordinance granting a franchise shall be adopted as an emergency ordinance.

7.03 Definitions:
Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, as used in this Charter:

A.    "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.

B.    "City" is the City of Folsom and "department," "commission," "agency," "officer," or "employee" is a department, commission, agency, officer, or employee, as the case may be, of the City of Folsom.

C.    "Council" is the City Council of the City of Folsom.

D.    "Councilmember" is a member of the City Council.

E.    "Law" includes ordinance.

F.    "State" is the State of California.

G.    "Voter" shall be as defined by state law.

7.04 Violations:
The provisions of this Charter or of any ordinance of the City shall be enforced by any method or procedure provided for by ordinance of the City.

The sanction for a violation of the provisions of this Charter or of any ordinance of the City shall be established by ordinance. (Added by a vote of the people, March 26, 1996 election).

7.05 American Bridge Crossing Site:
The first bridge constructed across the American River within the City limits of the City of Folsom shall be a bridge which connects Folsom Boulevard and Folsom Auburn Road, which bridge shall contain not more than four (4) vehicular traffic lanes and, if deemed necessary by the City Council, may provide for bicycle and pedestrian lanes and space for rail transit. Such newly constructed bridge shall not be a beltway. (Added by vote of the people, Res. 4532, 1994).

7.07 Meter Retrofits and Metered Rates:
A.    Mandatory water meter retrofits either partially or wholly paid for by citizens are prohibited in the City of Folsom on single family residences existing prior to 1992. This provision does not in any way conflict with the provisions of Chapter 407 of Stats 1991, as codified within the California Water Code at Chapter 11, Section 110, and Chapter 8 commencing with Section 500.

B.    The City shall establish a water rate which differentiates between pre-1914 water right costs and water supplied by contract with the Southern California Water Company (SoCal) and the federal water contract (Public Law 101-514, Section 206 or the "Fazio water"). Unmetered single family residences existing prior to 1992 shall be entitled to a flat rate of the City of Folsom's pre-1914 water right or a tiered rate with a high base line for pre-1992 residences, whichever is less. The rate for metered residences supplied by other contractors (SoCal and Fazio water) shall include the actual cost of the water, including treatment. All single family residences in Folsom except those served by the San Juan Water District may be charged for a prorated share of capital improvements and Water Forum obligations such as the acquisition of an alternative water supply during a period of drought. (Added by vote of the people, Res. 6902, 2002).

7.08 Local Control of Land South of Highway 50:
The City Council shall take the following actions prior to the approval by the Local Agency Formation Commission of the annexation of any of the land bounded by Highway 50, White Rock Road, Prairie City Road and the El Dorado County Line, hereafter referred to as "the Area."

A.    Water Supply. Identify and secure the source of water supply(ies) to serve the Area. This new water supply shall not cause a reduction in the water supplies designated to serve existing water users north of Highway 50 and the new water supply shall not be paid for by Folsom residents north of Highway 50.

B.    Transportation. Adoption of an infrastructure funding and phasing plan by the City Council providing for the construction of roadways and transportation improvements that are necessary to mitigate traffic impacts caused by any development of the Area. The infrastructure funding and phasing plan shall identify the timing for construction of all transportation improvements, including any required improvements along the Highway 50 corridor, and the timing of the construction of those improvements shall be tied to the anticipated rate of growth and associated traffic impacts. Folsom residents north of Highway 50 shall not be required to pay fees for the construction of any new transportation improvements required to serve the Area.

C.    Open Space. Adoption of a plan by the City Council requiring 30 percent of the Area to be maintained as natural open space to preserve oak woodlands and sensitive habitat areas. Natural open space shall not include active parks sites, residential yard areas, golf courses, parking lots, and their associated landscaping.

D.    Schools. Submission of a plan to the Folsom Cordova Unified School District providing for the funding and construction of all necessary school facilities for the Area, so that Folsom residents north of Highway 50 are not required to pay for the construction of new school facilities serving the Area and existing schools are not overcrowded by development in the Area.

E.    Development Plan. Adoption of a General Plan Amendment by the City Council to serve as the blueprint for development in the Area. The General Plan Amendment for this Area shall only be adopted after the completion and certification of an Environmental Impact Report. The environmental review shall include an evaluation of cultural, archaeological and prehistoric resources.

F.    Public Notice. The General Plan Amendment for the Area shall only be adopted by the City Council after comprehensive public meetings and hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council. Every registered voter in the City shall be mailed a notice of the time, place and date of the public meetings and hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council, along with a summary report on the proposed development plan. Further, the summary of the development plan and a summary of the associated environmental review shall be available for public review in the City Clerk's Office, at all Folsom public libraries, and on the City website.

G.    Implementation. All existing City plans, policies, ordinances, and other legislative acts shall be amended as necessary, as soon as possible and in the time and manner required by State law, including the California Environmental Quality Act, to insure consistency between this Charter Amendment and those plans, policies and other provisions. Any plans required to be adopted by the City Council in subsections (A) through (E) of this section shall only be adopted after compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act and upon adoption shall take precedence over any other plans or policies relating to the Area, regardless of the manner, method or time of enactment. (Added by a vote of the people, Nov. 2, 2004 election).

ARTICLE VIII. CHARTER AMENDMENT
8.01 Charter Amendment:
Amendments to this Charter shall be approved by a majority of the voters of the City at a regular election as set by state law, but may be framed and proposed:

A.    How Amended. In the manner provided by law by any of:

1.    Ordinance of the City Council containing the full text of the proposed amendment;

2.    A report with specific full text as prepared by a duly elected Charter Commission as created pursuant to state law;

3.    An initiative by the voters of the City.

B.    Amendment Election. If a majority of the registered voters of the City voting upon a proposed Charter amendment vote in favor of it, the amendment shall become effective at the time fixed in the amendment, but if no time is therein fixed, at the time the approved amendment is filed with the Secretary of State by the City Clerk and chaptered by the State. The City Clerk shall file the results of a Charter amendment election with the Secretary of State within 45 days following the election.

ARTICLE IX. TRANSITION/SEVERABILITY
9.01 Transition/Severability Provision:
All City ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective are repealed to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter or of ordinances adopted pursuant thereto.

A.    Inconsistent Acts. To the extent that the constitution and laws of the State of California permit, all laws relating to or affecting this City or its agencies, officers or employees which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective are superseded to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto.

B.    Severability of Provisions. If any provision of this Charter is held to be invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

9.02 Transition of Current Elected Officials:
At the time of the adoption of this Charter those persons serving in elected office shall continue to serve until the following conditions are met:

A.    Councilmembers. Councilmembers shall serve until the end of the term for which they have been elected, and until their successors have been elected and qualified;

B.    City Clerk. The City Clerk shall serve until the end of the term for which that officer has been elected, or until the position otherwise is vacated, except the acceptance of an employment agreement as a department head shall act to vacate the elected office of City Clerk;

C.    City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall serve until the end of the term for which that officer has been elected, or until the position otherwise is vacated.

9.03 Continuity of Laws, Officers and Employees:
The City shall continue to own, possess and control all rights and property of every kind and nature owned, possessed or controlled by it on the effective date of this Charter, and shall be subject to all its debts, obligations and liabilities.

A.    Continuation of Acts. All lawful ordinances, resolutions, and rules and regulations in force on the effective date of this Charter and not in conflict or inconsistent herewith are continued in force until repealed or amended.

B.    Continuation of Officers and Employees. The present officers and employees of the City shall retain their respective offices and employments subject to the provisions of this Charter.

C.    Commission Transition. The transition of membership on the Planning Commission and the Parks and Recreation Commission from the method of appointment which existed prior to the adoption of this Charter and that which is established by this Charter shall be as determined by ordinance.

Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    Enforcement of the Folsom Municipal Code and Other Applicable Laws

1.09    Administrative Violations and Administrative Enforcement Procedures

1.10    Additional Remedies

1.13    Public Officers and Employees Authorized to Issue Arrest Citations

1.15    Presentation of Claims

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    TitleCitationReference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.050    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.060    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.070    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.080    Effective date.

1.01.090    Constitutionality.

1.01.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code of the state of California, there is adopted the Folsom Municipal Code as a primary code, as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code. Said secondary codes include the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Electrical Code, the Uniform Plumbing Code and the Uniform Mechanical Code. (Ord. 297  1, 1973)

1.01.020 TitleCitationReference.
This code shall be known as the Folsom Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the Folsom Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Folsom Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Folsom Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 297  2, 1973)

1.01.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Folsom, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 297  3, 1973)

1.01.040 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Folsom Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Folsom, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 297  4, 1973)

1.01.050 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 297  5, 1973)

1.01.060 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 297  6, 1973)

1.01.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 297  7, 1973)

1.01.080 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter adopting this code as the Folsom Municipal Code becomes effective. (Ord. 297  8, 1973)

1.01.090 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 297  9, 1973)

Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.030    Prohibited acts.

1.04.040    Construction.

1.04.050    Repeal.

1.04.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Folsom, California, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

City means the city of Folsom, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Folsom, California, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision;

Computation of time means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded;

Council means the city council of the city of Folsom, California. All its members or all councilmen mean the total number of councilmen provided by the general laws of the state of California;

County means the county of Sacramento, California;

Law denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of Folsom, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder;

May is permissive;

Month means a calendar month,

Must and shall. Each is mandatory;

Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed;

Or may be read and and and may be read or if the sense requires it;

Ordinance means a law of the city; provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, may be in the form of a resolution;

Owner applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land;

Person means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them;

Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt;

Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively;

Property includes real and personal property;

Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments;

Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians;

State means the state of California;

Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state;

Tenant and occupant, applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies whole or in part of such building or land, whether alone or with others;

Title of Office. Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city;

Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed;

Year means a calendar year;

All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the languagebut technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning;

When an act is required by an ordinance the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement includes all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 291  1, 1972)

1.04.020 Grammatical interpretation.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Folsom, California:

1.    Gender. Any gender includes the other genders;

2.    Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;

3.    Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa;

4.    Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord. 291  2, 1972)

1.04.030 Prohibited acts.
Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc. Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 291  3, 1972)

1.04.040 Construction.
The provisions of the ordinances of the city and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 291  4, 1972)

1.04.050 Repeal.
Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 291  5, 1972)

Chapter 1.08
ENFORCEMENT OF THE FOLSOM MUNICIPAL CODE AND OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS
Sections:

1.08.010    Purpose and intent.

1.08.020    Definitions.

1.08.030    Public nuisance.

1.08.035    Cost and fee recovery.

1.08.040    Procedures for enforcement.

1.08.010 Purpose and intent.
Pursuant to its authority as a charter city, the city of Folsom adopts the procedures and remedies set forth in this title for the enforcement of the Folsom Municipal Code and uniform codes adopted by the city. The purpose of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10 is:

A.    To provide standards for the enforcement of the Folsom Municipal Code and other applicable laws;

B.    To establish administrative sanctions for violations of the Folsom Municipal Code and other applicable laws as an alternative to criminal or civil enforcement penalties;

C.    To establish a hierarchy of administrative sanctions and a prescribed method for enforcement through administrative hearings that are consistent with constitutional protections;

D.    To provide for administrative abatement to remedy code violations and to provide for the recovery of costs incurred in administrative abatement as allowed for by state law; and

E.    To provide for judicial review of final administrative orders or decisions made pursuant to this title in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.

Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge or modify the authority of the city manager or other designated person to enforce the Folsom Municipal Code through criminal or civil penalties where such remedies are designated by ordinance as appropriate. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.08.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

Administrative violation means any infringement or alleged infringement of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws for which enforcement is to be handled through the administrative procedures established in this title.

Administrative sanctions means the sanctions set forth in this chapter for violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws.

Applicable laws means any provisions of the Charter of the city of Folsom, any Uniform Code as adopted by the city of Folsom, design standards adopted by the city of Folsom, conditions imposed on any entitlement or environmental document issued or approved by the city of Folsom, and those state laws enforced by the city of Folsom which also have been designated by ordinance for enforcement pursuant to the procedures established in this title.

Citizen complaint means a report of an alleged violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws by any person or entity. Citizen complaint means and includes a complaint by a city official or city employee only to the extent such official or employee is able to demonstrate a direct affect on his/her person or property as a result of the alleged violation.

Design standards means written design standards, design guidelines or development standards that may be adopted by resolution or ordinance from time to time by the city council and/or planning commission, or that may be adopted as part of the conditions of approval on any project, that govern development of land within the city and that are on file with the city clerk.

Enforcement authority means the city manager or designated department head, building official, code enforcement officer or police official charged with responsibility for enforcement under this title.

Entitlement means any project approval issued by the city council, the planning commission, or any other committee, commission, or department as allowed for under procedures established by the Folsom Municipal Code.

Mediation means a meeting held between the enforcement authority and a responsible person under the supervision of an impartial third party to informally resolve issues relating to alleged violations of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws.

Notice of administrative violation means the notice issued by the enforcement authority of an alleged infringement of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws.

Notice to correct means the notice issued by the enforcement authority for required action to achieve compliance with the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws.

Reasonable time(s) means between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive, unless otherwise required by: (1) an emergency impacting the safety or preservation of life or property; or (2) the fact that the alleged violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws only occurs at some other hour or on a weekend.

Responsible person means any person or entity charged with or found to have violated the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws. Responsible person includes the parents and/or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen who is charged with a violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws.

Stop order means a written order issued by the enforcement authority or his/her designee that any and all work on a project, improvement or other development must cease on the terms and conditions set forth in the order.

Uniform codes means those uniform codes that have been adopted and amended from time to time by ordinance by the Folsom city council, including but not limited to the California Building Code, the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the Uniform Fire Code, the Uniform Building Code Material Testing and Installation Standards, the Uniform Mechanical Code, the Uniform Plumbing Code, the Uniform Administrative Code, the Uniform Swimming Pool and Hot Tub Code, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and the National Electrical Code. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.08.030 Public nuisance.
Any violation of the Charter of the city of Folsom, of any ordinance of the Folsom Municipal Code, of any provision of any uniform codes adopted by the city, or of any design standards is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to redress as provided for in this title. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.08.035 Cost and fee recovery.
Any person violating any provision of this code resulting in the city filing a civil action to obtain code compliance or remedy such violation shall be liable for the costs of such matter, including but not limited to costs of investigation, court costs, attorneys fees, and costs of monitoring compliance. (Ord. 1153  2, 2011)

1.08.040 Procedures for enforcement.
The city of Folsom shall enforce the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws through any of the following procedures:

A.    Administrative action concerning an administrative violation as provided for in Chapter 1.09;

B.    Criminal action prosecuted in the name of the people of the state of California when a criminal violation is expressly provided for by ordinance;

C.    Civil action instituted by the city attorney in the name of the city of Folsom; or

D.    Abatement as authorized by Chapter 1.10. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 1.09
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
Sections:

Article I. Administrative Violations

1.09.010    Designation of administrative violations.

1.09.011    Administrative violations are not exclusive remedy.

1.09.012    Levels of administrative violations.

1.09.013    Sanctions for administrative violations.

1.09.014    Standards for imposition of administrative sanctions.

Article II. Administrative Enforcement Procedures

1.09.020    Responsibility and authority.

1.09.021    Purpose of enforcement.

1.09.022    Guidelines for exercising administrative enforcement authority.

1.09.023    Notice to correct and stop order.

1.09.024    Notice of administrative violation.

1.09.025    Right of entry for inspection.

1.09.026    Informal attempts to encourage compliance.

1.09.027    Service of notices.

1.09.028    Responsibility of parent(s) and/or legal guardian.

1.09.029    Confidentiality in connection with citizen complaints.

Article III. Hearings

1.09.030    Right to a hearing.

1.09.031    Preservation of status quo pending hearing.

1.09.032    Request for hearing and feeNotice of denial of hearing based on untimely appeal.

1.09.033    Meeting with enforcement authority.

1.09.034    Mediation.

1.09.035    Timely hearing.

1.09.036    Notice of time and place of hearing.

1.09.037    Hearing officer.

1.09.038    Ex parte communications.

1.09.039    Rights of the parties.

1.09.040    Hearing procedure.

1.09.041    Hearing open to the public.

1.09.042    Oath.

1.09.043    Quantum and burden of proof.

1.09.044    Rules of evidence.

1.09.045    Subpoenas.

1.09.046    Record of the hearing.

1.09.047    Written transcript.

1.09.048    Written decision.

Article IV. Judicial Review

1.09.050    Final administrative decision.

1.09.051    Judicial review.

1.09.052    Review standard.

Article V. Enforcement of Monetary Sanctions

1.09.060    When monetary sanctions are due.

1.09.061    Place for payment of monetary sanction.

1.09.062    Failure to pay a monetary sanction.

Article I. Administrative Violations

1.09.010 Designation of administrative violations.
A.    The following shall be designated as administrative violations and shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:

1.    All violations of the Folsom Municipal Code, unless otherwise excepted by ordinance;

2.    All violations of the Charter of the city of Folsom, unless otherwise excepted by ordinance;

3.    All violations of Uniform Codes adopted by the city of Folsom;

4.    All violations of design standards adopted by the city council and/or the planning commission and on file with the city clerk;

5.    All violations of conditions imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental document issued or approved by the city of Folsom;

6.    All violations of state laws enforced by the city of Folsom that have been designated for enforcement through this chapter by ordinance.

B.    An administrative violation may only be adjudicated pursuant to the administrative enforcement procedures established in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.049 of this chapter. Each responsible person shall have the right to request an administrative hearing and subsequent judicial review pursuant to the procedures established in Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 before the city will take action to collect any administrative penalty. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.011 Administrative violations are not exclusive remedy.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or prohibit the enforcement of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws through civil or criminal process where the city attorney has evaluated the criteria set forth in Sections 1.09.014 and 1.09.024, and has determined that enforcement through the administrative enforcement procedures will not result in effective redress, where there have been repeated administrative violations, or where the severity of the violation warrants redress through civil or criminal action. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.012 Levels of administrative violations.
A.    Administrative violations shall be designated by level based upon the potential monetary sanction as follows:

1.    Level A violations shall be subject to a fine of $20$500.

2.    Level B violations shall be subject to a fine of $100$2,500.

3.    Level C violations shall be subject to a fine of $100$5,000.

4.    Level D violations shall be subject to a fine of $100$7,500.

5.    Level E violations shall be subject to a fine of $100$10,000.

Unless otherwise provided for by ordinance, all administrative violations will be deemed a Level A violation.

B.    At the time of issuance of a notice of administrative violation pursuant to Section 1.09.024, the enforcement authority shall evaluate in writing the criteria set forth in Section 1.09.014 to determine the appropriate level of sanction and shall provide written notice to the responsible person of the proposed level of sanction and the reasons therefor as required by Section 1.09.024.

C.    Where multiple violations have occurred or are occurring, each violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws shall be subject to a separate sanction.

D.    The enforcement authority shall have no power or discretion to void any notice of administrative violation until after a meeting with the enforcement authoritys supervisor as provided for in Section 1.09.033. If a notice of administration violation is voided, the enforcement authority shall provide written justification for such action to the city manager. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.013 Sanctions for administrative violations.
Any one of the following sanctions shall be available to redress infringement of the Folsom Municipal Code or applicable laws.

A.    Revocation and/or suspension of licenses or permits, conditional use permits or other entitlements issued by the city of Folsom;

B.    The placement of requirements for corrective action on permits, licenses or entitlements issued by the city of Folsom as a condition to avoid revocation of the permit, license or entitlement;

C.    Monetary sanctions as set forth in Section 1.09.012 of this chapter;

D.    The issuance of a compliance order setting forth corrective action;

E.    As an alternative to other sanctions and in appropriate circumstances, requiring community service by the responsible person;

F.    Requiring a responsible person to post a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other adequate security to ensure compliance with the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.014 Standards for imposition of administrative sanctions.
The following factors shall be considered in determining the appropriate sanctions for any administrative violation:

A.    The knowledge or intent of the person/entity found to have violated the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws;

B.    A final determination of prior violations of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws within 12 months of the date of the violation. Violations of a similar nature shall be given additional weight in evaluating the appropriate sanctions as provided for in Section 1.09.012(C);

C.    Efforts by the person/entity found to have violated the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws to take remedial action upon notice of a violation;

D.    Any financial gain realized by a responsible person as a result of an administrative violation;

E.    The extent to which the violation undermines the purpose of the ordinance violated;

F.    The number of other violations existing at the time of the issuance of the notice of administrative violation;

G.    The costs incurred for remedial action taken by the enforcement authority;

H.    The degree and permanence of harm to health, safety and/or the environment caused by the violation, including but not limited to any loss of life to person or animal;

I.    The amount it would have cost the responsible person to comply with the law;

J.    Where the violation consists of failure to obtain a permit or license, the financial cost to obtain a permit or license prior to engaging in the conduct that is the subject of administrative violation. The amount of any sanction imposed for failure to obtain a license or permit shall be no less than one and one-half times the cost of obtaining such license or permit. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

Article II. Administrative Enforcement Procedures

1.09.020 Responsibility and authority.
The city manager shall have overall responsibility and authority to enforce the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws. The city manager may delegate to department heads or other appropriate subordinates the authority to enforce any of the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws which relate to the responsibilities of their department. The city manager may also delegate to the police department or code enforcement officer the authority to enforce any of the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.021 Purpose of enforcement.
The purpose of administrative enforcement is to obtain fair and uniform compliance with the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code and other applicable laws. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.022 Guidelines for exercising administrative enforcement authority.
Administrative enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code and other applicable laws shall be limited to cases where: (1) specific bona fide citizen complaints have been received, (2) where the violation occurs within the context of the citys oversight and approval of a project, or (3) where the enforcement action is a part of a plan for the uniform enforcement of a provision of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws within the city. No notice to correct or notice of administrative violation shall be issued pursuant to a citizen complaint until the enforcement authority has conducted an independent investigation and determined that there is good cause to believe that a violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws has occurred. The enforcement authority shall keep a record of all citizen complaints. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.023 Notice to correct and stop order.
Whenever a violation is discovered which can be corrected and the responsible person has not been issued a notice to correct or notice of administrative violation for the same violation within the past 12 months, the enforcement authority shall issue a notice to correct in order to notify the responsible person of the violation and to order that the violation be corrected within a reasonable time. Unless a different period is specifically set forth in the Folsom Municipal Code, 10 calendar days shall be considered a reasonable time to correct any violation. The notice to correct shall be in writing and shall set forth the facts that constitute the violation, the specific provisions of the law which have been violated, the specific acts required to correct the violation, the time allowed to correct the violation, and the rights to appeal the notice to correct. If the violation is related to a permit, license or other city approval of a project, the notice to correct may be accompanied by a stop order which orders the responsible person to immediately stop any and all work on the project that is subject to the permit, license or approval until the violation is corrected. The notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.024 Notice of administrative violation.
A notice of administrative violation may be issued under any of the following circumstances:

A.    When the violation cannot be corrected;

B.    When the violation can be corrected, a notice to correct has been served, and the specified time has passed without adequate correction of the violation;

C.    When a stop order has been issued and has not been complied with by the responsible person;

D.    When the same violation has been committed by the same responsible person within the past 12 months and a notice to correct or notice of administrative violation has been served on the responsible person within that same 12 month period.

The notice of administrative violation shall be in writing and shall set forth the facts constituting the violation, the specific provisions of the law which have been violated, the proposed sanctions for the violation as specified in Section 1.09.013 of this chapter, and the rights that the responsible person has to appeal the notice of administrative violation. The notice of administrative violation shall be served as provided in Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.025 Right of entry for inspection.
A.    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists a violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times (as that phrase is defined in Section 1.08.020(k) of this title) to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws.

B.    Except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant of the building or premises to be inspected has been obtained, the city official shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24 hours written notice of the authorized officials intention to inspect through a notice of intention to inspect. The notice of intention to inspect shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and, that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of an administrative warrant or search warrant as allowed by law by a duly authorized judge.

C.    The written notice of intention to inspect shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. Where the authorized official intends to inspect within the next 24-hour period, the written notice shall be hand delivered. The notice of intention to inspect may be left with any person above the age of 18 who identifies himself/herself as an occupant, tenant or owner of the premises. If no one is at the premises at the time of delivery, the notice of intention to inspect shall be posted in 2 conspicuous places on the premises.

D.    Prior to entering the premises, the authorized official conducting the inspection shall ascertain from the owner and/or occupant whether the notice of intention to inspect has been received and shall obtain permission for entry. Unless an emergency situation exists, if the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such a request has been made, or if no actual contact is made with the owner and/or occupant prior to the attempt to enter, the official must seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.026 Informal attempts to encourage compliance.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to preclude an enforcement authority from informally encouraging citizens to comply with the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws. Informal oral or written requests to encourage compliance are encouraged as are attempts to informally negotiate or mediate issues relating to compliance. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.027 Service of notices.
Any notices required under this chapter except a notice of intention to inspect pursuant to Section 1.09.025 shall be served by personal delivery to the responsible person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the responsible person. If the responsible person is not present for personal delivery, if certified mail is refused, or if the location of a responsible person cannot be determined after diligent efforts, notices may be posted in a conspicuous place on the affected property for a period of 10 calendar days and by mailing first class to the last known address. When there is no affected property, such alternative service shall be accomplished by publication of any notices in a newspaper of general circulation that is most likely to give actual notice to the responsible person 2 times in a 10-day period and by mailing first class to the last known address. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.028 Responsibility of parent(s) and/or legal guardian.
Whenever the responsible person is a person under the age of 18, the enforcement authority shall provide copies of all notices and orders specified in this title to the parent(s) and/or legal guardian. Any administrative sanctions levied under this chapter may be levied against the juvenile and the parent(s) and/or legal guardian of the juvenile. The parent(s) and/or legal guardian shall have the right to a hearing and judicial review as set forth in this chapter. In addition to any other defenses that may be raised to the administrative violation, the parent(s) or legal guardian may raise a defense that the parent(s) or legal guardian have exercised good faith efforts to control the behavior of the minor but have been unsuccessful in achieving such control. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.029 Confidentiality in connection with citizen complaints.
The city shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the identity of any person making a complaint to the city concerning a violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws shall remain confidential. However, no enforcement action shall be taken beyond issuance of a notice of correction unless: (1) the complaining witness agrees to be identified upon request of the responsible person, or (2) the enforcement authority has developed sufficient independent evidence to proceed with a notice of administrative violation. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

Article III. Hearings

1.09.030 Right to a hearing.
Any person charged with an administrative violation who has been served with a notice to correct, stop order or notice of administrative violation and who wishes to contest the violation or the proposed sanction may request a hearing by filing a request for hearing within 10 calendar days of date of the service of the notice to correct, stop order or notice of administrative violation. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.031 Preservation of status quo pending hearing.
Any stop order issued pursuant to Section 1.09.023 shall remain in effect until the time of the hearing and any subsequent judicial review. Any additional compliance obligations that may be imposed as the result of a notice to correct, stop order or notice of administrative violation shall also be stayed if a timely request for hearing is filed and until a final decision after the hearing is completed unless an emergency situation affecting the safety or preservation of life or property exists. The enforcement authority shall provide written justification for invoking an emergency situation exception under this section to the responsible person within 24 hours of taking the action to correct the emergency situation. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.032 Request for hearing and feeNotice of denial of hearing based on untimely appeal.
The request for hearing shall be filed with the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk and shall include reference to the notice which is being appealed, shall state all of the grounds for the appeal, and shall be accompanied by payment of: (1) an amount not to exceed $500 as security for payment of the proposed administrative sanction; and (2) a hearing fee. The city clerk shall not accept any request for hearing unless it is accompanied by the hearing fee and the required security for administrative sanction. The amount of the hearing fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The amount of the security for the administrative sanction shall be the amount of the maximum sanction specified in the notice of violation, or $500, whichever is less. If the city clerk determines that the request for a hearing is untimely, the city clerk shall advise the responsible person of that determination in writing and shall mail a notice of denial of hearing based on untimely appeal to the responsible person by first class mail. The responsible person shall then have the right to judicial review of that determination as provided for in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059 of this chapter. Upon a showing of good cause for the delay in filing a request for hearing, the city clerk may refer the issue of the right to an appeal to an administrative hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall determine whether there was good cause for the delay in filing the request for hearing before proceeding to the merits of the appeal. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.033 Meeting with enforcement authority.
Persons charged with a violation of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws are encouraged to meet with the enforcement authority and/or the appropriate department head or his/her designee prior to requesting a hearing to seek resolution of the matter. Such a meeting may be requested before or after the request of hearing is filed, but a request for the meeting shall not extend the time for filing the request for hearing. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.034 Mediation.
With the filing of a request for a hearing or at any time before a hearing, the enforcement authority or a responsible person may request that an impartial mediator be appointed to help resolve the issues relating to the charged violation and/or proposed sanctions. The purpose of the mediation shall be to provide an opportunity for the enforcement authority and a responsible person to reach mutual agreement upon steps to achieve compliance with the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws. If the enforcement authority agrees to mediation, the city clerk shall appoint a volunteer mediator to assist in the resolution of the dispute. The hearing may be postponed until completion of the mediation if both parties agree to the postponement. The city will solicit members of the community to act as volunteer mediators and shall provide them with training in mediation skills. Mediators will not receive compensation but shall be recognized publicly for their service to the community. If the enforcement authority and the responsible person reach agreement on a compliance plan, that agreement shall be placed in writing and shall be signed by the enforcement authority, the responsible person and the mediator. If the terms of the agreement are violated, the enforcement authority shall serve a notice of administrative violation as provided for in Section 1.09.024 of this chapter. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.035 Timely hearing.
The hearing shall be held within 30 calendar days of the filing of a request for hearing unless both parties agree to a postponement of the hearing or the hearing officer rules that there is good cause to postpone the hearing. After the hearing has started, it may be continued with the consent of all parties or upon a showing of good cause for such continuance. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.036 Notice of time and place of hearing.
The city clerk shall mail to all parties written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall also include a description of the rights of the parties in the hearing. Hearings shall be conducted in the city. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.037 Hearing officer.
The city clerk shall appoint an impartial hearing officer for each hearing who may be an employee of the city or a person whose services are acquired by contract with the hearing officer or some public or private agency. The person appointed to conduct the hearing shall not have had within the past 12 months any responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of the provision of the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable laws at issue in the hearing and shall not have had any personal involvement in the case to be heard. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.038 Ex parte communications.
The hearing officer shall have no communications with any party, any city employee or official, or any potential witness concerning the substance of the case. Having such communications outside the presence of a party may be grounds for disqualification of the hearing officer from conducting the hearing. All communications concerning the case between the hearing officer and any person shall be revealed to the parties in the matter. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.039 Rights of the parties.
The parties to a hearing shall have the following rights:

A.    Timely and adequate notice of the time and place of the hearing, their rights during the hearing and the issues that are to be the subject of the hearing;

B.    The right to present evidence and witnesses;

C.    The right to present argument;

D.    The right to be presented. The representative need not be an attorney;

E.    The right to open disclosure of all evidence presented to the hearing officer in the case;

F.    The right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses;

G.    The right to subpoena witnesses or documents;

H.    The right to a verbatim record of the hearing;

I.    The right to a decision based upon the evidence in the record of the hearing;

J.    The right to an impartial hearing officer;

K.    The right to a written decision setting forth the reasons for the decision and the evidence relied upon. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.040 Hearing procedure.
The hearing shall be informal and the hearing officer will have an affirmative obligation to seek the truth concerning the issues in the hearing. The hearing officer may ask questions of any witness and may establish the procedure for the presentation of evidence. The hearing officer may, on his or her own motion, call or subpoena a witness. The hearing officer may order the exclusion of witness during the testimony of other witnesses. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.041 Hearing open to the public.
All hearings provided under this chapter shall be open to the public and press. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.042 Oath.
All testimony shall be given under oath. Hearing officers have the authority to administer such oaths. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.043 Quantum and burden of proof.
All facts must be established by a preponderance of the evidence. The enforcement authority will have the burden to prove that a violation occurred and that the proposed sanction is appropriate. The enforcement authority shall be required to present its case first. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.044 Rules of evidence.
The rules of evidence adopted by state or federal law shall not apply. All relevant evidence shall be admissible and hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing and explaining other evidence. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.045 Subpoenas.
The hearing officer shall have the authority to issue subpoenas (order to appear and give testimony) and subpoenas duces tecum (order to produce document(s) or paper(s)). The hearing officer may only issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum upon a showing of reasonable necessity by the requesting party. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.046 Record of the hearing.
The hearing shall be tape recorded and a copy of the recording will be provided to anyone requesting a copy upon the payment of a fee set from time to time by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of duplication. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.047 Written transcript.
Any person, including a party, may request a typed written transcript of the hearing but the requesting person will be responsible for the cost of transcription, including an administrative fee. An estimate will be provided of the cost of the transcription and the person requesting the transcript will be required to deposit an amount equal to that estimate before transcription will be started. If the cost of the transcription is greater than the estimate, the person requesting the transcript will be required to pay the additional cost before the transcript is provided. If the actual cost of transcription is less than the estimate, the city will refund the difference. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.048 Written decision.
The hearing officer shall prepare and forward to the parties a written decision within 30 calendar days of the close of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by first class mail. If the hearing officer grants the appeal, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to refund the fee charged to the responsible person for the appeal. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

Article IV. Judicial Review

1.09.050 Final administrative decision.
The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute the final administrative decision and shall not be appealable to the city council or any committee or commission of the city. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.051 Judicial review.
Appeal shall be through judicial review of the final administrative decision by filing a petition for a writ of mandate with the Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. Such writs must be filed within 90 calendar days from the date of the final administrative decision. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.052 Review standard.
The court may not change the findings of fact of the hearing officer unless there is no substantial evidence to support those findings. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

Article V. Enforcement of Monetary Sanctions

1.09.060 When monetary sanctions are due.
Monetary sanctions levied against a responsible person are due at the following times:

A.    If a request for hearing is not filed in relation to the notice of administrative violation, the monetary sanction set out in the notice shall be due and payable 10 calendar days after service of the notice of administrative violation.

B.    If a request for hearing is filed within the time limits proscribed by Section 1.09.030 and there is no appeal of the hearing decision to the court pursuant to Section 1.09.051, the monetary sanction shall be due and payable 90 calendar days after the date of a hearing decision, an order by the hearing officer dismissing the request for hearing, or the date the hearing request is withdrawn by the responsible party. The amount of sanction payable shall be the amount set by the hearing officer in a decision after hearing, or the amount set forth in the notice of administrative violation if there is no hearing decision.

C.    If there is judicial review of the hearing decision pursuant to Section 1.09.051, the monetary sanction shall be due and payable 30 calendar days after the date of the final court order in relation to that review. The amount due shall be the amount ordered by the hearing officer unless a court modifies the amount of monetary sanction. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.061 Place for payment of monetary sanction.
All monetary sanctions shall be paid to the city and delivered to the finance department of the city. All payments shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice of administrative violation, or the decision of the hearing officer or the court decision establishing the amount of the monetary sanction. The finance department shall prepare a receipt documenting the payment of the monetary sanction and shall forward one copy of the receipt to the enforcement authority and one copy of the receipt to the city clerk. The city clerk shall thereafter verify that the sanction has been paid in full. If the sanction has been paid in full, the city clerk shall so note in the records pertaining to the administrative violation. If the sanction has not been paid in full, the city clerk shall notify the enforcement authority and responsible person in writing. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.09.062 Failure to pay a monetary sanction.
If the responsible party does not pay the monetary sanction within the times provided under Section 1.09.060, or if the responsible party fails to pay the required monetary sanction in full within the times provided under Section 1.09.060, any unpaid portion shall bear interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum from the date such payment was due until paid in full and the city may take any of the following actions to collect the monetary sanction.

A.    Liens. The amount of the unpaid sanction plus interest plus a reasonable administrative fee established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection constitutes and may be declared a lien on any real property owned by the responsible party within the city.

1.    Notice shall be given to the responsible party prior to the recordation of the lien, and shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Article 3, (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

2.    The lien shall attach when the city manager or his/her designee records a lien listing delinquent unpaid sanctions with the Sacramento County recorders office. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date of the code violation(s), the date of the final administrative decision, the street address, legal description, and assessors parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

3.    In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be recorded by the city clerk.

B.    Special Assessments. The amount of the unpaid sanction plus interest plus a reasonable administrative fee established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection may be declared a special assessment against any real property owned by the responsible person within the city to the extent the responsible person owns more than one parcel within the city. The city council may impose the special assessment on more than one parcel. However, the amount of the assessment shall not exceed the penalty imposed for the administrative violation. The city manager/or his/her designee may present a resolution to the city council to declare a special assessment, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the Sacramento County recorders office. The assessment may then be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subjected to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

C.    Withholding Entitlements. The city may withhold issuance of licenses, permits and other entitlements to a responsible person until payment is received.

D.    Other Enforcement Procedures. The city may take such other actions as are allowed for enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for pursuant to the Enforcement of Judgments Law, California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 680.010, et seq. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 1.10
ADDITIONAL REMEDIES
Sections:

1.10.010    Abatement by city.

1.10.020    Procedure for creation of nuisance abatement lien.

1.10.030    Treble damages for subsequent abatement judgments.

1.10.010 Abatement by city.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773, the city may abate any nuisance at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance and any and all expenses of abatement, including reasonable attorneys fees incurred, shall constitute a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and such debt becomes a personal obligation against the property owner. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.10.020 Procedure for creation of nuisance abatement lien.
A.    Notice Requirement. Whenever a responsible person refuses to abate a nuisance and the owner or person occupying the property refuse to consent to abatement by the city, the enforcement authority shall serve a written notice to abate such nuisance upon the owner of the property (as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is most current), and on any persons known to be possessing such property.

B.    Contents of Notice. The notice shall include the following information:

1.    The street address, legal description or other description sufficient to identify the affected property;

2.    A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property has 10 calendar days from the date of the notice to voluntarily abate the nuisance;

3.    A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property, may, during the period of voluntary abatement, (1) file a written request for a hearing with the city clerk as provided for in Section 1.09.030 of this chapter if there is an objection to the demand to abate the nuisance, or (2) present written evidence to the enforcement authority to show that the property owner or person in possession of the property had no responsibility for creating or maintaining the nuisance on the property and that to be required to remove or abate such nuisance will cause financial or physical hardship; and

4.    A statement that if the nuisance is not voluntarily abated within the stated period, and the property owner and/or person in possession of the property fails to present the information set forth in subsection (B)(3) of this section or to file a timely written request for a hearing, all persons served with such notice shall be deemed to have consented to the abatement of the nuisance and that, at the election of the city, the city will abate the nuisance and the costs for such abatement may be charged against the premises and may be recorded as a lien against the premises.

C.    Service of Notice. The notice to abate the nuisance shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days. The failure to make or attempt such service on any person as required herein shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter as to any other person duly served.

D.    Failure to Pay CostsAuthority to Record Lien or to Declare Lien a Special Assessment Against Parcel.

1.    Except as to persons who have demonstrated a financial or physical hardship in paying for the costs of abatement, if all or any portion of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and accounted for by the enforcement authority remain unpaid after 30 days, pursuant to authority created by law, including Government Code Section 38773, et seq., such portion thereof as remains unpaid shall constitute and shall be declared to constitute a lien on the real property which was the subject of notice to abate.

2.    Prior to recordation of the lien, notice shall be given to the land owner. If the land owner, after a diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon the property subject to the lien, in a conspicuous place, for a period of 10 days. The notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

3.    The lien shall attach when the city manager or his/her designee records a lien listing delinquent unpaid nuisance abatement costs with the Sacramento County recorders office. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessors parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

4.    In addition to the recordation of a lien, the amount of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the nuisance plus a reasonable administrative fee established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection may be declared a special assessment against any real property owned by the responsible person within the city to the extent the responsible person owns more than one parcel within the city. The city council may impose the special assessment on more than one parcel. However, the amount of the assessment shall not exceed the penalty imposed for the administrative violation. The city manager/or his/her designee may present a resolution to the city council to declare a special assessment, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the Sacramento County recorders office. The assessment may then be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subjected to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

5.    In the event that the lien or special assessment is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (D)(1) of this section shall be recorded. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

1.10.030 Treble damages for subsequent abatement judgments.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a 2-year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.5, a court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17980. (Ord. 846  2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 1.13
PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE ARREST CITATIONS
Sections:

1.13.010    Authorization for issuance of citations by public officers and employees.

1.13.020    Issuance of notice to appear.

1.13.030    Designation of employees authorized to act pursuant to this chapter.

1.13.040    Training.

1.13.010 Authorization for issuance of citations by public officers and employees.
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the city council authorizes public officers and employees of the city, who have the duty to enforce a statute or ordinance of the Folsom Municipal Code, to arrest a person without a warrant whenever any such official or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of such statute or ordinance in the presence of the public official or employee. (Ord. 888  2 (part), 1998)

1.13.020 Issuance of notice to appear.
In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this chapter and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate or judge, the public official or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and shall thereafter release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court, pursuant to Penal Code Section 853.6. (Ord. 888  2 (part), 1998)

1.13.030 Designation of employees authorized to act pursuant to this chapter.
The city manager shall designate in writing the classification or job title of the city officials and employees designated to exercise such arrest and citation authority. No officer or employee shall be allowed by his or her supervisor to exercise the arrest and citation authority herein conferred, unless such officer or employee is within such designation. (Ord. 888  2 (part), 1998)

1.13.040 Training.
Every public official or employee designated to act under this chapter shall be provided with such training as is established in Penal Code Section 832, and such other training as may be required by the city manager. The training program shall include instruction regarding the provisions of the statutes and ordinances to be enforced, the evidentiary prerequisites to proper prosecution for violations thereof, the appropriate procedures for making arrests or otherwise prudently exercising such arrest and citation authority, and the legal and practical ramifications and limitations attendant thereto. Any such officer or employee shall be appropriately instructed to deposit executed citations or notices within three days for filing with the court after review for legal sufficiency. (Ord. 888  2 (part), 1998)

Chapter 1.15
PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS
Sections:

1.15.010    Applicability.

1.15.020    Requirement of presentation of claims.

1.15.030    Claims for class actions.

1.15.040    Exhaustion of remedies.

1.15.010 Applicability.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 935, and in accordance with Article XIII of the California Constitution, all claims against the city for money or damages, including disputes involving taxes, fees, assessments and other charges imposed by the city, and claims otherwise made exempt by Government Code Section 905 from the claims presentation requirements of Government Code Section 810 et seq. (the Claims Act) shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof), as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1141  2 (part), 2011)

1.15.020 Requirement of presentation of claims.
No legal action for money or damages shall be brought against the city or its officials or employees arising out of the course and scope of their duties unless a written claim therefor has first been timely presented to the city and has been either denied by the city or deemed to have been denied by the city, in accordance with the Claims Act. All claims shall state under penalty of perjury the specific grounds under which the claim is founded, and shall include any written records establishing the claimants entitlement to the amount claimed or a statement that no such records exist. (Ord. 1141  2 (part), 2011)

1.15.030 Claims for class actions.
No claim presented to the city on behalf of a class of persons shall be sufficient unless such claim is verified by every member of that class or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. Notwithstanding the foregoing, class actions shall not be allowed in any case challenging a city tax, fee, assessment or any other charge imposed by the city. (Ord. 1141  2 (part), 2011)

1.15.040 Exhaustion of remedies.
Prior to seeking judicial relief with respect to a dispute regarding a tax, fee, assessment or other charge imposed by the city, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer or any other party must first: exhaust any administrative remedies specified by any other provision of this code or applicable law; pay the full amount owed, including penalties and interest; and present a claim for refund as required by this chapter, the Government Claims Act, Government Code Section 910 et seq. and any other applicable law. (Ord. 1141  2 (part), 2011)

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

2.04    City Hall

2.06    City Council

2.08    City Manager

2.11    Departmental Organization Structure

2.12    City ClerkSalary

2.16    Official Bonds

2.18    Police Department

2.20    Law Enforcement Officers Training

2.24    Fire Department

2.28    Emergency Preparedness

2.30    Merit System of Personnel Administration

2.32    Retirement System

2.33    California Public Employees Retirement System

2.34    Governmental Conflict of Interests Guidelines

2.35    City Commissions, Boards, Councils and Committees

2.36    Purchase of Supplies, Equipment and Material

2.37    Alternative Delivery Method Procurement

2.40    General Election

2.42    Initiative, Referendum and Recall Petitions

2.44    Initiative Petition Filing Fee

2.46    Electronic Campaign Finance Disclosure

2.48    Campaign Contribution Limits

2.50    Public Participation in Civic Affairs

Chapter 2.04
CITY HALL
Sections:

2.04.010    Location.

2.04.010 Location.
The City Hall is located at 50 Natoma Street in the city. (Prior code  100)

Chapter 2.06
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.06.010    Salaries.

2.06.020    Selection of city council officers.

2.06.030    Regular city council meetings.

2.06.040    Other city council meetings.

2.06.050    Notice of meetings.

2.06.060    Meetings to be public.

2.06.070    Meeting rules of order.

2.06.080    Minutes of meetings.

2.06.010 Salaries.
Except as hereafter provided, each member of the city council shall receive a maximum salary of $600 per month. An additional maximum $100 per month shall be paid to the mayor. If, in any calendar month, any member of the city council fails to attend both regular meetings without his or her absence having been excused by the city council, no compensation shall be paid to such councilmember for such month. The council, by resolution, may set a monthly salary amount up to the maximum set forth in this section. (Ord. 1284  2, 2018: Ord. 775, 1993: Ord. 700  1, 1990)

2.06.020 Selection of city council officers.
The officers of the city council shall be a mayor and vice mayor. The council shall select a mayor and vice mayor from its membership by nomination and election by majority vote of all members of the city council annually.

A.    The selection of the mayor and vice mayor shall be conducted annually at the first regular meeting in December or on the second Tuesday of December or at a special meeting called for that purpose, whichever is first to occur.

B.    A vacancy in the office of mayor or vice mayor shall be filled by the council in the same manner as originally filled, for the unexpired portion of any term. The mayor and vice mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.

C.    In the absence of the mayor and vice mayor the city council may designate a senior member of the council to serve as presiding officer to facilitate the conduct of a meeting. (Ord. 730  1 (part), 1992: Ord. 687  1 (part), 1990)

2.06.030 Regular city council meetings.
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on certain days of the week and at certain hours of those days as established by resolution adopted by the city council; provided, that when the day of any regular meeting of the council falls on a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held at the discretion of the council.

The room designated as the Council Chambers in the City Hall at 50 Natoma Street, Folsom, shall be the location of all regular meetings of the council. If by reason of fire, flood or other emergency it shall be unsafe or impossible to meet in the Council Chambers, all meetings may be held for the duration of such emergency at such place as is designated by the mayor or vice mayor. (Ord. 687  1 (part), 1990)

2.06.040 Other city council meetings.
The city council may hold adjourned and study sessions at any time, which sessions may be called by order of the mayor, vice mayor or by order a majority of the city council. (Ord. 687  1 (part), 1990)

2.06.050 Notice of meetings.
Notice of all meetings of the city council shall be given to all members of the council, the city manager, the city clerk, representatives of all newspapers and other news media outlets which have so requested in writing, and a copy thereof shall be posted in the lobby of City Hall. All such notices shall be furnished in writing and posted within the times mandated by the California Government Code sections commonly known as the Brown Act or Open Meeting Law. (Ord. 687  1 (part), 1990)

2.06.060 Meetings to be public.
All meetings of the city council shall be open and public, except as otherwise provided for by law. (Ord. 687  1 (part), 1990)

2.06.070 Meeting rules of order.
A.    Agenda.

1.    Councilmembers, department heads, and other city staff should submit agenda items by the deadline announced in the tentative agenda. The city manager may remove or reschedule an item submitted by staff. It is the responsibility of the mayor and the city manager to develop the agenda for council meeting.

2.    Folsom residents, property owners, or others may propose an item for the agenda by contacting a member of the city council. Each agenda published will include an announcement to the public on the procedures for placing an item on the agenda.

B.    Motions Out of Order. The mayor may at any time, by majority consent of the members, permit a member to introduce an ordinance, resolution or motion out of the regular agenda order.

C.    Rules of Order. In all matters not otherwise provided for, the procedures of each city council meeting shall be governed under the most current edition of Roberts Rules of Order. The city council may adopt rules by resolution for the conduct of its meetings, proceedings and business. (Ord. 730  1 (part), 1992: Ord. 687  1 (part), 1990)

2.06.080 Minutes of meetings.
The official minutes of the meeting shall be the action version prepared from audiotapes by the city clerk. Videotapes of the meeting, if any, shall be retained as city records. A copy of the written minutes will be placed with the agenda packet at the Folsom Library for review by the public.

In accordance with the preceding section the official minutes shall be recorded in action version effective February 1, 2001. Through January 31, 2001, the official minutes of the city of Folsom city council shall be the excerpted version as adopted. (Ord. 944  2, 2001: Ord. 730  1 (part), 1992; Ord. 687  1 (part), 1990)

Chapter 2.08
CITY MANAGER*
Sections:

2.08.010    Council-manager form of government.

2.08.020    Appointment of city manager.

2.08.030    Removal of city manager.

2.08.035    Restriction on removal of city manager.

2.08.040    Powers and duties of the city manager.

2.08.050    Restrictions on city manager.

2.08.060    Right of appeal from city manager.

*    Prior ordinance historyOrds. 266 and 487.

2.08.010 Council-manager form of government.
The council-manager form of government is adopted for the city. The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city, subject to policies established and budgets adopted by the city council. (Ord. 684  3 (part), 1990)

2.08.020 Appointment of city manager.
Pursuant to the requirement of Section 3.01 of the City Charter, the city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term. The salary of the city manager at all times shall be at a level commensurate with the responsibilities of the position.

A.    At the time of appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city or state but shall be selected solely for his/her executive and administrative qualifications and abilities, and experience.

B.    The city manager shall serve under the terms of an employment agreement, which agreement shall establish his/her salary and when and at what intervals salary reviews shall be made, provide for benefits, termination compensation, terms and conditions of employment, goals and objectives, periodic and regular performance evaluations, obligations and subjects appropriate to his/her employment.

C.    The city manager shall in writing by letter filed with the city clerk designate an acting city manager on those occasions that the city manager will be absent from the city for longer than 48 hours.

D.    In the event of the disability of the city manager, or at his/her request, the city council may appoint an acting city manager.

E.    The city manager shall be bondable by a surety company to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be required by the city council within coverage of the citys blanket surety bond policy. (Ord. 684  3 (part), 1990)

2.08.030 Removal of city manager.
The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.

A.    Should the city council express its intent to remove the city manager, he/she shall be provided a written notice stating the intention of the city council to remove him/her. Within 7 days of delivery to the city manager of the written notice of intent to remove, the city manager may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a public hearing before the city council. In such event, the notice of intent to remove shall be published in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.

B.    The city council shall fix a time for the public hearing, which shall be held at its usual meeting place, after the publication of the notice, and after 10 days has elapsed after such publication, but not later than 30 days after the date of such publication.

C.    The city manager shall appear at and be heard at the public hearing. After the public hearing, the city council may remove the city manager by resolution of the city council, or may suspend him/her from duty, also by resolution. In either event, his/her salary and benefits shall continue until terminated, pursuant to the terms of his/her employment agreement or by resolution of the city council, which resolution must be consistent with the terms of the employment agreement of the city manager.

D.    The city council shall have the absolute right and authority to remove the city manager. In removal of the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final, and shall not depend on any particular showing or degree of proof at the public hearing, the sole purpose of which is to allow the city manager publicly to present to the city council his/her grounds for opposition to removal prior to the city council considering final action on a removal resolution.

E.    The city manager may choose to resign, pursuant to terms of his/her employment agreement, rather than request the public hearing provided for in this chapter, and invoke provisions of the employment agreement. (Ord. 684  3 (part), 1990)

2.08.035 Restriction on removal of city manager.
During a period of 90 days immediately following the date of installation of any person newly elected to the city council at a regular or special city election, or of any person newly appointed to the city council, the council shall take no action, whether immediate or prospective, to remove, suspend, request the resignation of, or to reduce the duties, salary or benefits of the city manager.

A.    Neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall interfere with the execution of the powers and duties of the city manager.

B.    Except for purposes of inquiry, the mayor and councilmembers shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately.

C.    Any prohibited action or practice set out in this section may be deemed removal should the city manager notify the city council of his/her decision to construe such action as removal hereunder, and such notice may, in the discretion of the city manager, invoke the removal or termination benefits of the city managers employment agreement. (Ord. 684  3 (part), 1990)

2.08.040 Powers and duties of the city manager.
The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and shall have the following powers and duties to enable him/her to do such:

A.    Appoint and remove all assistants to the city manager and all department heads;

B.    Appoint, remove and discipline all employees of the city; provided, however, that the city manager may delegate this authority to the several department heads, through a personnel ordinance, but shall retain the authority to approve, modify or disapprove all recommendations from department heads for such appointment, removal and disciplinary actions to be taken against employees by department heads or other city employees to whom such authority has been delegated;

C.    Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city in all respects and without exception, subject only to the restrictions of the City Charter and may, if necessary, temporarily act as the head of any city department for a period not to exceed one year;

D.    Prepare the annual budget or, if on a two-year budget cycle, prepare that document and submit and administer the city budget and capital improvement plan as set out in the City Charter and in this code;

E.    Keep the city council fully informed and advised of the financial, administrative, physical and operational condition of the city and of its future needs in each area, and make such recommendations and present such plans and programs concerning the affairs of the city as he/he shall deem to be necessary or desirable;

F.    Provide for the enforcement and faithful execution of all laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, acts of the city council, the City Charter and such other actions as the city council shall direct, delegating such enforcement and execution actions as are appropriate and necessary through the organizational pattern as established from time-to-time by the city council by ordinance;

G.    Administer all contracts of which the city is a party, including contingency appropriations for construction contracts, and assure that the citys interests are safeguarded, terms are enforced and all elements of any contract are faithfully administered, delegating such oversight and authority to the several departments and offices as he/she shall deem appropriate;

H.    Submit to the city council and make available to the public a comprehensive annual financial and administrative report on the finances and activities of all city departments and agencies, which report shall be filed with the city council within six months of the end of each fiscal year;

I.    Make such other special reports to the city council as he/she shall deem necessary and appropriate, or as the city council shall direct, including reports concerning the operations of the city departments, offices and agencies;

J.    Attend all city council meetings unless excused therefrom by the mayor, and have the right to take part in the discussions of the city council but have no vote concerning any matter before the city council;

K.    Receive notice of all meetings of the city council, and of all city boards, committees and commissions, and participate in the deliberations of any city board, committee and commission as he/she may choose, but shall have no vote in any matter before any such board, committee or commission;

L.    Provide for the transfer of employees between departments and organizational components of the city; provided, any organizational structure or budgetary program revision caused by such transfer has been approved by the city council pursuant to this code prior to the making of such transfer;

M.    Investigate any matter involving the city or its affairs, and any department, office or agency or organizational component of the city, and any contract, to assure the proper, faithful and legal performance of any obligation running to the city;

N.    Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city;

O.    Enforce the terms of all franchises, permits and privileges held by any party relative to the city to assure that the terms and conditions of such franchises, permits and privileges are faithfully observed;

P.    Exercise general supervision of all public buildings, parks, real and personal property, assets, utilities, streets and other public properties which are under the ownership, control or jurisdiction of the city;

Q.    Coordinate all activities of the various departments, offices and agencies of the city, and of its boards, committees and commissions so as to improve the efficiency, economy, effectiveness, harmonious relationships and public service capabilities of the city government and all its components;

R.    Carry out and enforce all policies of the city council and all rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by it relating to the administration of the affairs and activities of such departments, divisions, offices, agencies, services, boards, committees and commissions;

S.    Serve as public relations and information officer of the city government, and follow through and endeavor to adjust all just complaints filed against and service requests filed with any employee, department, division, office, organizational component or agency of the city;

T.    Cooperate with all community organizations whose purpose is to serve the welfare and best interests of the city and of its people, business and organizations, and to provide such persons, businesses and organizations, within lawful limits, assistance through the city government;

U.    Prepare the city council agenda is such a manner so as to ensure that all matters concerning the attention of the city council are included thereon in a timely manner;

V.    Perform such other duties consistent with the City Charter as may be required by the city council from time-to-time by ordinance, resolution or motion. (Ord. 950  2 (part), 2001; Ord. 684  3 (part), 1990)

2.08.050 Restrictions on city manager.
The actions of the city manager shall be restricted in the following ways:

A.    He/she shall engage in no incompatible business, occupation or activities;

B.    He/she may not attend any closed session of the city council when dismissal of or other disciplinary actions involving the city manager are discussed;

C.    He/she shall devote his/her full time to the duties and interests of the city; provided, however, that limited activities not incompatible with the position of city manager may be permitted by the city manager employment agreement when enumerated therein;

D.    He/she shall not act on any subject when ordered to do so by less than a majority of the city council, unless, in the opinion of the city manager, such action would not involve the establishment of a precedent, be incompatible with existing city policies and procedures, or result in the disadvantage of the city, of any individual councilmember or of the city council as a body;

E.    He/she shall abide by the Code of Ethics of the International City Management Association, and deviation therefrom shall be grounds for dismissal or disciplinary action against the city manager by the city council;

F.    He/she shall comply with all provisions of the laws of the state regarding conflicts of interest, declaration of economic interests, and other matters involving potentially incompatible activities as set out by state law, the City Charter, the municipal code, and applicable city ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations. (Ord. 684  3 (part), 1990)

2.08.060 Right of appeal from city manager.
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution of the city council, any person aggrieved by any ruling, determination or order made by any department head, assistant city manager, or by the city manager, in connection with a matter or subject under or pursuant to the authority granted such city official under any provision of the Folsom Municipal Code, adopted policies and procedures other than those provided in department or personnel policies and rules or by state law, shall have the right of appeal to the city manager if from an employee subordinate thereto, or to the city council if such appeal is from any action or the inaction of the city manager. The provisions of this section shall not apply to grievances or personnel related matters which shall be governed by personnel rules and policies or applicable memoranda of understanding with bargaining units. Any such appeal must be taken or filed within thirty days of the ruling, determination or order complained of. An appeal shall be filed with the city clerk in writing and identify the facts and ruling, determination or order upon which the appeal is based.

A.    If such aggrieved party is still dissatisfied after appeal to the city manager then, in that event, the aggrieved party shall have the further right of appeal to the city council. Any such appeal to the city council must be filed with the city clerk within thirty days of the decision of the city manager. An appeal to the city council shall be in writing and identify the facts and ruling, determination or order upon which the appeal is based.

B.    Any such appeal from the city manager to the city council shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, who shall place the same on the city council agenda for hearing within thirty days of filing of the appeal. The city council may, in its discretion, hear the appeal itself or refer the appeal to an outside and independent hearing officer for adjudication.

C.    The determination and decision of the city council or hearing officer in any such appeal from the city manager as set out in this section shall be final in any and all such matters, subject only to duly filed civil action filed with a court of competent jurisdiction. Any such civil action shall be subject to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. The citys decision on the appeal shall be in writing and shall provide notice to the parties to the appeal that the time within which judicial review may be sought is governed by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

D.    This administrative appeal section is of general application and shall apply where no other more specific ordinance, resolution or state law applies to a specific circumstance or activity. Where a more specific ordinance, resolution or state law applies to a specific circumstance or activity, the more specific procedure shall apply. (Ord. 1076  2, 2007: Ord. 684  3 (part), 1990)

Chapter 2.11
DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE
Sections:

2.11.010    City organizational structure.

2.11.020    City managers office.

2.11.030    Administrative services department.

2.11.040    Office of the city attorney.

2.11.050    City clerk department.

2.11.060    Community development department.

2.11.070    Finance department.

2.11.080    Fire department.

2.11.090    Library services department.

2.11.100    Neighborhood services department.

2.11.110    Parks and recreation department.

2.11.120    Personnel department.

2.11.130    Police department.

2.11.140    Public works department.

2.11.150    Utility services department.

2.11.160    Folsom community correctional facility.

2.11.010 City organizational structure.
Pursuant to the Folsom City Charter, the city manager shall recommend and the city council shall by ordinance create, reorganize and abolish departments and divisions thereof as necessary for the effective management of the citys affairs. Within the framework established by the Folsom City Charter and this chapter, the city manager shall be responsible for determining the administrative functions and duties of the various departments and in establishing divisions thereof as may be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.020 City managers office.
The office of the city manager shall be under the direct supervision of the city manager and shall consist of assistant city managers and other assistants to the city manager, as authorized by the city council in the annual budget. The position of executive assistant to the city manager shall also be under the direct supervision of the city manager and shall provide administrative support to the city manager and city council members.

Each assistant city manager, assistant to the city manager, including the executive assistant to the city manager, and each department head appointed hereunder shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager, shall have such duties and powers as set forth in this chapter and as from time-to-time shall be specified and assigned by the city manager. Each such assistant city manager, assistant to the city manager, executive assistant to the city manager and department head shall serve under the terms of an employment agreement. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.030 Administrative services department.
The administrative services department is created, the head of which shall be the administrative services director. The administrative services department shall generally be responsible for city information technology systems, city procurement and purchasing and the maintenance and repair of city buildings. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.040 Office of the city attorney.
The office of the city attorney is created, the head of which shall be the city attorney, who shall be the chief legal officer of the city. The city attorney shall perform those duties specified in the Folsom City Charter and the following duties:

A.    Advise the mayor, city council, individual city council members, the city manager and all department heads regarding the law relating to city affairs;

B.    Represent the city in all legal matters and legal proceedings in which the city is a party or is interested; and prepare all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other required legal documents as requested and/or as needed by all city officers and departments;

C.    Select and, with approval of the city manager (provided moneys are appropriated and available), retain and supervise special legal counsel when, in the opinion of the city attorney, city council or city manager, there is need for such specialized legal services;

D.    Review and approve all city contracts as to form, prior to their execution by any city official or employee;

E.    Select, appoint and retain such assistant city attorneys as in his or her judgment shall be required, provided such positions shall be authorized by the city council in the annual budget, and money appropriated therefore. Each such assistant city attorney may serve under the terms of an employment agreement with the approval of and at the pleasure of the city manager;

F.    Act as city prosecutor in those cases before the superior court as the city attorney may deem to be necessary and appropriate for the city to prosecute.

G.    Perform such other duties as the city council, city manager, state law and the City Code may require or assign, which duties shall be consistent with the City Charter. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.050 City clerk department.
The city clerk department is created, the head of which shall be the city clerk. The city clerk shall perform those duties specified in the Folsom City Charter and the following duties:

A.    Act as clerk of the city council, attending all city council meetings and recording the items before the city council and the actions taken, and maintain the official minutes of all city council proceedings, and the official record of ordinances, resolutions, contracts, real property rights and other official city documents and public records, except for the criminal records maintained by the police department;

B.    Prepare the city council agenda, and provide the required public notice concerning items to be considered and times, dates and place of meetings and public hearings;

C.    Act as custodian of, maintain the integrity of, and provide for public access to and inspection of all official city documents except those maintained by the police department, and certify city documents as being official copies;

D.    Attest, publish, post, index and file all ordinances and other city documents as required;

E.    Maintain the city seal;

F.    Administer and file oaths of office;

G.    Receive and process claims filed with and against the city;

H.    Conduct elections; receive petitions relating to initiative, referendum or recall; conduct annexation proceedings;

I.    Serve as the filing official for statements of economic interest and campaign disclosure statements filed pursuant to the Political Reform Act;

J.    Maintain the municipal code book;

K.    Notarize and certify city documents as required;

L.    Accept service of and attest to subpoenas and other legal filings of actions against the city;

M.    Act as city archivist and historian;

N.    Perform such other duties as the city council, city manger, state law and the City Code may require or may assign, which duties shall be consistent with the City Charter. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.060 Community development department.
The community development department is created, the head of which shall be the community development director. Where existing provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code state that the planning department or the planning, inspections and permitting department is the responsible department for the implementation of any statute or ordinance, such duties shall be performed by the community development department, unless otherwise assigned by the city manager. The community development department shall generally be responsible for land use, planning and development related functions, including the administration of the city general plan, specific plans and zoning ordinances; providing support to the planning commission and the historic district commission; the administration and implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act, including the preparation of required or necessary reports for all public projects and private projects within the city, and the implementation, administration and oversight of mitigation monitoring and reporting programs as required by state law or city ordinance; and the administration of the citys code enforcement program. (Ord. 1109  3, 2008: Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.070 Finance department.
The finance department is created, the head of which shall be the finance director, who shall be the chief financial officer of the city. The finance department shall perform the following duties:

A.    The maintenance and operation of the general, cost and budgetary accounting systems of the city, of and for each of the several departments, divisions, agencies and offices of the city government, without exclusion;

B.    The maintenance and operation of the city revenue system; the billing, collection, recordation, accounting and deposit of all city moneys in designated depositories; the maintenance of all checking accounts; and the custody over and the investment of all city moneys and assets in accordance with the city investment policy and the making, recording and reporting of all investments;

C.    The recordation, collection and control of all revenues and taxes levied by the city, unless the city council contracts with another governmental jurisdiction for the performance of such duties;

D.    The payment of all properly documented and valid bills, invoices and other such demands for payment by the city for services or supplies, including payrolls;

E.    The provision of assistance to the city manager as he/she may need in the compilation, preparation, administration and continuing control of the city budget;

F.    The preparation and presentation of required reports to the city manager, city council, the state, granting agencies and other appropriate agencies and parties, including preparation of the comprehensive annual financial report;

G.    The provision of required and requested information to the audit firm selected by the city council to perform the annual city audit;

H.    The maintenance of records concerning the accounting, reporting, and custody of all utility, enterprise, special and trust funds of the city, and all moneys for which the city is acting as agent for another person, government or agency;

I.    The monitoring of and reporting of the city debt limits as established by the City Charter;

J.    The administration of the city budgeting, accounting and fiscal procedures ordinance;

K.    Perform such other duties as the city council, city manager, state law and the City Code may require or may assign, which duties shall be consistent with the City Charter. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.080 Fire department.
The fire department is hereby created, the head of which shall be the fire chief. The fire department shall generally be responsible for the prevention and/or extinguishing of fires; the inspection of buildings to prevent the occurrence of fires and hazardous material spills; the investigation of fires and hazardous material spills; and the rescue, treatment, transportation and preservation of lives of injured, ill or endangered persons. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.090 Library services department.
The library services department is created, the head of which shall be the library director. The library services department shall generally be responsible for the administration of city library services, and shall support the functions of the library commission. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.100 Neighborhood services department.
The neighborhood services department is created, the head of which shall be the neighborhood services director. The neighborhood services department shall generally be responsible for the administration of the community redevelopment agency, housing programs and providing support to the redevelopment citizens advisory commission. The neighborhood services department shall also be responsible for the administration of all landscape and lighting districts within the city, and the provision of building inspection services. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.110 Parks and recreation department.
The parks and recreation department is created, the head of which shall be the parks and recreation director. The parks and recreation department shall generally be responsible for administering all city parks and recreation programs, including the city zoo and sanctuary, and shall maintain all city parks and trails and other public property as directed by the city manager. The parks and recreation department shall provide support to the parks and recreation commission. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.120 Personnel department.
The personnel department is created, the head of which shall be the personnel director. The personnel department shall generally be responsible for all personnel functions, and shall administer the city personnel merit system, maintain all personnel files and records, and shall accept all notices, requests for hearings, complaints and other official documents relative to city employee matters or affecting city employees, including disciplinary matters, grievances, claims of harassment or discrimination and provide for the proper and timely investigation, hearing, response or other appropriate action. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.130 Police department.
The police department is created, the head of which shall be the police chief. The police department shall generally be responsible for the enforcement of all federal, state and city laws, ordinances and regulations; the protection of persons and property from loss due to criminal activity, the prevention of crime and apprehension of criminals; and other activities necessary or appropriate to preserve civil peace and order. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.140 Public works department.
The public works department is created, the head of which shall be the city engineer and public works director. The public works department shall generally be responsible for the administration of public construction projects, transportation and traffic related functions, street maintenance and operation of the city transit system. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.150 Utility services department.
The utility services department is created, the head of which shall be the utility services director. The utility services department shall generally be responsible for the provision of water service, sanitary sewer service and solid waste service within the city. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

2.11.160 Folsom community correctional facility.
The Folsom community correctional facility shall be a division of the police department and shall operate the Folsom community correctional facility. (Ord. 994  2 (part), 2003)

Chapter 2.12
CITY CLERKSALARY
Sections:

2.12.010    Designated.

2.12.020    Transfer of duties.

2.12.010 Designated.
The salary of the city clerk is $115 per month. (Prior code  200)

2.12.020 Transfer of duties.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 40805.5, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 are transferred to the director of finance. (Ord. 407  1, 1980)

Chapter 2.16
OFFICIAL BONDS
Sections:

2.16.010    Designated.

2.16.020    Chief of police.

2.16.030    Premium payment.

2.16.010 Designated.
City officers shall file with the city clerk fidelity bonds in the amounts set forth opposite their respective positions. The city clerk shall file his bond with the city treasurer.

City clerk    

$10,000.00

Deputy city clerk    

10,000.00

City treasurer    

10,000.00

Deputy city treasurer    

10,000.00

Chief of police    

500.00

(Ord. 272  1, 1971: prior code  201)

2.16.020 Chief of police.
The bond of the chief of police shall cover employees that are under the control and supervision of the chief. (Prior code  202)

2.16.030 Premium payment.
The premiums upon the bonds of the city officials shall be paid by the city. (Prior code  203)

Chapter 2.18
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.18.010    Established.

2.18.020    Officers.

2.18.010 Established.
A police department is established. (Ord. 487  2 (part), 1982)

2.18.020 Officers.
The officers of the police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other subordinate officers as the city council deems necessary to carry out the duties of the department. The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at his pleasure. The city manager shall appoint, discipline and dismiss the subordinate officers and employees of the police department. (Ord. 487  2 (part), 1982)

Chapter 2.20
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TRAINING
Sections:

2.20.010    State aid.

2.20.020    Standards.

2.20.010 State aid.
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provision of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Prior code  204)

2.20.020 Standards.
Pursuant to Section 13522 of said Chapter 1, the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Prior code  205)

Chapter 2.24
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sections:

2.24.010    Mission areas.

2.24.020    Organization.

2.24.030    Members.

2.24.040    Fire chiefAdministrative officer.

2.24.050    Fire chiefPowers and responsibilities.

2.24.060    Automatic and mutual aid agreements.

2.24.010 Mission areas.
A.    The fire department is primarily responsible for the following core mission areas: emergency medical services, fire suppression, prevention, rescue, and hazardous materials response.

B.    The fire department is also responsible for assisting in emergency preparedness and responding to natural disasters and emergencies as requested by the director of emergency services (Chapter 2.28). (Ord. 1119  2 (part), 2009)

2.24.020 Organization.
The fire department shall be organized to accomplish its mission and duties. (Ord. 1119  2 (part), 2009)

2.24.030 Members.
The members of the fire department shall consist of the fire chief and such other subordinate officers as the city council deems necessary to carry out the mission and duties of the department. The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at his/her pleasure. The city manager shall appoint, discipline and dismiss the subordinate members of the fire department consistent with the city personnel rules and regulations and applicable bargaining agreements. (Ord. 1119  2 (part), 2009)

2.24.040 Fire chiefAdministrative officer.
The fire chief is the department head and chief administrative officer of the fire department and he/she shall be responsible for the planning, management, operation and evaluation of all aspects of the fire department under the general direction of the city manager. The fire chief may delegate duties and responsibilities to subordinate officers, consistent with the citys personnel rules and regulations and the applicable bargaining agreements. (Ord. 1119  2 (part), 2009)

2.24.050 Fire chiefPowers and responsibilities.
A.    The fire chief shall be responsible for all personnel, facilities, apparatus and equipment of the fire department.

B.    The fire chief shall promulgate policies and procedures governing the operation of the fire department in the manner prescribed in the citys personnel rules and regulations.

C.    The fire chief shall exercise powers consistent with state law.

D.    The fire chief shall interpret and enforce the Folsom fire code (Chapter 8.36).

E.    From the time an incident is recognized by the fire department until the emergency is completed, the fire chief shall be empowered to call upon citizens of the city for any assistance desired.

F.    The fire chief shall have the powers of peace officers while engaged in the prevention, suppression and investigation of fires, and the protection of life and property, including, but not limited to, actions associated with rescue services, emergency medical services, hazardous material response services, and ambulance services. The fire chief shall issue citations and make arrests, as necessary, in connection with these duties.

G.    Other members of the fire department, as designated by the fire chief, may issue citations for violations of fire-related laws and ordinances pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5. (Ord. 1119  2 (part), 2009)

2.24.060 Automatic and mutual aid agreements.
The fire department shall seek, implement, and maintain automatic and mutual aid agreements with allied agencies which provide for an exchange of operational resources during times of emergency need. (Ord. 1119  2 (part), 2009)

Chapter 2.28
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Sections:

2.28.010    Purpose.

2.28.020    Definitions.

2.28.030    Director and assistant director of emergency services.

2.28.040    Powers and duties of the director of emergency services.

2.28.050    Emergency operations plan.

2.28.060    Expenditures.

2.28.070    Penalty.

2.28.010 Purpose.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of life, environment and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 818  1 (part), 1995)

2.28.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

Emergency means a condition of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, hazardous material incident, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestations or disease, the Governors warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy. (Ord. 818  1 (part), 1995)

2.28.030 Director and assistant director of emergency services.
A.    There is hereby created the position of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

B.    There is hereby created the position of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 1016 2 (part), 2004)

2.28.040 Powers and duties of the director of emergency services.
The director is empowered to:

A.    Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed, the city council shall review the need for continuing the emergency at least every fourteen days until such local emergency is terminated, or as otherwise provided by law. The city council shall proclaim termination of the local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant;

B.    Control and direct the efforts of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter and of the city emergency operations plan;

C.    Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city during response and mitigation efforts; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

D.    Represent this city in dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

E.    In the event of a proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the director of the state Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered:

1.    To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life, environment and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

2.    To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life, environment and property, and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

3.    To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of a proclamation of a state of emergency in Sacramento, El Dorado or Placer counties, or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as the director deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster services workers,

4.    To requisition necessary personnel or materials of any city department or agency, and

5.    To execute all of his/her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon the director by this chapter or by resolution or the emergency operations plan and all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority;

G.    To designate the order of succession for the director of emergency services, and/or to delegate the duties, authority and responsibility of the director to qualified individuals. (Ord. 1016  2 (part), 2004)

2.28.050 Emergency operations plan.
The director shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency operations plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. The director shall coordinate the plan with civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having official emergency responsibilities, as may be appointed by the director. (Ord. 1016  2 (part), 2004)

2.28.060 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed inclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants, environment and property of the city. (Ord. 1016  2 (part), 2004)

2.28.070 Penalty.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine, not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment not to exceed 6 months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:

A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

B.    Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives, environment, or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.    Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 1016  2(part), 2004)

Chapter 2.30
MERIT SYSTEM OF PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

2.30.010    Basis of personnel system.

2.30.015    Department of personnel administration.

2.30.020    Adoption and amendment of personnel rules.

2.30.030    Meet and confer required.

2.30.040    City merit system requirements.

2.30.050    System of employee selection and appointment.

2.30.060    Restriction on city council in personnel matters.

2.30.070    Department head employment agreements.

2.30.080    Employees exempt from classification.

2.30.010 Basis of personnel system.
Pursuant to Section 4.04, as limited by 2.07(B) of the Folsom City Charter, and as further limited in implementation by the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act of the state of California, the city manager is instructed and authorized to prepare and present to the city council for its consideration and adoption a comprehensive system of personnel administration following the principles set out in this chapter. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.015 Department of personnel administration.
The city manager shall appoint a personnel director who shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager under the terms of an employment agreement. The personnel director shall direct the administrative work of the personnel department and shall be responsible for the following duties and responsibilities:

A.    Oversee and assure the proper administration of the personnel ordinance, personnel rules and regulations, and the city personnel merit system in all its aspects and in all respects;

B.    Maintain all personnel records, and certify to the finance director that all payments made to all employees are for work performed at the proper level of compensation, is earned, and is paid in a timely manner with the proper level of employee benefits included;

C.    Establish and maintain a roster of officers and employees of the city and, in conjunction and cooperation with the finance director, assure that all officers and employees are compensated properly and are provided with all employee benefits to which each is entitled;

D.    Be the official upon or with whom all notices, requests for hearings, complaints and other official documents relative to city employee matters or affecting city employees shall be served or filed;

E.    Serve as the city labor relations officer for purposes of meeting and conferring with employees and their representatives, as required by state law;

F.    Assure the integrity of the city merit system of employment;

G.    Perform such additional duties as the city manager shall assign. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.020 Adoption and amendment of personnel rules.
The personnel rules which set in detail the system of city personnel administration shall be adopted by the city council by resolution. Amendments and revisions to the personnel rules shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.030 Meet and confer required.
During development of the city personnel rules, as considered appropriate by the city manager, and prior to submission to the city council for its consideration and adoption, the city manager shall cause the city personnel rules to be subjected to the meet and confer process with duly selected representatives of city employee organizations, as required by California law. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.040 City merit system requirements.
The city merit system of personnel administration, as set out in detail in the personnel rules, shall include the specific procedures governing the following elements of the personnel program:

A.    Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the career service, including employment standards and qualifications for each job classification;

B.    Preparation, revision and administration of a plan of compensation directly related with the position classification plan;

C.    Public announcement of all vacancies and examinations;

D.    Acceptance of applications for employment;

E.    The use of examinations and the development of appropriate selection processes to determine the relative qualifications of employment applicants for appointment to or promotion in the career service;

F.    The establishment and use of employment lists containing the names of persons eligible for city appointment;

G.    The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists to fill vacancies in the career service;

H.    The establishment of a probationary period and evaluation of employees prior to attaining regular full- time status under the citys merit system;

I.    The making of provisional, temporary and emergency appointments;

J.    Transfer, promotion and demotion of employees within the career service;

K.    The resignation and reinstatement of employees;

L.    The separation of employees through layoffs, suspensions, dismissals, resignations and for incapacity to perform required duties;

M.    The establishment of provisions governing the accrual and use of various leaves such as sick leave, vacation, holidays and leave of absence;

N.    The establishment of grievance and appeal procedures which include provisions of hearing procedures on any appeal;

O.    The establishment of adequate personnel records and the certification of payrolls;

P.    Employee in-service training and professional development; and

Q.    Such other matters as the city council, city manager, personnel director and the meet and confer process determine to be desirable in a comprehensive and effective personnel program. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.050 System of employee selection and appointment.
The personnel rules shall provide for a comprehensive and detailed process for the selection, appointment, discipline and dismissal of city employees, which system mandatorily shall include the following elements:

A.    An open, public posted, and competitive employee selection process utilizing, where and when feasible, validated examinations at entry level, and objective evaluation process for all other classifications of city employment;

B.    Delegation by the city manager of appointment, discipline and dismissal of all employees except for department heads, assistants to the city manager, and the secretary to the city manager, to the several department heads, provided:

1.    Such delegation shall apply only to positions in the department assigned to the department head to which such authority has been delegated,

2.    The city manager shall approve, and may, in his/her discretion, modify or disapprove all recommendations for employee appointment, discipline or dismissal. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.060 Restriction on city council in personnel matters.
Neither the city council as a whole, nor the mayor, nor any individual member of the city council may interfere with the city personnel system in any manner, including:

A.    No interference in or request regarding the appointment, discipline or release of any city department head or employee;

B.    No issuance of any direct order to any city employee, either publicly or privately;

C.    But the city council shall have the absolute authority to express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager anything pertaining to the appointment and release of city department heads and employees. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.070 Department head employment agreements.
Department heads and assistants to the city manager shall be appointed to their positions by means of an employment agreement, pursuant to the provisions of City Charter Section 4.01(C), which employment agreements mandatorily shall address and encompass the following matters:

A.    Terms and conditions of employment;

B.    Compensation, including pay and benefits;

C.    Goals and objectives to be met, and the measurement of achievement of such goals and objectives;

D.    A requirement of and a procedure, including specific time intervals, for the periodic and regular evaluation of employee performance;

E.    Job obligations;

F.    Provisions of termination;

G.    No such employment agreement afforded by the city manager to a department head or assistant to the city manager shall be for a term in excess of 4 years. (Ord. 697  2 (part), 1990)

2.30.080 Employees exempt from classification.
The following employees shall be designated as exempt from the classification plan and rules pertaining to classified employees as established in the citys personnel rules and regulations: the city manager, the assistant city manager, the city attorney, all department heads, any confidential administrative assistants to the city manager and such other positions designated by the city manager after concurrence by the city council. Those employees shall be employed at the discretion and will of the city manager, and the city manager shall determine all terms, benefits and conditions of employment. An employee designated as exempt from the classification plan shall be ineligible for any classified position in the city for a period of 1 year after the termination of any contract of employment. (Ord. 836  2, 1995)

Chapter 2.32
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Sections:

2.32.010    Purpose.

2.32.020    Definitions.

2.32.030    Created.

2.32.040    Membership.

2.32.050    Retirement boardEstablishedMembership.

2.32.060    Pension.

2.32.070    Retirement date.

2.32.080    Early retirement.

2.32.090    Employee contributions.

2.32.100    City contribution.

2.32.110    Member withdrawal.

2.32.120    AnnuityForms.

2.32.130    Vested interest.

2.32.140    Exceptions.

2.32.150    BenefitsIncrease.

2.32.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a retirement system for employees of the city. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:

Accumulated normal contributions means the sum of all normal contributions, deducted from the compensation of a member and standing to the credit of a members account, together with interest thereon;

Beneficiary means any person in receipt of benefits under this chapter;

Board means retirement board as established by this chapter;

City means city of Folsom;

City service means service rendered as an employee for compensation;

Compensation means all remuneration paid by city in cash for services and excludes compensation based on overtime;

Current service means city service rendered as a member;

Employee or person employed means any person, including persons generally classed as officers or officials in the employ of the city, whose compensation in such employment is paid wholly by the city;

Final compensation means the average monthly compensation earnable by a member during the period of 5 consecutive years of city service, immediately preceding retirement;

Fiscal year means any year commencing with January 19th and ending December 31st next following;

Member means any person included in membership in the retirement system;

Prior service means the city service of a member rendered prior to January 1, 1969;

Retirement means withdrawal from membership in the retirement system with a retirement allowance granted under the provision of this chapter;

Retirement system means Folsom municipal employees retirement system;

Service means employment by the city. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.030 Created.
A retirement system is created and established to become effective January 1, 1969, and to be known as the Folsom municipal employees retirement system. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.040 Membership.
With the exception of employees hereinafter excluded from membership, all employees in the employ of the city on January 1, 1969, shall become members. Every new member who enters city service after January 1, 1969, shall become a member at the start of the fiscal year occurring after the completion of 6 months service, and having been employed prior to the age of 60 years. Temporary, part time, and contract employees shall not become members. (Ord. 238  l (part), 1968)

2.32.050 Retirement boardEstablishedMembership.
There is established a retirement board consisting of five members. Each member shall serve a term of two years, or until his successor is elected or appointed. Of the members first elected or appointed, three shall serve one year terms and two shall serve two year terms. Two members of the retirement board shall be elected by the members of the system. One of such, initially, shall serve a one year term, to be determined by lot. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint the other members who shall be selected as follows: one, a member of the public, not in the employ of the city; one, a member of the city council; and one being either a member of the city council or the city manager. In making such appointment, the mayor shall designate the term of the members. The retirement board shall serve in an advisory capacity only. It shall have no power to incur indebtedness or otherwise bind the city by its decisions which shall be recommendatory to the city manager who shall transmit such recommendations to the city council. The duties of the board shall be primarily, but not exclusively, to make recommendations as to the investment of retirement system funds, the choice of mortality tables and interest rates, to conduct hearings on claims of members, and recommend such changes in the system as may be advisable. (Ord. 487  4, 1982: Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.060 Pension.
Every member shall be entitled to a pension based upon final compensation and length of service in accordance with the following formula:

One percent of final compensation up to six hundred fifty dollars a month plus two percent of final compensation in excess of six hundred fifty dollars a month, times the number of years of service. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.070 Retirement date.
The normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the employees sixty-fifth birthday, or the tenth anniversary following his sixty-fifth birthday, whichever is later, but in no event later than the first day of the month following his seventieth birthday. Postponed normal retirement date to age seventy shall result in an actuarially increased benefit. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.080 Early retirement.
Early retirement may be had by members who have completed ten years of continuous employment, of which five years were under the system, and who are at least fifty-five years of age. Such members are entitled to an actuarially reduced annuity based upon contributions and years of service. Early retirement may also be had by members who are at least sixty-two years of age regardless of years of service. Such members shall be entitled to an actuarially reduced annuity based on contributions and years of service. This section shall be effective for retiring members commencing January 1, 1976. (Ord. 342  1, 1976: Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.090 Employee contributions.
Employee contributions to the plan shall be made by payroll deduction in accordance with the following schedule:

1.    One and five-tenths percent of compensation up to six hundred fifty dollars a month;

2.    Three percent of compensation in excess of six hundred fifty dollars a month. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.100 City contribution.
The city shall contribute to the plan monthly a sum sufficient to pay for prior service, costs of administration, and thereafter, to the maximum amount permitted by law. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.110 Member withdrawal.
Any member withdrawing from the system without retirement shall be entitled to be paid his normal accumulated contributions. A member may withdraw from the system upon his ceasing city service for any cause, and members shall cease to be members upon death, prior to retirement. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.120 AnnuityForms.
Upon retirement, members are entitled to a normal annuity for life only, or may elect to receive his pension in any of the following forms:

1.    Five-, ten- and twenty-year certain and life annuity;

2.    Joint and survivor annuity. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.130 Vested interest.
Any member with five years of continuous city service after the effective date of the system has a one hundred percent vested interest in the plan if he withdraws from city service and leaves his contribution on deposit. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.140 Exceptions.
The city council may, to prevent undue hardship, provide for retirement of members of the system upon its effective date without requiring five years of service in the system if such person is of the age of sixty-five years or over upon entry into the system and has in excess of fifteen years of uninterrupted city service. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

2.32.150 BenefitsIncrease.
This chapter may be amended by the council from time to time to provide increased benefits, but benefits shall not be decreased nor shall contributions of employees be increased without corresponding increased benefits, and this chapter may only be repealed by a vote of the electorate. The council shall make no law or ordinance which in any event deprives at any time any member the return of his normal accumulated contributions. (Ord. 238  1 (part), 1968)

Chapter 2.33
CALIFORNIA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Sections:

2.33.010    Public employees retirement system.

2.33.020    Contract.

2.33.030    Amendment to contract.

2.33.040    Further amendment.

2.33.050    Further amendment.

2.33.060    Further amendment.

2.33.070    Further amendment.

2.33.080    Further amendment.

2.33.090    Further amendment.

2.33.100    Further amendment.

2.33.110    Further amendment.

2.33.120    Further amendment.

2.33.130    Further amendment.

2.33.140    Further amendment.

2.33.150    Further amendment.

2.33.160    Further amendment.

2.33.170    Further amendment.

2.33.180    Further amendment.

2.33.010 Public employees retirement system.
The city shall participate in, and its employees shall be members of, the California Public Employees Retirement System pursuant to contract entered into between the city and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System. (Ord. 452  2 (part), 1981)

2.33.020 Contract.
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 359, passed and adopted November 21, 1977, a contract was entered into by which all employees of the city were made members of said system, effective December 25, 1977. (Ord. 452  2 (part), 1981)

2.33.030 Amendment to contract.
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 444, passed and adopted August 4, 1981, an amendment to the contract was authorized:

1.    To provide service credit for years covered under our former private retirement plan (applied to miscellaneous members only);

2.    To provide age fifty voluntary retirement for local safety members. (Ord. 452  2 (part), 1981)

2.33.040 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide three percent at fifty (3% @ 50) Modified formula and Section 20024.2 (One-Year Final Compensation) for public safety members.

(Ord. 927  2, 2000)

2.33.050 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System, is further amended:

To exclude from membership by said retirement law resident firefighters hired on and after the effective date of this amendment to contract.

(Ord. 572  1, 1986)

2.33.060 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System, is further amended:

To reclassify emergency medical technician from local miscellaneous to local safety member status effective date of this amendment to contract.

(Ord. 587  1, 1986)

2.33.070 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System, is further amended:

To provide Section 21354.5, 2.7 percent at fifty-five (2.7% @ 55 Full and Modified formula), and Section 20042 (One-Year Final Compensation) for local miscellaneous members.

(Ord. 996  2, 2003)

2.33.080 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the board of administration of the public employees retirement system is further amended:

To provide Section 21024 (Military Service Credit as Public Service) for local miscellaneous members and local safety members.

(Ord. 841  1, 1996)

2.33.090 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide Section 21548 (Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2 Death Benefit) for local fire members only.

(Ord. 1064  2, 2006)

2.33.100 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide Section 21548 (Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2W Death Benefit) for local miscellaneous and local police members.

(Ord. 1080  2, 2007)

2.33.110 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide Section 20903 Two Years Additional Service Credit for miscellaneous and safety personnel as authorized by the City Council.

(Ord. 1117  2, 2009)

2.33.120 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide Section 21547.7 (Alternate Death Benefit for Local Fire Members Credited with 20 or More Years of Service).

(Ord. 1129  2, 2010)

2.33.130 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby added:

To provide Section 20475 (Different Level of Benefits), Section 21363 (2% @ 50 Modified formula) and Section 20037 (Three-Year Final Compensation) are applicable to local police members entering membership for the first time in the police classification after the effective date of this amendment to contract.

(Ord. 1134  2, 2010)

2.33.140 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby added:

To provide Section 20475 (Different Level of Benefits), Section 21354 (2% @ 55 Modified formula) and Section 20037 (Three-Year Final Compensation) are applicable to local miscellaneous members entering membership for the first time in a miscellaneous classification after the effective date of this amendment to contract.

(Ord. 1142  2, 2011)

2.33.150 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby added:

To provide Section 20475 (Different Level of Benefits), Section 21362 (2% @ 50 Modified formula) and Section 20037 (Three-Year Final Compensation) are applicable to local fire members entering membership for the first time in the fire classification after the effective date of this amendment to contract.

(Ord. 1152  2, 2011)

2.33.160 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide Section 20965 (Credit for Unused Sick l Leave) for local miscellaneous members only.

(Ord. 1178  2, 2013)

2.33.170 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide Section 20965 (Credit for Unused Sick Leave) for local safety members only.

(Ord. 1182  2, 2013)

2.33.180 Further amendment.
The contract between the city council of the city of Folsom and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees Retirement System is hereby amended:

To provide Section 20503 (Removal of the Contract Exclusion of Resident Fire Fighters Hired on or After May 20, 1986, Whose Tenure Does Not Exceed 36 Months, Prospectively Only).

(Ord. 1192  2, 2014)

Chapter 2.34
GOVERNMENTAL CONFLICT OF INTERESTS GUIDELINES
Sections:

2.34.010    Purpose and effect.

2.34.020    Incorporation of 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730.

2.34.030    Designation of public officials, officials, employees and consultants.

2.34.040    Filing requirements.

2.34.010 Purpose and effect.
Pursuant to the Political Reform Act, Government Code Sections 81000 through 91015, the city adopts the following provisions to govern the requirements for its public officials, designated employees, and designated consultants to determine whether such persons have an economic interest or interests which are in substantial conflict with their official duties and powers. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to modify or abridge the provisions of the Political Reform Act, statutes prohibiting conflicts of interest in contracts as set forth in Government Code Sections 1090 through 1097, or any other provisions of law, statutes or regulations pertaining to conflicts of interest. This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent therewith. (Ord. 1114  2 (part), 2008)

2.34.020 Incorporation of 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730.
The Fair Political Practices Commission has adopted a regulation, 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730, which contains the terms of a standard conflict of interest code. This regulation can be incorporated by reference by a legislative body and may be amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission after public notice and hearings to conform to amendments in the Political Reform Act. Therefore, the terms of 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730 and any amendments to it duly adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter. An appendix in which officials, employees and consultants are designated and disclosure categories are set forth shall constitute the conflict of interest code of the city and shall be set by resolution. The city clerk shall maintain current copies of said regulations and is directed to make available to all interested persons copies of 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730. (Ord. 1114  2 (part), 2008)

2.34.030 Designation of public officials, officials, employees and consultants.
A.    Public Officials, Officials and Elected and Appointed Officers. The following public officials are subject to the disclosure and filing requirements set forth in Article 2 of the Political Reform Act, contained in Government Code Sections 87200 through 87210 and all regulations promulgated thereunder:

1.    Mayor;

2.    Council members;

3.    Planning commissioners;

4.    City manager;

5.    City attorney;

6.    City treasurer, finance director or other public officials managing public investments.

B.    Public Officials, Officials, Employees and Consultants Not Subject to Article 2 of the Political Reform Act. Designated public officials, officials, employees and/or consultants that are not subject to Article 2 of the Political Reform Act are subject to city council resolution that establishes designated positions.

1.    Designated Positions. The city council shall designate by resolution public officials, officials, employees and consultants as defined in Government Code Section 82019 et seq. who are deemed to make or participate in the making of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on any financial interest.

2.    Consultants. A consultant for purposes of the conflict of interest code is a natural person (a) who provides, under contract, information, advice, recommendation or counsel to a local government agency; and (b) whose consulting position entails the making or participation in the making of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on any financial interest. Natural person includes only the specific individual or individuals providing the consulting services, and does not include the corporate or other business entity which employs the individual. The term consultant excludes a person who (a) conducts research and arrives at conclusions with respect to his or her rendition of information, advice, recommendation or counsel independent of the control and direction of the agency or any agency official, other than normal contract monitoring; and (b) possesses no authority with respect to any agency decision beyond the rendition of information, advice, recommendation or counsel. A person who provides consulting services, advice, information, recommendations or counsel on a regular basis is included within the meaning of the term consultant. However, persons hired to produce a finished product or study, construct a project, represent the city in a piece of litigation, or conduct similar activities on an ad hoc basis are not included within the meaning of consultant.

a.    Disclosure Requirements for Designated Consultants. If a natural person is a consultant as defined in subsection (B)(2) of this section and has not been designated as exempt from disclosure requirements pursuant to subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section, and such person has been deemed to make or participate in the making of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on any financial interest, such consultant shall provide such disclosures as the city manager deems appropriate in light of the services provided by said consultant.

b.    Consultants Exempt from Disclosure Requirements. The city manager may determine in writing that a particular consultant, although a designated position, is hired to perform a range of duties that is limited in scope and thus is not required to fully comply with the disclosure requirements. Any such written determination shall include a description of the consultants duties and, based upon the description, a statement of the extent of disclosure requirements, if any. The city manager may also determine whether a particular contract consultant constitutes a consultant as the term is defined in the Political Reform Act and regulations promulgated thereunder. The city managers determination is a public record and shall be retained for public inspection in the same manner and in the same location as other filings required by the conflict of interest code. (Ord. 1114  2 (part), 2008)

2.34.040 Filing requirements.
All public officials, officials, elected and appointed officers, persons holding designated positions and consultants that are subject to the filing and disclosure requirements as set forth by resolution shall file statements of economic interests with the city clerk, who will make the statements available for public inspection and reproduction. Each designated filer shall report such information disclosing that filers interest in investments, real property, and income as designated reportable under the category to which the filers position is assigned in this conflict of interest code. Statements for all persons designated pursuant to this section will be retained by the city clerk. Upon adoption of this conflict of interest code, the city clerk shall advise all persons holding designated positions who have not previously been required to file disclosure statements that an initial statement must be filed within thirty days of the effective date of this conflict of interest code. Thereafter, all public officials, officials, elected and appointed officers, persons holding designated positions, and consultants shall file assuming-office statements, annual statements, and leaving-office statements as required by the Political Reform Act, Government Code Sections 87200 through 87205 and 87302(b) and 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730(5). (Ord. 1114  2 (part), 2008)

Chapter 2.35
CITY COMMISSIONS, BOARDS, COUNCILS AND COMMITTEES
Sections:

2.35.010    Purpose and scope.

2.35.020    Effect of a vacancy on the city council on appointments.

2.35.030    Termination date for at-large appointments.

2.35.040    One seat limitation.

2.35.010 Purpose and scope.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth general provisions governing appointments by members of the city council to any city commissions, boards, councils and/or committees. The provisions of this chapter shall govern over any other provisions contained in the Folsom Municipal Code that pertain to the appointments to such entities.

B.    The provisions of this chapter apply to all appointments made pursuant to Sections 4.05 through 4.07, inclusive, of the Charter of the city of Folsom, and also to any appointments made by the mayor, the vice mayor or any councilmember pursuant to authority vested by the Charter, the Folsom Municipal Code, or any resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 920 (part), 2000)

2.35.020 Effect of a vacancy on the city council on appointments.
A.    Definitions:

1.    Former member of the Folsom city council means only a member of the Folsom city council who leaves a seat on the city council by any of the means described in Section 2.08(A) of the Charter (i.e., through death, resignation, removal from office, or forfeiture of office as further specified in Section 2.08 of the Charter).

2.    Vacant or vacancy shall have the meaning set forth in Section 2.08(A) of the Charter.

B.    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Folsom Municipal Code, if a seat on the Folsom city council becomes vacant at any time on or after April 1, 2000, any person appointed by the former member of the Folsom city council to a city commission, board, council or committee, shall retain that appointment until the vacancy on the city council is filled in the manner required by law. (Ord. 920 (part), 2000)

2.35.030 Termination date for at-large appointments.
A.    Definition: An at-large appointment is an appointment made by a majority vote of the city council or an appointment made by the mayor with the approval of the city council.

B.    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Folsom Municipal Code and except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the terms of all at-large appointments (except appointments to the historic district commission) shall expire on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in December of the even-numbered year in which the specific at-large term is scheduled to expire.

Terms for the landscaping and lighting district advisory committee will be four years, with the exception of appointments occurring in year 2005. The terms for representatives appointed in 2005 shall be in accordance with Section 16.56.030.

C.    Except as otherwise provided herein, the members of the historic district commission shall be appointed to serve for two-year terms. Four commission members terms (members filling the seats designated in Section 17.52.020(D), (E) and (F)) shall expire on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in December of even-numbered years, and three commission member terms (members filling the seats designated in Section 17.52.020(A), (B) and (C) shall expire on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in December of odd-numbered years.

D.    If an at-large seat becomes vacant at any time after an appointment but before expiration of the term, the city council, or the mayor with the approval of the city council (depending on the appointment requirements of the specific committee, board, council or committee), shall make an appointment for the remainder of the term. (Ord. 1030  3, 2005; Ord. 964  2, 2002; Ord. 940  2 (part), 2001)

2.35.040 One seat limitation.
No person may hold more than one appointed commission, board, council or committee seat at a time. This one-seat limitation shall not apply to: (1) commission, board, council or committee members who are appointed to other commissions, boards, councils or committees as a result of, or by virtue of, their status as a member of a particular commission, committee, board or council; or (2) membership on ad hoc committees. (Ord. 940  2 (part), 2001)

Chapter 2.36
PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND MATERIAL
Sections:

2.36.010    Purpose.

2.36.020    Application.

2.36.030    Definitions.

2.36.040    Establishment of the position of the purchasing agent.

2.36.050    Authority and duties.

2.36.060    Delegations to other city officials.

2.36.070    Collection of data concerning public procurement.

2.36.080    Award of contracts.

2.36.090    Methods of award.

2.36.100    Competitive sealed bidding.

2.36.110    Negotiated bid proposals.

2.36.120    Contracting for designated professional services.

2.36.130    Small purchases.

2.36.140    Sole source procurement.

2.36.150    Emergency procurement.

2.36.160    Public works projects.

2.36.170    Cooperative purchasing.

2.36.180    Cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals.

2.36.190    Bid bonds.

2.36.200    Security for public works projects.

2.36.210    Miscellaneous items.

2.36.220    Disposition of surplus personal property.

2.36.230    Conflict of interests.

2.36.250    Sealed bid or public auction.

2.36.260    Record of disposition of property.

2.36.270    Sale, donation, or exchange of city real property.

2.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to assure a maximum of competition for the lowest price consistent with the stated level of quality, to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of persons involved in public purchasing with the city, and to provide safeguards to maintain a procurement system of quality and integrity. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.020 Application.
This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, equipment, services and construction, entered into by the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. It shall apply to the expenditure of public funds by any city department for public purchasing. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.030 Definitions.
Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind. It does not include operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property.

Contract means types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of supplies, equipment, services or construction.

Department means any using agency, commission, board or agency created by the city which requires supplies, equipment, services or construction pursuant to this chapter.

Equipment means procured items which are maintained on inventory as fixed assets. These items are durable and have a fixed, predetermined life expectancy.

Invitation for bids means documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids.

Procurement means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or other acquisition of supplies, equipment, services or construction. It also includes the definition of requirements (specifications), the selection and solicitation of sources, the preparation and award of a contract, and the administration of the contract.

Professional services means work performed by specially trained and experienced persons, firms or corporations rendering professional services and advice such as accounting, financial, legal, medical, engineering, architectural, environmental, economic, real estate, insurance, lobbying, public relations, code publication or similar services.

Public procurement unit means any purchasing entity involved in the acquisition of commodities for a governmental unit such as: state, county, city, school district, or other similar entity.

Public works project means projects for the erection, construction, repair, renovation, alteration or improvement of:

1.    Public buildings and related structures and improvements;

2.    Streets (including curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights and traffic signals), sewers and water systems;

3.    Drainage and flood control works;

4.    Park and recreation facilities.

Public works projects do not include routine, recurring, or other normal work done to maintain, preserve or protect any public owned or operated structure or improvement.

Request for proposal means documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.

Responsible vendor or offeror means a person who has the capacity in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the experience, tenacity, perseverance, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment and credit which will assure good faith performance.

Responsive vendor means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.

Services means the furnishing of labor, time or effort (sometimes parts are included) to perform or complete a designated task. Precise specifications (taskings) shall be delineated in the contract.

Supplies means property, including but not limited to materials, required to perform a departments function. It can be office, as well as, departmental supplies. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.040 Establishment of the position of the purchasing agent.
A.    Establishment. There is created the position of purchasing agent, which shall be the citys principal purchasing and contracting official.

B.    Appointment. The purchasing agent shall be a division within the finance department pursuant to procedures delineated in the personnel ordinance, Ordinance No. 697. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.050 Authority and duties.
A.    Principal Purchasing Official. Except as otherwise provided in this section and in Section 2.36.060, the purchasing agent shall serve as the principal purchasing and contracting official for the city, and shall be responsible for the procurement of, or the coordination of the procurement of, supplies and equipment in accordance with this chapter, and for the management and disposal of surplus supplies and equipment. The preparation of specifications for, solicitation of bids, contract administration and supervision and inspection of public works projects is delegated to the public works director. The procurement of, contract administration for, and supervision of professional services is delegated to the city manager or his/her designee.

B.    Duties. In accordance with this chapter, and subject to the supervision of the finance director, the purchasing agent shall:

1.    Procure, or coordinate the procurement of, all supplies, equipment and services needed by the city;

2.    Exercise general supervision and control over inventories of equipment (fixed assets) and certain supply items belonging to the city;

3.    Dispose of surplus supplies and equipment belonging to the city via public auction; items not disposed of by auction shall be disposed of according to the direction of the city manager;

4.    Assist city departments, as needed, in the development of specifications, contract administration, and inspection and acceptance procedures;

5.    Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on city purchases;

6.    Prepare and recommend to the finance director procedures governing the procurement of supplies, equipment, services and construction items;

7.    Prepare and maintain a vendor list to include respective catalogs.

C.    Operational Procedures. Consistent with this chapter, and with the approval of the finance director, the purchasing agent shall adopt specific operational procedures pertaining to the execution of his/her duties. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.060 Delegations to other city officials.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.36.050 and with the approval of the city manager, the purchase of certain supplies, equipment, services or construction items may be delegated by the purchasing agent to individuals in other city departments, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.070 Collection of data concerning public procurement.
The purchasing agent shall prepare statistical data required by the finance director concerning the procurement, usage and disposition of supplies, equipment, services and construction. In order to compile this data, the purchasing agent may require the various city departments to furnish him/her data concerning their usage, needs and/or stock on hand. The purchasing agent shall prescribe the forms to be used by the departments in requisitioning, ordering and reporting of supplies, equipment, services and construction. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.080 Award of contracts.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, contracts for supplies, equipment, services and construction of estimated value fifty-three thousand dollars or greater shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder. The city manager, or his/her designee, may award contracts costing less than fifty-three thousand dollars. The dollar value set forth in this subsection shall be adjusted annually, on or before January 1st, by the finance director, with the approval of the city manager and to adjust these limits and the limits specified in Sections 2.36.090, 2.36.100, 2.36.110, 2.36.120, 2.36.130 and 2.36.160 based upon the Consumer Price Index established and published by the State of California Department of Industrial Relations for all California urban consumers. The finance director shall provide annual notification to the city council of the Consumer Price Index adjustment under this section.

B.    A contingency appropriation shall be included in the total project appropriation for all construction contracts awarded by either the city council or city manager. The contingency appropriation shall be ten percent of the construction contract amount and shall be administered by the city manager or his/her designee. The contingency appropriation shall be used to fund only construction contract change orders and shall be funded in the same manner as the appropriation for the construction contract.

C.    Except as otherwise provided herein, all construction contract change orders shall comply with the city of Folsom standard construction specifications and shall be approved in writing by the city manager or his/her designee prior to the work being performed. If a contract change order exceeds one hundred thousand dollars, the city manger shall obtain the written consent of the mayor or his/her designee, or, at the mayor or his/her designees discretion, the city council, prior to approving the work. All construction contract change orders approved by the city manager shall be reported to the city council by the city manager at least quarterly.

D.    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the city manager, or his/her designee, may award and execute contracts for supplies, equipment, services or construction which are funded entirely by non-city entities or persons without the expenditure of city funds or commitment to future city funds, provided that a commitment for payment from the funding source is obtained through a funding agreement or a deposit and reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 1214  2, 2014; Ord. 951  2 (part), 2002; Ord. 950  2 (part), 2001: Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.090 Methods of award.
A.    Contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to Sections 2.36.100 and 2.36.110, except as provided in:

1.    Contracting for designated professional services pursuant to Section 2.36.120;

2.    Small purchases pursuant to Section 2.36.130;

3.    Sole source procurement pursuant to Section 2.36.140;

4.    Emergency procurement pursuant to Section 2.36.150;

5.    Cooperative purchasing pursuant to Section 2.36.160; and

6.    Alternative delivery methods pursuant to Chapter 2.37.

B.    Whenever competitive sealed bidding procedures are not utilized, a waiver of bid delineating the reason(s) for noncompetitive award shall be prepared in writing by the requesting department and filed with the city clerk. Prior to being filed, the waiver shall be reviewed by the purchasing agent and the finance director and approved by the city manager.

C.    When the cumulative dollar value of contract awards of ten thousand dollars or less to one vendor or contractor exceeds one hundred thousand dollars during three consecutive years, subsequent awards shall be made only via the competitive sealed bid procedures. (Ord. 1181  2, 2013; Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.100 Competitive sealed bidding.
A.    Conditions for Use. City contracts for supplies, equipment, services or construction of estimated value of fifty-three thousand dollars or greater shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in Section 2.36.090.

B.    Public Notice. Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given at least ten calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Such notice shall include publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. This notice shall state the place, date and time of bid opening.

C.    Invitation for Bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued to vendors who request such and shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. Prior to the invitation for bid, the requesting department may contact respective vendors to obtain specific product/service information, product demonstration/evaluation/testing, etc.

D.    Vendors List. The purchasing agent will also issue invitations for bids to responsible prospective bidders whose names are on the citys current vendors list for the required commodity/service.

E.    Bid Opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of 1 or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded; this record, as well as each bid, shall be open to public inspection after the award of the contract.

F.    Bid Acceptance and Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will effect the bid price and be considered in the evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs.

G.    Correction or Withdrawal of BidsCancellation of Awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Prior to bid opening the bidder may modify or withdraw a bid by written or telegraphic notice providing it is received by the city prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids or withdrawals of bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that the bidder made a material mistake of fact that is evident on the face of the bid. Decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written recommendation made by the purchasing agent and approved by the city manager for contracts costing less than fifty-three thousand dollars and by the city council for contracts costing fifty-three thousand dollars or more.

H.    Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and specifications set forth in the invitation for bids. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid for any contract exceeds available funds as certified by the finance department, and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than ten percent, the purchasing agent, or his/her designee, is authorized, when time and economic consideration preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, and upon approval from the requesting department and the finance department, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. Any such negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon eliminating independent deductive items specified in the invitation for bids.

I.    Contract Preference. Contracts to furnish supplies, equipment, and services to the city shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder with preference to the responsible bidder who offers to furnish supplies, equipment and services which are raised, grown, manufactured, fabricated, processed, assembled or distributed from within the city. Such preference shall be only as to price if quality, service and other factors are equal. The amount of the differential shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1214  3 (part), 2014; Ord. 951  2 (part), 2002; Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.110 Negotiated bid proposals.
A.    Conditions for Use. The competitive sealed bidding procedures shall be the method of choice, and as such, shall be utilized for most contract awards. However, when the city council determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding does not provide sufficient detail to evaluate the bidders proposal or is otherwise too technical or not advantageous to the city, a contract to furnish supplies, equipment, public works projects or services of estimated value of fifty-three thousand dollars or greater may be entered into by use of the negotiated bid proposal method. In this manner the bidder will delineate his/her entire proposal to include, at a minimum, specific parts and/or processes used to complete the designated contract specifications. The purchasing agent shall provide instructions and required forms to each requesting vendor.

B.    Request for Proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.

C.    Public Notice. Public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in Section 2.36.100; the minimum time shall be at least 10 calendar days.

D.    Receipt of Proposals. Proposals shall be handled in a manner which does not permit the disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection only after contract award.

E.    Evaluation Factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other criteria used to base the award on.

F.    Discussion with Responsible Offerors and Revisions to Proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit responsive proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment, with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals. Such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, the identity of competing offerors or any information derived from proposals submitted by the competing offerors shall not be disclosed.

G.    Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. (Ord. 1214  3 (part), 2014; Ord. 951  2 (part), 2002; Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.120 Contracting for designated professional services.
For the purpose of procuring the services of persons providing professional services as defined in Section 2.36.030, any department requiring such service of estimated value of less than fifty-three thousand dollars may procure them on its own behalf. The department procuring such services shall notify the purchasing agent of the procurement. That department shall also prepare the waiver of bid and submit it to the purchasing agent for filing with the city clerk. Professional services, as defined in Section 2.36.030, costing fifty-three thousand dollars or greater shall be contracted for by the city council. (Ord. 1214  3 (part), 2014: Ord. 951  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.130 Small purchases.
A.    General. Purchases costing less than fifty-three thousand dollars shall be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this section.

B.    Small Purchases Greater Than Ten Thousand Dollars. Insofar as it is practical for small purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars, but less than fifty-three thousand dollars, no less than three vendors shall be solicited to submit quotations. Quotations may be received in writing, in person, or via the telephone. Award shall be made to the vendor offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the vendors submitting quotations and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record for no less than two years after the award of the contract.

C.    Small Purchases of Ten Thousand Dollars or Less. The purchasing agent shall adopt operational procedures to make small purchases of ten thousand dollars or less. Such operational procedures shall ensure adequate and reasonable competition exists for the supply, equipment, service or construction item(s) being purchased. (Ord. 1214  3 (part), 2014: Ord. 951  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.140 Sole source procurement.
Prior to submitting a purchase request, the requesting department shall conduct a survey of available sources to determine whether there is only 1 source for the required supply, equipment, service or construction item. After review of this request by the purchasing agent and the finance director and approved by the city manager, a contract shall be awarded without competition. The purchasing agent, or his/her designee, shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and terms. The requesting department shall prepare a waiver of bid and submit it to the purchasing agent for filing with the city clerk. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.150 Emergency procurement.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall make, or authorize others to make, emergency procurement of supplies, equipment, services or construction items when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety; provided, that such emergency procurement shall be made with sufficient competition as is practicable under the circumstances. The requesting department shall complete a waiver of bid format and submit it to the purchasing agent for filing with the city clerk. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.160 Public works projects.
In the awarding of public works contracts, the following shall apply:

A.    Public Works Projects Costing Less Than Fifty-Three Thousand Dollars. Public works projects costing less than fifty-three thousand dollars may be performed by city employees by force account or by complying with the procedures pursuant to Section 2.36.130.

B.    Public Works Projects Costing Fifty-Three Thousand Dollars or Greater. Public works contracts costing fifty-three thousand dollars or greater shall be awarded pursuant to procedures in Section 2.36.080, 2.36.100 or 2.36.110.

C.    If the city council rejects all the bids, the city may:

1.    Abandon the project or readvertise it for additional bids; or

2.    Have the project completed by city employees by force account after a four-fifths approval vote by the city council.

D.    If no sealed bids or proposals are received the city council can authorize the project to be completed by city employees by force account or through negotiation without complying with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1214  3 (part), 2014; Ord. 951  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 950  2 (part), 2001; Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.170 Cooperative purchasing.
A.    Without complying with the requirements of Sections 2.36.080, 2.36.090 and 2.36.100, the purchasing agent may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any supplies, equipment, service or construction with 1 or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multiparty contracts between public procurement units and open-ended state public procurement unit contracts which are made available to the city. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.180 Cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals.
Where stated in the invitation for bid, the city council may cancel an invitation for bid, a request for proposal, or other solicitations, or may reject any or all bids or proposals when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the city. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.190 Bid bonds.
Bid bonds or other security shall be required for all sealed bid contracts costing $25,000 or greater and may be required on other contracts as the city manager, purchasing agent, or heads of department deem advisable to protect the citys interests. Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Bid bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder or offerors responsibility. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.200 Security for public works projects.
All contracts for the construction of a public works project in an estimated amount of $25,000 or greater shall require the contracting party to furnish security for the completion of the project and the payment of labor, materials and equipment. The provisions of Chapter 5 of Division 2, of Title 7 of the California Government Code (Sections 66499 through 66499.10) as the same now reads or is hereafter amended shall govern the kind of security (Section 66499), the form of bonds (Sections 66499.1 and 66499.2), the amount of the security (Section 66499.3), the costs, expenses and fees included in the amount of the security (Section 66499.4), the provision for reduction of improvement security (Section 66499.5), exemption of security from enforcement of money judgment (Section 66499.6), release of security (Section 66499.7), restriction on release of security (Section 66499.8), limitation on security liability (Section 66499.9) and party against whom suit on security maintained (Section 66499.10). Said Government Code provisions are incorporated in this chapter by reference, as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.210 Miscellaneous items.
A.    Specifications. Specifications shall be drafted by the requesting department in a manner to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and to encourage competition in satisfying the citys needs; they shall state the citys minimum requirements, but shall not be unduly restrictive so they prevent competition. The policy enunciated in this section applies to all specifications including, but not limited to, those prepared for the city by architects, engineers, designers and draftsmen. The department requiring the supply, equipment, service or construction shall prepare the specification(s) as a part of their purchase request.

B.    Requisitions. Departments shall submit requests for supplies, equipment, services and construction items to the purchasing agent by means determined by the purchasing agent and approved by the finance director.

C.    Procurement. Procurement of supplies, equipment, services and construction materials shall be made by written contract or purchase order unless directed otherwise by the purchasing agent according to established procedures.

D.    Dividing Requirements. Contract or purchase order requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase or to avoid complying with any other provision of this chapter.

E.    Encumbrance of Funds. The purchasing agent, or others authorized to establish purchase orders, shall not issue any contract or purchase order for supplies, equipment, services and construction materials unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the proper account against which the purchase is charged.

F.    Purchase of Surplus Commodities. The purchasing agent is authorized to procure, when economically feasible, commodities from other governmental agencies which are surplus to their requirements and determined to be valid needs of this city. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.220 Disposition of surplus personal property.
A.    Definitions. For purposes of this section, surplus personal property shall mean any personal property or equipment owned by the city of Folsom which a department head determines is no longer needed or used for city purposes or which has become obsolete, worn out or past its useful life. Market value is the value estimated by the city manager or his/her designee at which the property would sell if offered at auction or other open competitive bid sale. City manager shall mean the city manager or his/her designee.

B.    Surplus personal property of the city shall be disposed of in the following manner:

1.    The city manager may authorize the sale or disposition of surplus personal property which has a market value equal to or less than his/her contracting authority.

2.    The city council may authorize the sale or disposition of surplus personal property which has a market value in excess of the city managers contracting authority.

3.    Any surplus personal property within his/her contracting authority may be sold or disposed of by the city manager as follows:

a.    Surplus personal property with an estimated market value of greater than five thousand dollars per individual item of property shall be sold under sealed bid or by public auction. Public auctions may include electronic bidding or auction services.

b.    Surplus personal property with an estimated market value of less than five thousand dollars per individual item of property may be sold or disposed of by any method the city manager determines to be most advantageous to the city considering the value and nature of the property and the cost of sale, including, but not limited to, sale by salvage, recycling or disposal.

c.    Surplus property with only a nominal value may be disposed of by the department head, upon written approval of the city manager, in the manner most advantageous to the city considering the value of the property and the cost of sale, including, but not limited to, sale by salvage, recycling or disposal.

d.    Disposition of surplus city personal property pursuant to this section shall be as is without warranty, express or implied, and the buyer shall agree to pay applicable sales or transfer taxes.

e.    Notwithstanding other provisions in this section, surplus personal property may be sold to another public entity for market value or traded for market value equivalent property or services as approved by the city manager.

f.    Notwithstanding other provisions in this section, surplus personal property of any value may be traded in as consideration toward the acquisition of other personal property upon written approval of the city manager.

g.    Notwithstanding other provisions in this section, surplus personal property of any value may be transferred to other city departments without consideration as approved by the city manager.

4.    Surplus personal property which the city manager deems unacceptable for sale to the public may be disposed of in the manner deemed appropriate by the city manager. Examples of such property include: police K-9s, city-owned animals, law enforcement equipment and property which may pose a hazard to the general public.

C.    The city council may, by resolution, authorize the donation of surplus personal property, if the city council finds that such donation serves a public purpose and/or benefit. All donations pursuant to this section shall be as is without warranty, express or implied, and the transferee shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any claim, cause of action, damage, loss or liability arising out of the condition of the property or its use by the organization or subsequent transferee.

D.    Property disposed of pursuant to this section shall comply with the intent of the citys environmentally preferred and recycled policy adopted in 2003 or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 1132  2 (part), 2010)

2.36.230 Conflict of interests.
A.    No city official or employee shall accept any gratuity or kickback, provide confidential or contractual advance information to any potential bidder, or accept any fee contingent upon the award of a contract. Without prior authorization of the city council, the city will not award any contracts or purchase orders to city officials or employees or to family members of either, purchase any items for the personal use of any city official or employee, or allow city officials or employees, or their family members, to purchase surplus city supplies or equipment.

B.    Collusion with Bidder. Any official or employee of the city who shall aid or assist a bidder in securing a contract to furnish supplies, equipment or services at a higher price than that proposed by any other bidder, or who shall favor one bidder over another by giving or withholding information, or who shall wilfully mislead any bidder in regard to the character of the commodity called for, or who shall knowingly accept commodities of a quality inferior to those called for by the contract, or to the receipt of a greater amount or different kind of commodity than has been actually received, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 723  3 (part), 1991)

2.36.250 Sealed bid or public auction.
In cases where a sealed bid or public auction is required for the sale of property, reasonable notice to prospective bidders of such sale by sealed bid or public auction shall be given, as determined by the city manager or his/her designee, taking into account the circumstances and the item(s) to be sold. (Ord. 1132  2 (part), 2010)

2.36.260 Record of disposition of property.
A.    Any department disposing of surplus personal property shall document the disposition and provide, in writing, to the city clerk or his/her designee, and to the finance director or his/her designee, who shall keep a record of sales, exchanges or other disposition of any property disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, at least the following information:

1.    A description of the property transferred;

2.    The name of the transferee;

3.    The date of transfer;

4.    The gross receipts, net receipts and/or transaction costs; and

5.    A description, including the value of any personal property received in exchange for the property transferred.

B.    Such records shall be kept consistent with the citys records retention policy. A copy of such records shall be filed with the city clerk on a quarterly basis and shall be a public record. (Ord. 1132  2 (part), 2010)

2.36.270 Sale, donation, or exchange of city real property.
A.    Except as provided herein, all transfers, sales, donations or other disposition of real property interests in city property shall be approved by the city council.

B.    All city real property which is deemed surplus property by the city council may be approved for sale or disposition by the city council.

C.    The city council may authorize the method for disposition of real property interests by request for proposal, auction, sealed bid, open public sale process or other means it deems appropriate. The city council may set conditions or parameters which the buyer must meet. When the city council elects to proceed with a request for proposal, price is given strongest consideration, but the city council may also consider other factors, including permissible uses, experience required by the potential buyer, compatibility of a proposed development in the vicinity of the project, and other criteria as described in any offer for sale or request for proposal.

D.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the grant or sale of minor easements as provided by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1132  2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 2.37
ALTERNATIVE DELIVERY METHOD PROCUREMENT
Sections:

2.37.010    Purpose and intent.

2.37.020    Definitions.

2.37.030    Request for proposals.

2.37.040    Performance criteria.

2.37.050    Advertisement.

2.37.060    Prequalification.

2.37.070    Prequalification criteria.

2.37.080    False declaration unlawful.

2.37.090    Withdrawal of proposals.

2.37.100    Proposal security.

2.37.110    Review and evaluation of proposals.

2.37.120    Selection committee.

2.37.130    Selection method.

2.37.140    Approval of design-build contracts.

2.37.150    Change orders.

2.37.160    Retention.

2.37.170    Right to reject proposals.

2.37.180    Subcontractor listing.

2.37.190    Indemnification.

2.37.200    Severability and effect.

2.37.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide definitions and guidelines for the award, use and evaluation of alternative delivery method contracts. The intent of this chapter is to set forth the requirements, including the competitive process the city will follow whenever it awards an alternative delivery method contract. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.020 Definitions.
Alternative delivery method means a process of selecting a contracting team for design and construction using the design-build, design-assist or integrated project delivery methods for the construction of a public works project pursuant to a competitive negotiation process to establish the best value.

Alternative delivery method contract means a contract between the city and an alternative delivery method entity to furnish services as required for a given public works project.

Alternative delivery method entity means the entity (whether natural person, partnership, joint venture, corporation, business association, or other legal entity) that proposes to enter into a contract with the city for delivery of any public works project under the procedures of this chapter.

Alternative delivery method entity member (sometimes referenced as member) means any natural person, partnership, joint venture, corporation, business association or other legal entity who provides licensed contracting, architectural or engineering services for the alternative delivery method entity.

Awarding entity means the city council when referencing procurement for the city or for any department of the city.

Best value means a value determined by stated criteria that may include, but is not limited to, price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience and other criteria deemed appropriate by the city department.

City department means the city department utilizing the alternative delivery method process.

Competitive negotiation means a competitive sealed proposal procurement method which includes but is not limited to all of the following requirements: (1) generally describes the services sought to be procured by the city, (2) sets forth minimum criteria for evaluating proposals submitted in response to a request for proposals/qualifications, (3) generally describes the format and content of proposals/qualifications to be submitted, (4) provides for negotiation of scope and price and (5) describes the factors to be used in evaluating proposals.

Director means the director of the city department primarily responsible for managing and administering an alternative delivery method contract pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

Performance criteria means the requirements for the public works project, including, as appropriate, capacity, durability, production standards, ingress and egress requirements, or other criteria for the intended use of the public works project, expressed in conceptual documents, performance-oriented preliminary drawings, outline specifications and other documents provided to the alternative delivery method entity by the city department establishing the projects basic elements and scale, and their relationship to the work site suitable to allow the alternative delivery method entity to make a proposal.

Performance criteria developer means the design professional assisting with the development of the request for proposals/qualifications and performance criteria, who is duly licensed by the state of California.

Project procedures manual means the guidance manual for all alternative delivery method projects which includes the components of the scope of work, proposal requirements, contract provisions, selection criteria and selection process. This document shall be prepared and amended from time to time as set forth by the city manager or his or her designee.

Proposal means an offer to enter into an alternative delivery method contract, as further defined in this chapter.

Public works project shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 2.36.030.

Request for proposals means the document or publication whereby a city department solicits proposals for an alternative delivery method contract. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.030 Request for proposals.
For purposes of this chapter only, prior to procuring an alternative delivery method contract, the city department shall prepare a request for proposals containing, at minimum, the following elements:

A.    The procedures to be followed for submitting proposals.

B.    The proposed terms and conditions for the alternative delivery method contract.

C.    The performance criteria.

D.    A description of the project approach, work plan and/or other submittals to be submitted with the proposal.

E.    A schedule for planned commencement and completion of the alternative delivery method public works project.

F.    The minimum qualifications that the alternative delivery method entity will be required to possess to be deemed responsive.

G.    Any other relevant information that the city department in its discretion may choose to supply. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.040 Performance criteria.
Performance criteria for purposes of the request for proposals and additional scope refinements shall be prepared by the city department or the performance criteria developer. The performance criteria developer shall be disqualified from submitting a proposal to enter into the alternative delivery method contract as an alternative delivery method entity or as a subcontractor or team member of an alternative delivery method entity. The alternative delivery method entity shall not be permitted to delegate services under the alternative delivery method contract to the performance criteria developer.

The city department, in consultation with the performance criteria developer, shall determine the scope and level of detail required for the performance criteria. The performance criteria shall be detailed enough to permit qualified alternative delivery method entities to submit proposals in accordance with the request for proposals, given the nature of the alternative delivery method public works project and the level of design to be provided in the proposal. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.050 Advertisement.
Notice of request for proposals shall be advertised in the same manner in which formal bids generally are solicited for public works projects for the city. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.060 Prequalification.
The city department may establish a prequalification process for alternative delivery method entities on a project by project basis that specifies the prequalification criteria, standardized questionnaire and the manner in which the alternative delivery method entities will be selected. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.070 Prequalification criteria.
Where the city department determines that prequalification is in the best interest of the city and project delivery, at a best value, it may, prior to receipt of proposals, seek information in order to evaluate qualifications. Qualification may include any of the following criteria, without limitation, to be supplied by an alternative delivery method entity:

A.    Submission of documentation establishing that the alternative delivery method entity proposing to enter into the alternative delivery method contract (1) is a licensed contractor (Class A, B, or C, as specified in the request for proposals) and either holds an engineering or architect license (as required by the request for proposals) or subcontracts that required license, or (2) is a licensed engineer or architect (as specified in the request for proposals) and either holds or subcontracts a contractors license (Class A, B, or C, as specified in the request for proposals).

B.    Submission of documentation establishing that the alternative delivery method entity or its members have completed projects of similar size, scope, structure or building type, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the alternative delivery method public works project.

C.    Submission of a proposed project management plan establishing that the alternative delivery method entity or its members have the experience, competence, and capacity needed to effectively complete the alternative delivery method public works project on schedule.

D.    Submission of documentation establishing that the alternative delivery method entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance, as well as a financial statement assuring the city that the alternative delivery method entity has the capacity to complete the alternative delivery method public works project.

E.    Provision of a declaration that neither the alternative delivery method entity, nor any of its members, under its current or former name, has had a surety company complete any project within the past five years.

F.    Provision of a declaration providing detail for the past five years concerning all of the following:

1.    Civil, criminal, or administrative violations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act against the alternative delivery method entity and/or any of its members.

2.    Civil, criminal, or administrative violations of the contractors state license law against the alternative delivery method entity and/or any of its members.

3.    Conviction of or any written accusations by a government entity of the alternative delivery method entity and/or any of its members for submitting a false or fraudulent claim to a public agency.

4.    Civil, criminal, or administrative violations of federal or state law governing the payment of wages, benefits, or personal income tax withholding, or of Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) withholding requirements, state disability insurance withholding requirements, or unemployment insurance payment requirements against the alternative delivery method entity and/or any of its members. For purposes of this subsection, only violations by the alternative delivery method entity and/or its members, as an employer, shall be deemed applicable, unless it is shown that the alternative delivery method entity and/or its member(s), as an employer, had knowledge of a subcontractors violation or failed to comply with the conditions set forth in Section 1775(b) of the State Labor Code.

5.    Civil, criminal, or administrative violations of federal or state law against the alternative delivery method entity and/or any of its members governing equal opportunity employment, contracting or subcontracting.

6.    Disbarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state or local government public works project.

7.    Bankruptcy or receivership of the alternative delivery method entity and/or any of its members.

8.    All settled adverse claims, disputes or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and the alternative delivery method entity and/or any of its members in which the claim, settlement or judgment exceeds fifty thousand dollars.

G.    Provision of a declaration that the alternative delivery method entity will comply with all other provisions of law applicable to the alternative delivery method public works project. The declaration shall state that reasonable diligence has been used in its preparation and that it is true and complete to the best of the signers knowledge.

H.    Other information related to a project designed to assess the qualification of the prospective alternative delivery method entity.

At its sole discretion, the city department may, in lieu of prequalification, require qualification information to be provided as part of the proposals. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.080 False declaration unlawful.
The information concerning the design-build entitys qualifications and experience shall be verified under oath by the alternative delivery method entity and its members. It is unlawful to submit any declaration under this chapter containing any material matter that is false. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.090 Withdrawal of proposals.
Proposals may be withdrawn by written notice to the city department for any reason at any time prior to the deadline set forth in the RFP and the proposal guarantee for the proposal shall be returned. Timely withdrawal of a proposal shall not prejudice the right of an alternative delivery method entity to timely file a new proposal. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.100 Proposal security.
All proposals shall be accompanied by a proposal guarantee in the form of a cashiers check or certified check made payable to the city of Folsom, or a bond executed by a surety admitted to engage in such business in the state of California, or other similar security as approved by the city manager and city attorney, for an amount equal to ten percent of the amount of the proposal and no proposal shall be considered unless such proposal guarantee is timely provided. The proposal guarantee shall be forfeited if the proposal is withdrawn beyond the deadline set forth in the RFP, or if the proposal is accepted but the alternative delivery method entity fails to execute the alternative delivery method contract. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.110 Review and evaluation of proposals.
A.    Proposals received shall be submitted to the performance criteria developer prior to review by the selection committee, as defined in Section 2.37.120. The performance criteria developer may seek clarification from the proposed alternative delivery method entities to ensure proposals are responsive to the RFP. No proposal shall be considered if the proposal is not consistent with the information required by the request for proposals.

B.    The city department may conduct a phased solicitation process. In the event of a phased solicitation process, draft proposals, without cost or fee information, will be submitted for review to the performance criteria developer, who then may meet with each alternative delivery method entity to discuss its draft proposal and/or otherwise seek clarification of the draft proposal. Following review of the draft proposals, final proposals will be submitted, which shall contain all information required in the request for proposals, including cost and fee information. Final proposals shall be submitted as set forth in subsection A of this section.

C.    Adequate precautions shall be taken to insure that information gleaned from competing proposals is not disclosed to other proposers. Prices and other information contained in the proposals shall not be disclosed until a recommendation for award is made to the awarding authority. All proposals received shall become a matter of public record and shall be regarded as public, with the exception of those elements of each proposal which are identified by a proposer as business trade secrets and plainly marked Trade Secret, Confidential or Proprietary. If disclosure is required or permitted under the California Public Records Act or otherwise by law, the city shall in no way be liable or responsible for the disclosure of any such records or any part thereof. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.120 Selection committee.
The city department, with concurrence of the city manager, shall appoint a selection committee to review and rank the proposals of the alternative delivery method entities. The selection committee shall use the evaluation criteria set forth in this chapter and the applicable request for proposals in its review of the proposals. The composition of the committee shall be within the discretion of the city department and may include, but not be limited to: members of department administration or staff, the performance criteria developer, any person having special expertise relevant to selection of an alternative delivery method entity (design or construction experience) and/or other as determined by the city manager. No person interested or affiliated with any entity submitting a proposal shall participate on the selection committee. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.130 Selection method.
The following method shall be utilized in selecting an alternative delivery method entity for award of an alternative delivery method contract:

A.    Criteria utilized may include, but not be limited to:

1.    An evaluation of overall quality, capability, resource availability and financial stability of the alternative delivery method entity.

2.    An evaluation of references provided with respect to responsiveness, quality of work, timeliness and overall performance.

3.    An evaluation of the alternative delivery method entity members experience, training and qualifications.

4.    Consideration of items such as proposed design approach, initial and/or life cycle costs, project features, quality, capacity, schedule, and operational and functional performance of the facility.

5.    The extent to which the alternative delivery method entitys proposal meets the performance criteria and other requirements set forth in the request for proposals.

6.    Analysis of the cost/fee schedule to the alternative delivery method entitys ability to meet the performance criteria and other requirements set forth in the request for proposals.

7.    Whether the cost/fee schedule as provided in the proposal is guaranteed firm, evidenced in writing and signed by an authorized representative of the alternative delivery method entity.

8.    The alternative delivery method entitys cost/fee proposal and proposal for additions or deletions for the public works projects.

9.    The percentage of the work that is to be performed by the alternative delivery method entity and the sub-contractors that can be identified at the time the proposal is submitted.

B.    Depending on the number of proposals received, the city department or the selection committee may develop a short list of top ranked alternative delivery method entities.

C.    The city department or selection committee may require short listed alternative delivery method entities to submit to an interview and/or make a presentation to establish a final ranking.

D.    The city department or selection committee will negotiate with the top ranked alternative delivery method entity. The negotiations may include but not be limited to project costs/fee schedule, scope, and schedule. If negotiations are unsuccessful, negotiations will cease with the top ranked alternative delivery method entity and may begin with the next highest ranked alternative delivery method entity.

E.    Award shall be made by the awarding entity to the alternative delivery method entity whose proposal is judged as providing the best value to the city while meeting the objectives of the alternative delivery method public works project. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.140 Approval of design-build contracts.
All alternative delivery method contracts shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.150 Change orders.
Change orders to alternative delivery method contracts shall be subject to the limits and requirements set forth in the Folsom Municipal Code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.160 Retention.
If the awarding entity awards an alternative delivery method contract, retention in an amount up to ten percent shall be withheld from progress payments, subject to the citys right, in its sole discretion, to reduce retention to five percent and to permit progress payments for design services to be made without withholding retention. The city council may authorize a retention of up to ten percent upon determination that the project is substantially complex and a need exists for a retention of up to ten percent. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.170 Right to reject proposals.
Nothing in this chapter shall require the city to accept any proposal and the city hereby reserves the right to reject any and all proposals. City assumes no responsibility for the costs incurred by any alternative delivery method entity in preparation of any proposal. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.180 Subcontractor listing.
The city recognizes that the alternative delivery method entity is charged with performing both design and construction. Due to the fact that an alternative delivery method contract may be awarded prior to completion of the design, it is often impractical for the alternative delivery method entity to list all subcontractors at the time of award.

A.    It is the intent of the city to establish a clear process for the selection and award of subcontracts entered into pursuant to this chapter in a manner that retains protection for subcontractors while enabling alternative delivery method public works projects to be administered in an efficient manner.

B.    All of the following requirements shall apply to subcontractors, licensed by the state of California, that are employed on an alternative delivery method public works project undertaken pursuant to this chapter.

1.    The city department in each request for proposals shall specify the essential design disciplines, construction trades or types of subcontractors that must be listed by the alternative delivery method entity in the proposal.

2.    Subcontractors not listed in the proposal shall be awarded subcontracts by the alternative delivery method entity in accordance with a bidding process set forth in the request for proposals. The alternative delivery method entity shall furnish to city documentation verifying that all subcontractors not listed at the time of award were subsequently awarded subcontracts in accordance with the process set forth in the request for proposals. All subcontractors that are listed in the proposal or subsequently awarded subcontracts shall be afforded the protection of all applicable laws.

3.    The city may require specific subcontracting trades to meet specified experience or qualifications in order to become part of an alternate delivery method team. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.190 Indemnification.
The alternative delivery method contract shall include a provision that requires the alternative delivery method entity to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents from liability arising from the acts of the alternative delivery method entity members in connection with the performance of the alternative delivery method contract. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

2.37.200 Severability and effect.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If a court determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision. (Ord. 1181  3 (part), 2013)

Chapter 2.40
GENERAL ELECTION
Sections:

2.40.010    Change of election date.

2.40.020    Terms of office.

2.40.030    Effective date.

2.40.040    Notice.

2.40.050    Filing fee for nomination papers.

2.40.010 Change of election date.
The date of the general municipal election is hereby changed from the second Tuesday in April of even-numbered years, to the same day as the statewide general election in even-numbered years. (Ord. 489  1, 1983)

2.40.020 Terms of office.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36503.5, those elected city officers whose terms would have expired on the Tuesday succeeding the second Tuesday in April of an even-numbered year, shall instead, continue in their offices until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the day of the general municipal election and until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 489  2, 1983)

2.40.030 Effective date.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect upon the approval of the board of supervisors in accordance with Government Code Section 36503.5. (Ord. 489  3, 1983)

2.40.040 Notice.
Within 30 days after the ordinance codified herein is approved of the board of supervisors, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be mailed to all registered voters informing the voters of the change in the election date. The notice shall also inform the voters that as a result of the change in the election date elected city office-holders term in office will be extended and that no terms shall be decreased. (Ord. 489  4, 1983)

2.40.050 Filing fee for nomination papers.
The sum of $25 is set as the filing fee for nomination papers for elective offices of the city, which shall be paid at the time of the filing of nomination papers. The fee shall not be refunded in the event the candidate fails to qualify. (Ord. 573  2, 1986)

Chapter 2.42
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL PETITIONS
Sections:

2.42.010    Declaration of purpose.

2.42.020    Scope.

2.42.030    Residency and voter registration/qualification requirements for petition circulators.

2.42.040    Disqualification of signatures on petitions circulated by a person that is not a resident and registered voter or qualified to register as a voter of the city.

2.42.050    Licensing requirements for paid petition circulators.

2.42.060    Paid petition circulator license application procedures.

2.42.070    Action on a paid petition circulator license application.

2.42.080    Notice regarding compensation for petition circulationProof of license.

2.42.090    Expiration of license.

2.42.100    Proof of licensure upon filing of petitions.

2.42.110    Prohibition against counting signatures on petitions where a paid petition circulator is not licensed.

2.42.120    Right to review.

2.42.125    Registration required for individuals paid to campaign against a petition.

2.42.130    Prohibited practices.

2.42.135    Disclosure of sources of compensation.

2.42.138    Disclosure of contributions to city officials.

2.42.140    Penalties.

2.42.150    Cancellation and revocation of licenses.

2.42.160    Notice of licensing requirements.

2.42.010 Declaration of purpose.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to enforce the requirements of California Elections Code Sections 9209, 9237, and 11005 that require the circulator(s) of petitions for initiative, referendum or recall pertaining to local measures or local officials to be residents and registered voters or qualified to register as voters of the city in which the petition is circulated.

B.    By the provisions set forth in this chapter, the city council intends to determine the qualifications of persons who are paid to collect signatures on a petition for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or a local official before signatures are collected within the city. By imposing licensing requirements on paid petition circulators, the city council intends to:

1.    Ensure that only persons who are bona fide residents and registered voters or qualified to register as voters of the city circulate petitions concerning local measures or local officials as required by the California Elections Code;

2.    Protect the Folsom electorate from having a signature on a petition disqualified because the circulator did not meet the residency and registration requirements set forth in the Elections Code and in this chapter;

3.    Protect the Folsom electorate from harassment and intimidation with respect to the decision whether to sign petitions concerning local measures or local officials;

4.    Impose reasonable regulations on the practice of paying people to collect signatures on petitions for initiative, referendum and recall concerning local measures or local officials that do not infringe on the rights of such persons to circulate petitions within the city;

5.    Ensure that the powers of initiative, referendum and recall are available to the electorate of the city to ensure that local officials are accountable to local citizens on matters of local concern. (Ord. 1003  2 (part), 2003)

2.42.020 Scope.
A.    The requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to: (1) any initiative petition circulated in the city proposing the enactment or amendment of any ordinance, section or provision of the Folsom Municipal Code or the Charter of the city, (2) any referendum petition circulated in the city advocating the repeal of any ordinance or legislative act by the city council, and (3) any petition circulated in the city advocating the recall of an official elected to the Folsom city council.

B.    Nothing set forth in this chapter is intended to enlarge or abridge the rights of initiative, referendum, or recall that have been reserved to the Folsom electorate by Article VI, Section 6.01(B) of the Charter of the city. Except for establishing an express method for enforcing the residency requirements set forth in Elections Code Sections 9209, 9237 and 11005, nothing in this chapter is intended to affect the legal requirements for signatures on petitions for initiative, referendum or recall. All requirements established by the California Elections Code for petitions for initiative, referendum or recall shall apply to any such petitions circulated within the city. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.030 Residency and voter registration/qualification requirements for petition circulators.
A.    Any person circulating a petition or any section of a petition for initiative, referendum or recall pertaining to a local measure or local official shall be a bona fide resident and registered voter or be qualified to register as a voter of the city at the time of the circulation of any such petition or section thereof and shall attach a declaration to the petition declaring that the circulator is a voter or is qualified to register as a voter of the city, and state his or her residence address at the time of the execution of the declaration.

B.    For purposes of this chapter, bona fide residency within the city shall be established by reference to a persons domicile. Domicile shall be determined by evidence of the place in which a persons habitation is fixed, where the person has the intention of remaining, and to which, whenever the person is absent, the person has the intention of returning. At a given time, a person may have only 1 domicile. (Ord. 1003  2 (part), 2003)

2.42.040 Disqualification of signatures on petitions circulated by a person that is not a resident and registered voter or qualified to register as a voter of the city.
If a person circulating a petition for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or local official is not a bona fide resident and registered voter or qualified to register as a voter of the city as required by this chapter, any signatures on petitions (or sections of petitions) circulated by such a person shall not be counted for any purpose. (Ord. 1003  2 (part), 2003)

2.42.050 Licensing requirements for paid petition circulators.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to circulate, solicit or gather signatures on a petition for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or local official in exchange for monetary or other financial compensation or remuneration without first obtaining a license from the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be known as the paid petition circulator license.

B.    A paid petition circulator license may only be issued to an individual and such licenses are not transferable. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.060 Paid petition circulator license application procedures.
A.    A person who will be paid monetary or other financial compensation or remuneration in exchange for the circulation, solicitation or gathering of signatures on a petition for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or a local official shall file an application for a paid petition circulator license with the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk. The license application shall contain the following information:

1.    The legal name of the applicant;

2.    A statement that the applicant is registered to vote, the residence address where the applicant is registered to vote and, if known, the date (or approximate date or year) of registration;

3.    If the applicant has registered to vote under more than 1 name, the applicant shall identify each other name under which a voter registration affidavit has been submitted;

4.    If the applicant has registered to vote within the past 12 months, the applicant must identify the number of voter registration affidavits that have been submitted to the county registrar of voters within that 12-month period. The applicant must also identify the residence address listed on each affidavit of registration in such 12-month period;

5.    The residence address of the applicant, giving the street and number. If no street and number exists, the applicant shall provide adequate designation of the residence so that the location may be readily ascertained and so that mail can be sent to that location;

6.    Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or no contest to: (a) any felony, or (b) a misdemeanor involving any violation of the California Elections Code or the Political Reform Act or any other crime of moral turpitude. If the applicant answers in the affirmative to any of these questions, the applicant shall provide the details concerning the acts that gave rise to any such conviction or plea;

7.    Whether the applicant has previously received a paid petition circulator license from the city and, if so, the status of such license;

8.    Whether the applicant is affiliated as an owner, officer, director, manager, supervisor, employee or independent contractor with any business or enterprise that has as its primary function political lobbying, the circulation of petitions, or the solicitation or gathering of signatures on petitions.

B.    In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, the applicant shall also bear the burden of establishing that the applicant is a bona fide resident of the city as required by Section 2.42.030 of this chapter. The following evidence shall create a rebuttable presumption of bona fide residency within the city:

1.    A deed of trust or mortgage document bearing the name of the applicant and pertaining to residential property located within the city;

2.    A residential rental agreement or residential lease agreement bearing the name of the applicant and pertaining to property located within the city and which will be in effect for a period of at least 29 days;

3.    A utility bill bearing the name of the applicant and a Folsom residential address and evidencing the provision of utility services;

4.    A valid current drivers license bearing photo identification, the name of the applicant, and a Folsom address; or

5.    A property tax bill bearing the name of the applicant and a Folsom residential address.

C.    If the applicant is unable to present any of the evidence itemized in subsection B of this section, the applicant shall provide such other evidence as may be required by the city clerk to establish bona fide residency as that term is defined in Section 2.42.030(B) of this chapter.

D.    The applicant shall authorize the city clerk and the chief of police to obtain a state summary criminal history concerning the applicant.

E.    The application shall be signed by the applicant personally, and the applicant shall certify the truth and correctness of all information contained in the application under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.070 Action on a paid petition circulator license application.
A.    In order to verify that the applicant is a bona fide resident of the city, within 3 business days of receipt of the application, the city clerk shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a residency verification form to the applicant at the residence address listed on the application. The residency verification form shall require the applicant to confirm, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the license application is true and correct. The residency verification form shall be returned to the city clerk by the applicant. The city clerk shall have no obligation to take any further action on the application until the city clerk receives the certified mail receipt, signed by the applicant, back in the United States mail and the residency verification form back from the applicant. If the city clerk does not receive the signed certified mail receipt and the residency verification form back within 30 days of the date of mailing the residency verification form, the application shall be deemed void and no further action may be taken to issue a license based upon that application.

B.    After receipt of the signed certified mail receipt and the residency verification form referenced in subsection A of this section, the city clerk shall independently verify the information stated on the license application, including but not limited to taking the following steps:

1.    The city clerk shall confirm with the county registrar of voters that the applicant is registered to vote in the city, and shall also determine the number of voter registration affidavits submitted by the person in the past 12-month period. If the applicant has submitted more than 1 voter registration affidavit in the past 12-month period, the city clerk shall obtain copies of each such voter registration affidavits and shall determine whether there has been a change in residency on any such affidavit.

2.    The city clerk shall compare the signatures on the license application, the residency verification form, and any voter registration affidavits.

3.    With the assistance of the chief of police, the city clerk shall obtain a state summary criminal history concerning the applicant.

C.    The city clerk shall deny the license upon discovery of any of the following:

1.    That the applicant is not a bona fide resident of the city as that term is defined in Section 2.42.030(B) of this chapter;

2.    That the applicant has registered to vote more than 1 time in the 29 days preceding the date of the application and has identified a residence outside of the city on any such voter registration affidavits;

3.    That the applicant has been convicted of, or has plead guilty or no contest to a felony or misdemeanor involving a violation of the Elections Code, the Political Reform Act or any crime involving voter fraud or moral turpitude; or

4.    That the applicant has misrepresented any material fact on the application for the license.

If the city clerk does not make any of the findings as set forth above, the city clerk shall issue the license.

D.    The city clerk shall process applications in a timely manner and shall not delay the processing of any application in order to prevent a person from circulating petitions concerning local measures or local officials. Applications shall be processed in the order in which they are received.

E.    If the city clerk determines that a license should not be issued, the city clerk shall provide a written explanation of the grounds for rejection of the license to the applicant. (Ord. 1003  2 (part), 2003)

2.42.080 Notice regarding compensation for petition circulationProof of license.
A.    In addition to any requirements imposed by state law, every petition circulated by a person who receives monetary or other financial compensation or remuneration for circulating a petition for initiative, referendum or recall in the city concerning a local measure or local official shall post in a prominent location within 5 feet of the place of circulation the following statement in bold faced, type at least two inches in height:

NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC: THIS PERSON CIRCULATING THIS PETITION IS A PAID SIGNATURE GATHERER. PURSUANT TO FOLSOM CITY COUNCIL ORDINANCE, A PAID PETITION CIRCULATOR IS REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED BY THE CITY. YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO SEE A COPY OF THE LICENSE. IF THE PERSON CIRCULATING THIS PETITION DOES NOT HOLD A VALID LICENSE, YOUR SIGNATURE ON THIS PETITION SHALL NOT BE COUNTED FOR ANY PURPOSE.

If the circulator is not standing in a fixed location to collect signatures, the above-referenced disclosure shall be carried on a printed card in the same type face and type size referenced above. The disclosure card shall be prominently displayed to each potential signatory of the petition.

B.    Any person required to be licensed under this chapter who is circulating a petition for initiative, referendum or recall in the city concerning a local measure or local official shall carry the paid petition circulator license issued by the city clerk with him/her at all times while circulating such petitions. The license shall be produced on demand to any person or official. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the license as provided for in Section 2.42.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.090 Expiration of license.
A paid petition circulator license shall expire immediately if the holder of the license changes the place of bona fide residency to a location outside of the city. The license holder shall be required to immediately notify the city clerk of any change of residence. A license must be renewed on an annual basis by presenting to the city clerk the information set forth in Section 2.42.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.100 Proof of licensure upon filing of petitions.
Concurrent with the filing of any petition (or sections thereof) for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or local official with the city clerk, the person filing such petition shall present proof of licensure of any persons who circulated sections of the petition and who are required to hold a license under this chapter. If the license was issued more than 29 days before the date of filing the petition, the person filing the petition shall also present proof of continued Folsom residency by the license holder. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.110 Prohibition against counting signatures on petitions where a paid petition circulator is not licensed.
Upon receipt of a petition (or sections of a petition) for initiative, referendum or recall, the city clerk shall attempt to immediately verify whether the person circulating the petition (or sections thereof) was paid to circulate the petition. If the circulator has indicated that he/she was paid to circulate the petition, the city clerk shall attempt to verify whether such person holds a valid license. If the city clerk is able to determine at the time of the filing of the petition that a circulator of any section of the petition does not hold a valid license, the city clerk shall reject the sections of the petition that were circulated by a person without a valid license. If at any time after a petition is accepted for filing the city clerk determines that any paid petition circulator did not hold a valid license as required under this chapter, any signatures on such petition sections shall not be counted for any purpose. Notwithstanding Section 2.42.040, if the city clerk is able to determine that a valid license was held at some time during the circulation of the petition, the signatures collected during that time shall be counted. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.120 Right to review.
A.    The decision of the city clerk with respect to the issuance, cancellation or revocation of a license under this chapter may be appealed to the city manager or his/her designee within 10 days of the date of the decision. The city manager may refer the matter to an administrative hearing officer authorized to adjudicate code enforcement matters pursuant to Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. Any appeal shall be accompanied by a written statement of the facts and/or law that form the basis of the appeal. The appeal hearing shall be scheduled as soon as practicable, and shall not be delayed in order to prevent a person from circulating petitions concerning a particular local measure or local official. The decision of the city manager or designee is final and is not subject to further administrative review.

B.    The decision of the city clerk as to whether to accept sections of a petition for filing or whether to count signatures on a petition is final and is not subject to further administrative review. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.125 Registration required for individuals paid to campaign against a petition.
A.    It is unlawful for any individual to campaign, advocate or attempt to persuade a Folsom resident not to sign a petition being circulated for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or local official in exchange for monetary or other financial compensation or remuneration without first registering with the chief of police.

B.    The registration form shall contain the following information:

1.    The legal name of the individual;

2.    The residence address of the individual, and if different from the residence address, the mailing address of the individual;

3.    The business address, if any, of the individual;

4.    The residence and business telephone numbers of the individual.

C.    Upon receiving the signed registration form, the chief of police, or his or her designee, shall provide the individual with a code of conduct, as established by resolution of the city council, that delineates the proscribed behavior in connection with such campaign or advocacy efforts. The behavior proscribed under such resolution shall be consistent with the regulations set forth in the penal provisions of the California Elections Code at Chapters 6 and 7, Sections 18500 through 18671. The individual shall also read and sign a copy of the code of conduct in the presence of the chief of police, or his or her designee, attesting to the fact that the individual has read, understands and will abide by the code of conduct.

D.    Failure to abide by the code of conduct shall be a misdemeanor, unless another penalty is set forth by state law. Failure to abide by the code of conduct shall also be grounds for the chief of police to prohibit the individual from engaging in further campaign or advocacy activity pending an investigation and resolution of the charges. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.130 Prohibited practices.
In addition to any practices that are prohibited by state law, the following practices are prohibited:

A.    No person shall circulate a petition for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or local official without first complying with the requirements of this chapter.

B.    No person shall impede, hinder, intimidate, threaten, harass or block the efforts of a person to circulate or collect signatures on a petition for initiative, referendum or recall in the city.

C.    No person shall falsify a voter registration card or provide false information concerning residency in order to receive a license.

D.    No person shall identify a Folsom address as a residence address on a license application unless that residence is a bona fide residence as that phrase is defined in Section 2.42.030(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.135 Disclosure of sources of compensation.
A.    Any person who is paid to circulate petitions for initiative, referendum or recall concerning local measures or local officials and any person required to register with the chief of police pursuant to Section 2.42.125 of this chapter shall disclose the source and amount of any and all financial payments or other compensation or remuneration received by such person in exchange for such services on a form supplied by the city clerk. The disclosure form shall be on file with the city clerk prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, or at the time of filing for registration with the chief of police pursuant to Section 2.42.125. All paid petition circulators or persons required to register with the chief of police pursuant to Section 2.42.125 shall update such disclosure form within 2 business days of any changes or additions to the source(s) of such compensation.

B.    The city clerk shall maintain all disclosure records filed pursuant to this section. Such records shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.138 Disclosure of contributions to city officials.
A.    Any person who is paid to circulate petitions for initiative, referendum or recall concerning local measures or local officials and any person required to register with the chief of police pursuant to Section 2.42.125 of this chapter shall disclose the source and amount of any and all contributions to any elected or appointed city official on a form supplied by the city clerk. The disclosure form shall be on file with the city clerk prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, or at the time of filing for registration with the chief of police pursuant to Section 2.42.125. All paid petition circulators or persons required to register with the chief of police pursuant to Section 2.42.125 shall update such disclosure form within 2 business days of any changes or additions to such contributions.

B.    The city clerk shall maintain all disclosure records filed pursuant to this section. Such records shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.

C.    The disclosure required under this section is in addition to and not in place of any disclosure requirements imposed on elected or appointed officials pursuant to state law, including but not limited to the Fair Political Practices Act. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.140 Penalties.
Unless otherwise provided for by state law, the violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.150 Cancellation and revocation of licenses.
A.    Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be canceled and revoked at any time for the following reasons:

1.    A material false statement in the application;

2.    Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to a change of residency to a place outside of the city.

B.    The city clerk shall notify any person holding a license of the grounds for cancellation and revocation of the license.

C.    Upon receipt of notice of cancellation of a license, the holder of the license shall return the license to the city clerk and shall immediately discontinue any efforts to circulate, solicit or gather signatures on a petition.

D.    The holder of the license may seek review of the city clerks determination pursuant to Section 2.42.120 of this chapter. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

2.42.160 Notice of licensing requirements.
The city clerk shall publish the ordinance codified in this chapter once each year in a newspaper of general circulation. The city clerk shall also distribute copies of this ordinance to any individual or group who inquire about procedures for initiative, referendum or recall concerning a local measure or local official. The city clerk shall also send a copy of said ordinance, and all amendments thereto, to the county registrar of voters. (Ord. 844  2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 2.44
INITIATIVE PETITION FILING FEE
Sections:

2.44.010    Purpose.

2.44.020    Initiative petition fee.

2.44.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of Chapter 767, Statutes of 1987, which provides for the payment of a fee prior to circulating an initiative petition in the city in an amount to be established by the city council, but not to exceed $200. (Ord. 616  1 (part), 1988)

2.44.020 Initiative petition fee.
Any person filing a notice of intention to circulate an initiative petition pursuant to Section 4002 of the California Elections Code shall pay a fee to the city in the sum of $200. Such fee shall be refunded to the filer, if, within 1 year of the date of such notice of intention, the city clerk certifies the sufficiency of such petition. (Ord. 616  1 (part), 1988)

Chapter 2.46
ELECTRONIC CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE
Sections:

2.46.010    Purpose.

2.46.020    Electronic filing requirement.

2.46.030    Exemptions.

2.46.040    Availability of statements for public reviewRecord retention.

2.46.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require electronic filing of campaign disclosure statements under the Political Reform Act whenever any elected city official, candidate or committee is required to file said statement with the city clerk, unless exempt from the requirement to file online pursuant to California Government Code Section 84615. (Ord. 1280  4 (part), 2018)

2.46.020 Electronic filing requirement.
Any elected officer, candidate, or committee required to file statements, reports or other documents (statements) as required by Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act (California Government Code Section 84100 et seq.) must file such statements electronically using the city clerks online system according to procedures established by the city clerk. These procedures shall ensure that the online system complies with the requirements set forth in Section 84615 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1280  4 (part), 2018)

2.46.030 Exemptions.
A.    Any elected officer, candidate, or committee required to file statements is exempted from the requirement to file electronically if the officer, candidate, or committee receives less than one thousand dollars in contributions and makes less than one thousand dollars in expenditures in a calendar year, as set forth in Government Code Section 84615(a).

B.    In the event the city clerks electronic filing system is not able or capable of accepting a statement, an elected officer, candidate, or committee shall file that statement in paper format with the city clerk. (Ord. 1280  4 (part), 2018)

2.46.040 Availability of statements for public reviewRecord retention.
A.    The city clerks system shall make all the data filed available on the internet in an easily understood format that provides the greatest public access. The data shall be made available free of charge and as soon as possible after receipt. The data made available on the internet shall not contain the street name of the persons or entity representatives listed on the electronically filed forms or any bank account number required to be disclosed by the filer. The city clerks office shall make a complete, unredacted copy of the statement available to the Fair Political Practices Commission for 87200 filers.

B.    The city clerks office shall maintain, for a period of at least ten years commencing from the date filed, a secured, official version of each online or electronic statement which shall serve as the official version of that record for purpose of audits. (Ord. 1280  4 (part), 2018)

Chapter 2.48
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITS
Sections:

2.48.010    Purpose and intent.

2.48.020    Definitions.

2.48.030    Campaign contribution limitation.

2.48.040    Organizational contributions.

2.48.050    Duties of the city clerk.

2.48.060    ViolationPenalties.

2.48.070    Effect of violation on outcome of election.

2.48.010 Purpose and intent.
Inherent to the high cost of election campaigning is the problem of improper influence, real or potential, exercised by campaign contributions over elected officials. It is the purpose and intent of the people of the city in enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter to preserve an orderly political forum in which individuals may express themselves effectively; to place realistic and enforceable limits on the amounts of money that may be contributed to political campaigns in municipal elections; to limit contributions by organizations in order to develop a broader base of political efficacy within the community; to limit the use of loans and credit in the financing of municipal election campaigns; and to provide full and fair enforcement of all the provisions of this chapter. (Initiative measure passed by vote of the people 6/7/94)

2.48.020 Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted as defined in Title 9, Chapter 2, of the California Government Code. (Initiative measure passed by vote of the people 6/7/94)

2.48.030 Campaign contribution limitation.
A.    No person other than a candidate shall make, and no campaign treasurer shall solicit or accept, any contribution which will cause the total amount contributed by such person with respect to a single election in support or opposition to such candidate, including contributions to all committees supporting or opposing such candidate, to exceed $150.

B.    Extension of credit for a period of more than 90 days is prohibited. Extension of credit for more than $1,000 is prohibited; provided, however, a candidate may personally borrow any amount and such funds shall be considered as a contribution by the candidate personally; provided, further, that such transaction is fully disclosed and documented in accordance with applicable law.

C.    The terms of this section are applicable to any contributions made to a candidate or committee hereunder, whether used by such candidate or committee to finance a current campaign, to pay deficits incurred in a prior campaign, or otherwise.

D.    If any person is found guilty of violating the terms of this section, the amount of funds received constituting such violation shall be paid by the candidate or committee treasurer who received such funds to the city finance director for deposit in the general fund of the city.

E.    As used in this section, extension of credit means any loan, gift, forbearance or forgiveness of debt without adequate compensation. (Initiative measure passed by vote of the people 6/7/94)

2.48.040 Organizational contributions.
A.    In any municipal election, no person shall make a contribution to any candidate or committee in excess of the limit in Section 2.48.030; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to contributions made to a committee which is organized solely for the purpose of supporting or opposing the qualification for the ballot or adoption of one or more city measures.

B.    No person covered by this chapter shall knowingly aid, abet, recommend or participate in a violation of this section.

C.    No person shall knowingly accept a payment or contribution made in violation of this section.

D.    If a committee treasurer is offered a contribution which would be in excess of the limitation, the treasurer must refuse the contribution.

E.    This section shall not prohibit a committee from delivering to a candidate any moneys legally received by said committee as contributions. (Initiative measure passed by vote of the people 6/7/94)

2.48.050 Duties of the city clerk.
In addition to other duties required under the law, the city clerk shall:

A.    Supply every candidate for city election a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter at the time of filing qualification documents for the election;

B.    Report any violations of this chapter to appropriate law enforcement authorities. (Initiative measure passed by vote of the people 6/7/94)

2.48.060 ViolationPenalties.
Any person who knowingly or wilfully violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any wilful or knowing failure to report contributions, done with intent to mislead or deceive, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $500. (Initiative measure passed by vote of the people 6/7/94)

2.48.070 Effect of violation on outcome of election.
If after an election a candidate is convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the election to office of such candidate shall be void and such office shall become vacant immediately thereupon, or on the date upon which the candidate, if she or he is not an incumbent, would otherwise take office, whichever occurs later. In such event, the vacancy shall be filled as otherwise required by law. If a candidate is convicted of a violation of this chapter at any time prior to an election, her or his candidacy shall be terminated immediately and the person shall be no longer eligible for election. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be ineligible to hold city elective office for a period of 5 years from and after the date of her or his conviction. (Initiative measure passed by vote of the people 6/7/94)

Chapter 2.50
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN CIVIC AFFAIRS
Sections:

2.50.010    Intent.

2.50.020    Public participation opportunity.

2.50.030    Public Participation Day.

2.50.040    Access to city information.

2.50.010 Intent.
A.    The intent of this chapter is to encourage broad, informed public participation in civic affairs through effective communication between the city and its residents and to require that the city on an ongoing basis explore opportunities to provide clear lines of communication between the city and its residents. It is intended that this chapter fulfill the requirements of Section 2.09 of the Folsom City Charter (Public Participation).

B.    In order to accomplish the intent of this chapter, the city shall establish public participation opportunities which:

1.    Encourage citizen participation to the greatest extent possible;

2.    Seek and encourage the advice and input from the public on matters relative to the city;

3.    Provide information to the public about matters relative to the city. (Ord. 734  1 (part), 1992)

2.50.020 Public participation opportunity.
A.    A public participation opportunity is defined to be an idea, activity, event, declaration or action which serves to encourage greater public participation in municipal affairs.

B.    All public participation opportunities submitted to the city shall be given full consideration. Public participation opportunities which do any or all of the following shall not be considered:

1.    Remove municipal authority from the city;

2.    Establish quasi-governmental bodies;

3.    Add secondary layers of bureaucracy;

4.    Contain provision known to violate state or federal laws or constitutions;

5.    Legislate mandatory public participation of residents.

C.    The Folsom city council may, at any time, in accordance with the law, hear and vote to implement a public participation opportunity which meets the intent of this chapter.

D.    All implemented public participation opportunities will be reviewed annually for their effectiveness in meeting the intent of this chapter. The results of this evaluation, as well as additional public participation opportunities suggested by the public, staff, elected Folsom officials, or their representatives, shall be reviewed and discussed annually during a public city council meeting following the established Public Participation Day. (Ord. 870  2 (part), 1997)

2.50.030 Public Participation Day.
The city shall designate at least four months in advance an annual event as Public Participation Day and use this day as an opportunity to encourage greater participation in municipal affairs. (Ord. 870  2 (part), 1997)

2.50.040 Access to city information.
A.    The city manager, in conjunction with the city clerk, shall establish a system by which interested parties, organizations, or individuals may obtain, in a timely fashion, information generated by or for the city and generally available to the public.

B.    This information shall be provided at a minimal cost, set only to offset any printing or delivery charges.

C.    All information materials available to the public shall be accessible for review, free of charge, at the Folsom Public Library.

D.    Organizations wishing to act as a clearinghouse of city information may register with the city manager after arranging long-term agreements which satisfy subsection B of this section. Duly registered organizations and the Folsom Public Library will be identified by the city as reference locations for public information.

E.    Registered organizations shall be entitled to receive all public information provided to members of the city council or to members of any city board or commission. However, the term public information shall not include confidential communications between the city and its attorney, nor to any written communications, reports, analyses and information provided to the city council in connection with any matter which is properly the subject of a closed session of the city council. Public information shall include, but not be limited to, preliminary and regular agendas, proposed ordinances and resolutions, staff and consultant reports, analyses and background information. Other items which may be released include the following:

1.    The cover sheet of an application for planning commission/historical committee action;

2.    The notice of preparation of an environmental impact report and the notice of exemption from the California Environmental Quality Act;

3.    The proposed budget and budget message, the budget adopted by the city council, notice of proposals to make a supplemental or emergency appropriation, notice of appropriation reductions, notice of transfer of moneys, a copy of the capital improvement plan and budget, a copy of the quarterly financial statement, and the audit report;

4.    Notice that the city is considering the granting of a franchise.

F.    Upon written request by a citizen or organization about a matter pending before the city, written notice shall be provided within seventy-two hours prior to commencement of the hearing or agenda item at which it will be considered. If the matter is to be considered at a special meeting, twenty-four hours notice shall be given to the citizen or organization requesting the same. (Ord. 734  1 (part), 1992)

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.02    Budgeting, Accounting and Fiscal Procedures

3.04    Documentary Stamp Tax

3.08    Sales and Use Tax

3.12    Property Tax Collection

3.14    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.16    Gas Tax Fund

3.20    Municipal Service Charges

3.23    Utility Commission

3.25    Emergency Transportation Service Charges

3.28    Fee Structure for Commuter Bus Service

3.29    Fare Structure for Folsom Stage Lines

3.30    Investment of City Moneys

3.40    Facilities Augmentation FeeFolsom South Area Facilities Plan

3.50    Fee and Service Charge Revenue/Cost Comparison System

3.60    Entrance Fee at the Folsom City Zoo

3.70    Fees for Rental of City Facilities

3.80    Capital Improvement New Construction Fee

3.90    Housing Trust Fund

3.100    Tourism Business Improvement Districts

3.110    Community Facilities Financing

3.120    Folsom Plan Area Development Impact Fees

3.130    Folsom Plan Area Specific Plan Infrastructure Fee

Chapter 3.02
BUDGETING, ACCOUNTING AND FISCAL PROCEDURES
Sections:

3.02.010    General premise of budgeting and accounting system.

3.02.020    Fiscal year.

3.02.030    Budget.

3.02.040    Capital improvement plan.

3.02.050    Public financial documents and reports.

3.02.060    Fund structure.

3.02.070    Interest earnings allocation.

3.02.080    Special assessment fund procedures.

3.02.090    Fixed asset replacement policy and requirements.

3.02.100    Inviolate use of special funds.

3.02.110    Method of payment of demands.

3.02.120    Depositories and method of payment.

3.02.130    Accounting records.

3.02.140    Certifications and records.

3.02.150    Petty cash accounts.

3.02.160    Audit of city accounts.

3.02.170    Claims against the city.

3.02.180    Actions against the city.

3.02.190    Security required of depositories.

3.02.200    Assumption of treasurers duties.

3.02.010 General premise of budgeting and accounting system.
The city budgeting and accounting system shall be an integrated budgeting and financial management system based on the principles of double entry self-balancing accounts, and under the supervision of the finance director.

A.    Generally accepted accounting principles shall be followed and adhered to, and appropriate controls shall be installed, implemented and maintained for all city and agency financial records, thereby assuring maximum protection of the citys moneys, assets and resources, and the integrity of the accounting, cash management, budgeting and reporting system comprising the integrated financial management and reporting system as required by the City Charter.

B.    The annual budget, annual comprehensive financial and administrative report, and all other reports of the finance department except those prepared to the specifications of granting agencies shall be prepared with the informational needs of the public and the city council in mind, as well as meeting the requirements of generally accepted accounting principles, audit standards and the reporting requirements of other governments.

C.    Quarterly budgetary status reports shall be prepared and provided to the city manager, department heads and city council by the finance director, such that those persons might maintain the integrity of and accountability for the citys financial resources, accomplish city council established policies and programs, and utilize such data for management purposes. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.020 Fiscal year.
The fiscal year for the city shall begin on July 1st and end on June 30th. All budgets, financial plans, financial and management reports, and audits shall correspond with the fiscal year. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.030 Budget.
An annual budget shall be prepared by the city manager, with the assistance of the finance director. The budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be presented to the city council on or before the first working day of the last month of each fiscal year.

A.    The budget shall consist of the following, which shall comprise a complete budget document:

1.    A budget message by the city manager, which message shall provide an explanation of the budget, both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs proposed to be funded by the budget. The message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, revenues or financial position, together with the reasons for such changes;

2.    A summarization of the citys debt position;

3.    A complete financial plan for the fiscal year for all city funds, agencies and activities, in such form as the city manager shall deem desirable to provide the information desired by the city council, except for trust funds;

4.    A clear general summary of the contents of the budget;

5.    A summary of all estimated revenues of all funds and agencies, including carryover fund balances and reserves;

6.    All proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year;

7.    Sufficient summaries to provide a comprehensive and consolidated view of the citys financial plan;

8.    A section providing a statement of proposed goals and objectives and appropriations for current operations during the ensuing year, detailed for each fund by organization unit, and program, purpose or activity, and the method of financing each such proposed appropriation;

9.    A section providing comparative amounts for actual and estimated income and expenditures for the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures for the preceding fiscal year;

10.    A section providing capital expenditures proposed to be made during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by organization unit when practicable, and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditures;

11.    A section detailing anticipated income, expense, profit, loss and reserves, and the purpose of such reserves, for each utility and enterprise fund separate agency of the city;

12.    Such other material as the city manager and finance director shall deem desirable to explain the comprehensive annual financial plan for all city funds, agencies and activities.

B.    Each such department, division, program or activity budget shall contain within it such detail as the city manager shall determine necessary and appropriate to provide the city council with adequate policy data and the department heads and program managers with proper management information, but minimally shall contain with each such budget recommended appropriations for the following categories:

1.    Personnel services;

2.    Services and supplies;

3.    Capital outlay/improvements.

C.    The budget shall establish the number of authorized positions to be filled by employees, the number of hours for which part-time or seasonal employees may be hired, and the dollar amount of overtime which may be utilized by the employees of any budgetary program.

D.    The city manager may transfer authorized positions between departments, divisions or programs, but not between funds, provided:

1.    The total appropriation for the fund within which the position transfers are made is not exceeded;

2.    Any new salary involved for any position so transferred is at the same or a lower level and dollar amount than the present or prior incumbent; and,

3.    That moneys to cover the necessary appropriation is transferred in accordance with the requirements and procedures of this section.

E.    Each fund may contain a general contingency appropriation, and such additional subsidiary contingency accounts within the several departmental accounts as the city manager shall recommend and the city council shall deem appropriate.

F.    The total of expenditures proposed as the budget for each fund shall not exceed the total of estimated revenues, plus the carried forward balance, exclusive of reserves, for each fund.

G.    The city council shall adopt the annual budget by resolution by fund and program by affirmative vote of at least 3 members, on or before the last working day of the last month of the current fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by the last day of the current fiscal year, the budget as proposed by the city manager shall be deemed adopted.

H.    The city council may make supplemental appropriations during the course of the fiscal year provided that the city manager certifies that moneys are available. All such supplemental appropriations shall be made for the fiscal year by resolution, up to the amount of any excess moneys certified by the city manager as being available.

I.    Emergency appropriations may be made by the city council provided:

1.    A statement accompanies the appropriation, which statement declares the reason for declaring the emergency;

2.    The stated emergency is related to a public threat to the life, health, public welfare, property or peace of the general public;

3.    A source of funding is declared as a part of each such appropriation;

4.    Each of the statements and the appropriation is approved by at least a four-fifths vote of the city council.

J.    Appropriations made in any budget, or any component thereof, may be reduced by the city manager or the city council at any time during any fiscal year provided:

1.    It appears probable that the revenues or fund balances available to fund any portion of the budget will be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropriations have been authorized;

2.    The city manager reports any such reduced appropriation which he/she shall make to the next meeting of the city council, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, remedial actions taken, and recommendations to the city council as to any other steps which should be taken by either of the city manager or the city council.

K.    The city manager may transfer appropriations between departments and divisions, and programs and accounts within departments and divisions within the budget, provided:

1.    All such transfers shall be reported in the aggregate to the city council by the city manager at least quarterly;

2.    The appropriation for any department, division, program, activity or account shall not be exceeded by any transfer unless a similar reduction is made in another account, or a transfer made from a contingency appropriation or account;

L.    Only the city council, by resolution, may transfer appropriations between funds and from unappropriated balances, contingency appropriations or accounts, or fund balances to any fund or appropriation account, or increase the total budget of any fund.

M.    All appropriations, except for capital projects involving capital replacements and capital additions, shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that such appropriation has not been expended or encumbered, except:

1.    All capital project appropriations shall continue in force until expended, revised or repealed by action of the city council;

2.    All capital project appropriations shall be deemed to be abandoned if 3 years pass without disbursement from or encumbrance against the appropriation.

N.    The annual budget shall be adopted only after being the subject of a public hearing before the city council. Ten days posted notice shall be provided for the hearing. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.040 Capital improvement plan.
A capital improvement plan and budget shall be prepared and presented, or updated and presented by the city manager to the city council annually.

A.    The capital improvement plan and budget shall encompass 5 or more years, as determined by the city manager, and shall include:

1.    A general summary of its contents;

2.    Appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each proposed project or acquisition;

3.    Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each project, improvement or capital expenditure;

4.    The proposed method of financing for each proposed capital project, whether replacement or addition;

5.    The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining any facility to be constructed or acquired.

B.    The capital improvement plan and budget shall be adopted only after being subjected to a public hearing before the city council. Ten days posted notice shall be provided for such public hearing.

C.    The capital improvement plan and budget shall be adopted by the city council by resolution on or before the beginning of the first fiscal year covered by the plan and budget.

D.    Since the city does not have a capital improvement plan, a period of 1 year will be allowed for implementation. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.050 Public financial documents and reports.
Each of the annual budget, the capital improvement plan and budget, and the comprehensive annual financial and administrative report shall be public documents and filed with the city council as required in this chapter and by the City Charter.

A.    Copies of each of the documents listed in this section, and all appropriate summarizing documents, shall be made available to the public for inspection and review.

B.    Within 30 days after the end of each quarter during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the city council, the city manager shall submit to the city council a financial and management report showing the relation between budgeted and actual revenues and appropriations, expenditures and encumbrances to date for all city funds, departments, offices and agencies, and summarizing all budgetary transfers. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.060 Fund structure.
The finance director shall prepare the annual budget, maintain the accounting system, and make all required financial reports reflecting the transactions of the following funds, which shall conform to the Governmental Accounting Standards Board, and which funds shall contain the moneys, assets and report the transactions of the funds created hereby, as follows:

A.    Governmental Funds.

1.    The general fund will account for all financial resources except those required to be accounted for in another fund.

2.    Special revenue funds will account for the proceeds of specific revenue sources (other than expendable trusts or for major capital projects) that are legally restricted to expenditure for specified purposes.

3.    Capital projects funds will account for financial resources to be used for the acquisition or construction of major capital facilities (other than those financed by proprietary funds and trust funds)

4.    Debt service funds will account for the accumulation of resources for and the payment of general long- term debt principal and interest.

B.    Proprietary Funds.

1.    Enterprise funds will account for operations:

a.    That are financed and operated in a manner similar to business enterprises where the intent of the governing body is that the costs (expenses, including depreciation) of providing goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily through user charges; or

b.    Where the governing body has decided that periodic determination of revenues earned, expenses incurred, and/or net income is appropriate for capital maintenance, public policy, management control, accountability or other purposes.

2.    Internal service funds will account for the financing of goods or services provided by 1 department or agency to other departments or agencies of the governmental unit, or to other governmental units, on a cost-reimbursement basis.

C.    Fiduciary Funds.

1.    Trust and agency funds will account for assets held by a governmental unit in a trustee capacity or as an agent for individuals, private organizations, other governmental units, and/or funds. These include:

a.    Expendable trust funds;

b.    Nonexpendable trust funds;

c.    Pension trust funds; and

d.    Agency funds.

D.    Account Groups.

1.    General fixed assets account group will account for fixed assets other than those accounted for in the proprietary funds or trust funds;

2.    General long-term debt account group will account for all unmatured general long-term liabilities for which the city is obligated in some manner except for proprietary funds and trust funds of which the long-term liabilities will be accounted for in these funds.

The finance director may create subsidiary revenue and expenditure accounts or subfunds within the fund to segregate specific accounts, as he may deem to be appropriate or necessary. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.070 Interest earnings allocation.
All interest earned on investment of city moneys shall be allocated to the various funds and subfunds in proportion to the contribution made by each fund or subfund to the moneys which were invested, based on computations made and applied by the finance department. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.080 Special assessment fund procedures.
In addition to the special assessment projects or districts established and accounted for under all applicable state laws, the city council may by ordinance establish assessment projects or programs and require accounting therefor through special funds and/or accounts within the funds structure. Any and all assessments shall be spread among benefitted properties in accordance with council policy, with applicable state law and as interpreted by judicial decision, and within the City Charter, ordinances and council policy.

A.    All assessment projects and programs authorized by the Charter and by state law are authorized to be proceeded on and under by the city council on its order, following applicable procedural steps, determinations and notifications.

B.    The finance director is directed to maintain such accounts as are appropriate, and records necessary to provide a full fiscal accounting to the council and to benefitted and assessed property owners. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.090 Fixed asset replacement policy and requirements.
It is the policy of the city council that insofar as is possible the city services listed in this section shall be operated on a businesslike basis.

A.    The city manager and finance director are directed to establish each of an emergency reserve account, and a fixed asset replacement account in each fund enumerated in this section and, for those listed in subsections B and C of this section, to assure that the amounts set out in this section are held in such accounts and utilized only for the purposes set out herein.

B.    It is the policy of the city council that the utility and enterprise services of the city listed in this subsection shall be operated with adequate reserves to meet emergencies and to replace the depreciable fixed assets of the utility system or enterprise as they wear out or in reasonable anticipation of their failure:

1.    Water fund;

2.    Sewer fund;

3.    Transit fund;

4.    Solid waste fund;

5.    Golf enterprise fund;

6.    Storm drainage fund.

C.    It is the policy of the city council that the internal service funds of the city listed in this subsection shall be operated with adequate reserves to meet emergencies and to replace the depreciable fixed assets of the internal service fund as they wear out or in reasonable anticipation of their failure:

1.    Building fund;

2.    Equipment fund;

3.    Computer fund;

4.    Microfilming fund.

D.    It is the policy of the city council that insofar as is possible and as expeditiously as is possible, the following city funds listed in this subsection shall have adequate reserves to meet emergencies and to replace depreciable fixed assets as they wear out or in reasonable anticipation of their failure:

1.    General fund;

2.    Historic district fund;

3.    Lighting and landscape district fund.

E.    Each fund enumerated in subsections B and C of this section shall be credited quarterly with the calculated amount of moneys generated from the revenues of the utility, enterprise or internal service fund which represents a fixed asset charge calculated to be adequate to replace perpetually the depreciable fixed assets of the utility, enterprise or internal service fund.

1.    Such amounts shall be estimated annually as part of the annual budget process, contained in and enumerated by the budget, credited to a fixed asset replacement account in each such fund, and appropriated from such anticipated estimated revenues.

2.    Such moneys as are accumulated in each such fixed asset replacement account within each such fund shall be expended only for the specific purposes of the fund and account, unless the requirements of Section 3.02.100 are met.

F.    Each fund enumerated in subsection B of this section shall retain an amount equal to 5 percent of the estimated current replacement value of the depreciable fixed assets of the fund as an emergency reserve account within each such fund.

1.    The emergency reserve account within each fund shall be fully funded before moneys may be expended for projects, pursuant to subsection E2 of this section.

a.    Moneys may be expended from any emergency reserve account only by a four-fifths vote of the city council.

b.    Every such appropriation from any emergency reserve account shall enumerate the nature of the emergency, make the appropriation, and notify the public of the nature of and situation engendering the emergency.

G.    The city manager annually shall cause an updating of the fixed asset value for each city utility, enterprise and internal service fund as listed in subsections B and C of this section, calculate the amount necessary to provide adequate cash flow to the funds enumerated in subsections B and C of this section from rates, and make a written report and rate recommendation to the city council, which rate recommendation shall provide to the city council the rate structure necessary to meet all of the following:

1.    All elements of costs as set out in Chapter 3.50 of this code, including fixed asset replacement costs;

2.    Those utilities and enterprises listed in subsection B of this section additionally shall contribute:

a.    One percent of the fixed asset replacement value of the utility or enterprise to the general fund;

b.    A fee in amount of 2 percent of the gross billings of the utility or enterprise to the general fund;

c.    Such fees to begin July 1, 1991. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.100 Inviolate use of special funds.
The use of moneys designated by law or by council ordinance as assets of any special fund as established by this chapter shall remain inviolate for the purpose for which they were created unless the city council shall by ordinance adopted by a four-fifths vote of the city council, after the holding of a public hearing, designate otherwise.

A.    Any unexpended and unencumbered balance remaining in any special fund created hereby after the purpose for which the special fund was created has been accomplished shall be transferred by the city council to the general fund or to the most appropriate other special fund.

B.    Prior to the discontinuance of any special fund, and the transfer of moneys, the city council shall hold a public hearing on such proposed action. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.110 Method of payment of demands.
The finance director shall be the disbursing officer of the city. The city clerk shall provide the finance director with a copy of each ordinance, resolution or council action pertaining to the fiscal affairs of the city. The finance director shall not approve the payment of any bill or demand on the city until the following conditions are met:

A.    He/she is satisfied both as to the fund and account to be charged and as to the legality of the payment requested;

B.    That sufficient moneys are available for payment of the bill or demand in the fund to be charged;

C.    That an appropriation has been made by the city council or an appropriate, legal budgetary transfer made;

D.    That such other conditions are met as the city council may by ordinance, resolution, contract or agreement have provided, or as may be required by the City Charter or state law;

E.    That a contract, purchase order, or other valid written disbursement document denoting an obligation requiring payment has been entered into or approved by a city official who has authority to so do;

F.    That a receiving report for supplies, a certified payroll for employee payments, a certification for services provided, or a signed general disbursement claim authorization is a part of the documentation supporting such disbursement. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.120 Depositories and method of payment.
All payments of bills and demands made on the city which are approved pursuant to Section 3.02.100 shall be paid by city check drawn on a checking account held in a depository bank approved by the city council by resolution, which process shall comply with all provisions of this section.

A.    The city shall have not more than 2 major consolidated checking accounts, 1 for general purposes and 1 for payroll checks. This does not include money held by fiscal agents.

B.    All moneys received by the city shall be deposited in 1 consolidated account in such bank as the city council shall designate by resolution, and city investments shall be made from that account.

C.    Transfers between bank accounts may be made by the finance director as may be necessary to meet demands on the city, but only by check or appropriate electronic transfer made payable to the City of Folsom Only, pursuant to requirements of this section.

D.    All electronic fund transfers shall be authorized by the finance director and 1 other city officer which the city council shall designate by resolution.

E.    All checks shall be signed with 2 signatures, both of which may be by facsimile signature plate, with each such plate retained in the custody of 2 persons, and at all times prior to and after use signed out and in by those 2 persons.

1.    Neither of the 2 persons having custody over 1 plate shall under any circumstances have access to the other plate;

2.    Each of the persons involved in the check writing and electronic transfer procedure, and the finance director, shall be covered by an individual surety bond in amount set by the city council;

3.    The city council shall by resolution designate which 2 city officers shall have their signatures affixed to city checks and be authorized to make electronic fund transfers, but, in the discretion of the city council, may designate an alternate third officer whose signature and electronic fund transfer authorization will be valid only as an alternate to the signature and authorization of 1 of the 2 primary designees.

F.    The finance director shall establish and enforce procedures to assure the integrity of revenue receipt, accounting therefor, review and approval of disbursements, the writing of checks, and the custody of moneys and other city assets. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.130 Accounting records.
The finance director shall maintain accounting records for each fund showing the cash and unencumbered balances of each fund, and such records as are sufficient to show each demand issued and disbursement made and the appropriation account, program and fund against which each such payment is made.

A.    Each disbursement shall be recorded as to date, payee, number, amount, fund and account charged therefor.

B.    The bank account on which the check is drawn. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.140 Certifications and records.
The finance director shall review each purchase order, contract or other document which financially obligates the city prior to the issuance of such document and certify that moneys are available and an appropriation has been made by the city council adequate to meet the proposed obligation, or provide a statement as to the expected source of payment, prior to entering into any such obligation.

A.    The finance director is charged with custody of and responsibility for all books of account, papers, records, computer programs and data sources, electronic storage media, accounting documents and documentation, and all financial records of the city pertaining in any respect to any and all fiscal transactions of the city.

B.    The finance director shall assure that all revenues received and disbursements made are fully documented and recorded pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and such other requirements as he/she shall establish to assure the validity and integrity of the utilization of city moneys and assets. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.150 Petty cash accounts.
The finance director is authorized to establish and control petty cash and change accounts pursuant to the requirements set out in this chapter, no 1 of which shall exceed $1,000.

A.    The finance director shall establish in writing such petty cash and change accounts as he may determine to be necessary.

B.    The finance director shall establish, require and audit documentation for replacement of moneys in such accounts.

C.    The finance director shall in writing designate the person or persons responsible for maintenance of the integrity and records of each such petty cash and change account as is established. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.160 Audit of city accounts.
The city council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts, financial transactions and documents, and may provide for more frequent, more specialized, or special audits as it may determine in its discretion to be necessary to assure the integrity of city moneys, assets, accounts and records.

A.    All such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant firm experienced in the audit of California cities.

B.    The audit firm shall have no personal interest, either direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers, and may not provide services to the city other than audit services.

C.    The city council shall, through a request for qualifications and proposal process as set out in the city purchasing ordinance, select and designate such audit firm annually, or for a period not exceeding 3 years, at the discretion of the city council.

D.    Such selection process and designation to perform the annual audit for any particular fiscal year shall be completed not later than 30 days before the beginning of the fiscal year for which the audit is to be performed.

E.    The annual audit shall be comprehensive of all departments and agencies, and shall include a written evaluation of the city budgeting and accounting system as to compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and modern practices for an integrated and computerized city financial management system utilizing all possible modern accounting and control techniques and procedures.

F.    The annual audit and written evaluation report shall be submitted to the city council at a regular meeting, shall be open to public inspection in the office of the city clerk, and shall be acted on by the finance director as appropriate and necessary to assure full compliance with generally accepted accounting principles, the City Charter, state law, and this code. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.170 Claims against the city.
Claims against the city for damage alleged to have been incurred by persons and corporations shall be filed with the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk to the claimant.

A.    The form shall contain all pertinent information and must be completed by the claimant prior to being considered for processing, including whether the claim is for bodily injury, property damage, personal injury or material damage.

B.    Claims shall be processed pursuant to state law and the procedures under joint powers insurance agreements and claims processing requirements of agreements entered into by the city.

C.    Claims shall be filed with the city clerk within 6 months of the incident or event for which the claim is made.

D.    Claims shall be rejected or processed for appropriate payment pursuant to procedures established by the citys insurance coverage process and pursuant to state law.

E.    Claims against a city employee shall be reviewed by the city personnel office as part of the processing of the claim.

F.    The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with insurance carriers, adjustors, or the citys joint powers self-insurance agency to review, process, advise on, negotiate with claimants on behalf of the city, and to settle claims on behalf of the city.

G.    Claims of less than $20,000 may be approved for payment by the city manager. Claims which are recommended to be paid, which involve in excess of $20,000, shall be referred to the city council for approval. Such claims may be reviewed in closed session on recommendation of the city attorney, pursuant to the State Open Meeting Law and Procedures. (Ord. 951  3, 2002; Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.180 Actions against the city.
All legal actions naming the city or any of its officers, employees or agencies as defendant shall be filed with the city clerk and immediately referred to the city attorney for appropriate response to protect the interests of the city. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.190 Security required of depositories.
City moneys may be deposited only in a depository designated by the city council, which depository shall be a state or national bank, state or federal savings association, or state or federal credit union headquartered within the state.

A.    Deposits maintained by the city in any depository shall not exceed the amount of the paid up capital and surplus of the depository institution.

B.    All active and inactive city deposits held by the depository institution must be secured by the deposit of government securities as authorized by state law and approved by the finance director having a current market value of 110 percent of the total amount of the deposits, pledged to the city by the depository institution.

C.    The finance director at his/her discretion may waive security for that portion of a deposit which is insured by federal insurance.

D.    Prior to the designation of a depository institution by the city council, each such institution desiring to be considered as a city depository shall submit the following documents and meet the following requirements, which information shall be evaluated by the finance director, who shall make a recommendation to the city council as to the institution which he feels is best suited to be a city depository:

1.    The financial institution shall:

a.    Have been in business for a minimum of 3 years,

b.    Have assets of at least $50,000,000,

c.    Have a net worth to liability ratio of at least 3.5 to 1,

d.    Have a ratio of brokered to direct deposits of less than 50 percent,

2.    Audited financial statements covering the past fiscal years;

3.    An unaudited but certified financial statement for the most recently completed quarter;

4.    A favorable reserve for loan losses, generally with an improving ratio;

5.    Sufficient capital to meet all federal insurance and regulatory requirements and standards;

6.    A qualified rating service may be used in lieu of financial statements.

E.    All city investments shall comply with all City Charter and city ordinance requirements.

F.    Local financial institutions, or California institutions with branches in the city shall be given preference, provided that all requirements of this section are met. (Ord. 685  3 (part), 1990)

3.02.200 Assumption of treasurers duties.
The duties assigned in this chapter to the finance director, which by law are to be exercised by the city treasurer, shall not be assumed by the finance director until the end of the term of the office of the present city treasurer, or until the office is otherwise vacated. (Ord. 685  6, 1990)

Chapter 3.04
DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
Sections:

3.04.010    Created.

3.04.020    Rate.

3.04.030    Payment.

3.04.040    Application.

3.04.050    Liability.

3.04.060    Conveyances.

3.04.070    Securities and Exchange Commission order.

3.04.080    RealtyRequirements.

3.04.090    Administration.

3.04.100    Tax refund claims.

3.04.010 Created.
This chapter is known as the real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Folsom. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.020 Rate.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city is granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.030 Payment.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.040 Application.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.050 Liability.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 251  1, 1970: Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.060 Conveyances.
A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment:

1.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

2.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

3.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

4.    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

B.    Subsections (A)(1) to (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.070 Securities and exchange commission order.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

1.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

2.    Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

3.    Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.080 RealtyRequirements.
A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

1.    Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2.    Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.    If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C.    Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (B) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.090 Administration.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

3.04.100 Tax refund claims.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 228  1 (part), 1967)

Chapter 3.08
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.08.010    Short title.

3.08.020    Rate.

3.08.030    Operative date.

3.08.040    Purpose.

3.08.050    Contract with state.

3.08.060    Sales tax.

3.08.070    Place of sale.

3.08.080    Use tax.

3.08.090    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.08.100    Limitations on adoption of state law.

3.08.110    Permit not required.

3.08.120    Exclusions and exemptions.

3.08.130    Exclusions and exemptions.

3.08.140    Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.

3.08.150    Amendments.

3.08.160    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.08.170    Penalties.

3.08.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. (Ord. 303  1, 1973)

3.08.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 303  2, 1973)

3.08.030 Operative date.
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 303  3, 1974)

3.08.040 Purpose.
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

1.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

2.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

3.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adopts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;

4.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 303  4, 1973)

3.08.050 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified herein; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 303  5, 1973)

3.08.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 303  6, 1973)

3.08.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 303  7, 1973)

3.08.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 303  8, 1973)

3.08.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 303  9, 1973)

3.08.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word State is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word State in the phrase retailer engaged in business in this State in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 303  10, 1973)

3.08.110 Permit not required.
If a sellers permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional sellers permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 303  11, 1973)

3.08.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

A.    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

B.    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state;

C.    The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this city;

D.    The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. (Ord. 303  12, 1973)

3.08.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
A.    1. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

2.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this section.

3.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

4.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

The amendment set forth in this subsection shall become operative upon January 1, 1984.

B.    1. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

2.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this section.

3.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

4.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

5.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

6.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

The amendment set forth in this subsection shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the legislature of the state of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and uses taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 517  1 and 2, 1983: Ord. 303  13, 1973)

3.08.140 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
A.    Section 3.08.130 shall become operative on January 1st of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 3.08.120 shall become inoperative.

B.    In the event that Section 3.08.130 becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, Section 3.08.120 shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time Section 3.08.130 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 3.08.130 shall again become operative and Section 3.08.120 shall become inoperative. (Ord. 303  14, 1973)

3.08.150 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 303  15, 1973)

3.08.160 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 303  16, 1973)

3.08.170 Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 303  17, 1973)

Chapter 3.12
PROPERTY TAX COLLECTION
Sections:

3.12.010    County responsibility.

3.12.010 County responsibility.
The city avails itself of the provisions of Article 1, Chapter 2, Part 2, Division 1, Title 5, of the Government Code, for the levy and collection of the taxes of the city by the county, and the city requests the county to assess, levy and collect the municipal taxes of the city. (Prior code  1300)

Chapter 3.14
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

3.14.010    Short title.

3.14.020    Definitions.

3.14.030    ImposedMethod of payment.

3.14.040    Exemptions.

3.14.050    Operators duties.

3.14.060    RegistrationDisplay of registration certificate.

3.14.070    Reporting and remitting tax collected.

3.14.075    Uncollectible accountsRelief of operator from liability.

3.14.080    Enforcement.

3.14.085    Penalties.

3.14.090    Failure to collect or report taxDetermination of amount by tax administrator.

3.14.110    Records.

3.14.120    Refunds.

3.14.140    ViolationsInfractions.

3.14.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Regulations of the City of Folsom. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

Hotel means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, bed and breakfast inn, marina and boatel or other similar structure or portion thereof.

Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

Operator means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

Tax administrator means the director of finance.

Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.030 ImposedMethod of payment.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 8 percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transients ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.040 Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed upon:

A.    Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

B.    Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;

C.    Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

D.    Any person who occupies a campsite in a unit of the state park system.

No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.050 Operators duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.060 RegistrationDisplay of registration certificate.
Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.    The name of the operator;

B.    The address of the hotel;

C.    The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D.    This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform transient occupancy tax regulations by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting such tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.070 Reporting and remitting tax collected.
Each operator shall, within 60 days following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 867  2(1) (part), 1997: Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.075 Uncollectible accountsRelief of operator from liability.
An operator is relieved from liability for the remission to the city of the tax imposed under this chapter insofar as the measure of the tax is represented by accounts which have been found to be worthless and charged off for income tax purposes. If the operator has previously remitted the tax, he may, pursuant to procedures prescribed by the tax administrator, take as a deduction the amount of tax previously remitted for the worthless and charged off account. If any such accounts are thereafter in whole or in part collected by the operator, the amount so collected shall be included in the first return filed after such collection and the tax on such amount paid with the return. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.080 Enforcement.
A.    This title shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of this code.

B.    The finance director acting as the tax administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 867  2(1) (part), 1997: Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.085 Penalties.
A.    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. In addition to the administrative remedies set forth therein, the city council may direct the city attorney to commence a civil action in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.

C.    In lieu of the monetary sanctions imposed pursuant to Section 1.09.012, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:

1.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

2.    Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10-percent penalty first imposed.

3.    Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

4.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 1-1/2 percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

5.    Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 867  2(2), 1997)

3.14.090 Failure to collect or report taxDetermination of amount by tax administrator.
A.    If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by this chapter, or to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due.

B.    As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and/or to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. This notice shall serve as a Notice to Correct as that term is defined in Section 1.08.020(J). The time allowed to pay or otherwise contest the amount set forth in the notice shall be 10 calendar days from the date of the notice. The notice shall also advise the operator of its right to appeal the determination pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.030.

C.    If the operator objects to the determination of the amount of the tax assessed, the operator shall follow those appeal procedures established in Sections 1.09.030 and 1.09.032. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the further appeal rights of the operator shall be governed exclusively by the provisions of Chapter 1.09. (Ord. 867  2(1) (part), 1997: Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.110 Records.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve for a period of 3 years all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 564  1, 1986)

3.14.120 Refunds.
A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest and penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within 3 years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

B.    An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C.    A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided on subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, established to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 574  1, 1986)

3.14.140 ViolationsInfractions.
A.    Unless provided otherwise, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable therefor by: (i) a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation; (ii) a fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of this chapter within one year; (iii) a fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of this chapter within 1 year.

B.    Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of an infraction and is punishable as aforesaid.

C.    Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of an infraction and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 574  1, 1986)

Chapter 3.16
GAS TAX FUND
Sections:

3.16.010    Established.

3.16.010 Established.
Pursuant to Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, there is established in the treasury of the city, a special gas tax street improvement fund and all payments into and disbursements from said fund, shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of the state pertaining to such fund. (Prior code  1400)

Chapter 3.20
MUNICIPAL SERVICE CHARGES*
Sections:

3.20.010    Scope.

3.20.020    Exceptions.

3.20.030    Deposit required.

3.20.035    Enforcement.

3.20.040    Collection methods.

3.20.045    Solid waste capital improvement service charges.

3.20.062    Municipal service chargesPublic hearing.

3.20.063    Municipal service chargesEstablishment of rates.

3.20.070    Due date.

3.20.090    Additional charges.

3.20.100    Right of entry.

3.20.110    Service discontinuance.

3.20.130    Water serviceContinuance.

3.20.140    Easements.

3.20.150    Advance deposit requirement.

*    See also Ch. 8.32, Garbage Collection, and Title 13, Water and Sewage.

3.20.010 Scope.
A.    As used in this code, municipal services includes, but is not limited to, the collection of solid waste, the provision of sanitary sewer service, the furnishing of water service for domestic, commercial or industrial use, and the furnishing of water service for an automatic fire sprinkler protection system.

B.    Municipal service charges means charges for municipal services and shall be no greater than the costs incurred by the city in providing the service to the user, including but not limited to the costs required to maintain, upgrade, and extend the facilities necessary to provide the municipal services. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.020 Exceptions.
Municipal service charges may be discontinued upon written request for a period of no less than two months when a dwelling, house, or residence will be unoccupied. The minimum time of discontinuing service will be two months. A service charge equal to two months charges for all city services will be charged to the utility user, for the removal and redelivery of the assigned automated containers and turn-off and turn-on of water service, when services have been temporarily discontinued. This service charge will be paid at the time service is discontinued. Upon occupancy of a dwelling, house or residence the utility user must contact the city to restart service. If the occupant of a dwelling, house, or residence does not contact the city to restart service, the city may bill back to the discontinuance of service all monthly charges. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.030 Deposit required.
Unless the owner of the premises to which municipal service is to be furnished applies for such service in his own name, the applicant for service may, at the discretion of the city, be required to deposit with the city an amount equal to the estimated charge for services for six months in advance. The deposit is refundable by the city upon termination of occupancy and may be refunded by the city after one year of completed service if the city deems itself secure. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.035 Enforcement.
A.    The finance director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Collection of any amounts owed for services provided by the city that are charged pursuant to this chapter may be by any legal method including but not limited to a civil action brought in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. To the extent other enforcement is necessary under this chapter, this title may also be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of this code.

C.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall also be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Upon determination of a delinquency, the finance director may serve a turn-off tag on the responsible person. The turn-off tag shall set forth the deadline for payment of all unpaid fees and charges, including any penalties assessed as of the date of such notice. If the delinquency is not cured by the date set forth in the turn-off tag, the city may pursue any remedy available by law. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.040 Collection methods.
The methods of collection set forth in this chapter are in addition to any other method permitted or allowed by law and shall not repeal any existing law or ordinance now in effect. Unpaid charges may become a lien on any property to the extent authorized by law. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.045 Solid waste capital improvement service charges.
A.    There is hereby established a capital improvement service charge which shall be collected prior to the issuance of building permits for all residential development and upon application to the finance department for all commercial/industrial development as established by resolution of the city council.

B.    Purpose. The purpose of the fee is to establish a fund for financing equipment and capital improvement purchases required to maintain municipal services at adequate levels as service requirements increase with the construction of commercial/industrial developments and dwelling units.

C.    Inflationary Adjustment. The solid waste capital improvement service charges established by this section shall automatically be adjusted on July 1st of each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the increase, if any, in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost indices. The determination shall be reported to the city council by the finance director on or about June 30th of each year or as soon as the information is available. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.062 Municipal service chargesPublic hearing.
The city clerk shall cause notice to be provided in accordance with the Government Code and any other applicable law, and the city council shall receive at a regularly scheduled public meeting, oral and written presentations concerning any change in the municipal service charges. Such notice, oral and written presentation and public hearing shall be provided by the city council prior to taking any action on the proposed change to the municipal service charges. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.063 Municipal service chargesEstablishment of rates.
There is levied and assessed a monthly service charge against the municipal service customer (user), for municipal services as defined in Section 3.20.010(A). The amount of these municipal service charges shall be set by resolution of the city council and may be adjusted from time to time by resolution so as to reflect the cost of the services provided. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.070 Due date.
All charges for municipal services are due and payable monthly in advance, except for metered water service. Charges for metered water service shall be due and payable monthly upon receipt of a bill reflecting the quantity of water used during the prior measurement period. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.090 Additional charges.
There are levied and assessed the following charges on the unpaid municipal service charge billing not paid within the twenty days of its due date:

A.    Finance Charge. A late payment finance charge of one and one-half percent per month on all unpaid municipal service charges that are not paid on or before the due date listed on the monthly billing form.

B.    Additional Charge to Cover Collection Costs. In addition to the finance charge imposed pursuant to subsection A of this section, there shall be an additional twenty-five percent processing fee assessed against all unpaid municipal service charges that are one hundred twenty days past due to cover the costs of collection; notwithstanding this provision, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs of collection, including attorneys fees. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.100 Right of entry.
Subject to any restrictions imposed by the state or federal Constitution or state or federal law, the city shall have at all reasonable times the right of ingress to and egress from the consumers premises for any purpose properly connected with the furnishing of municipal services to the consumer as provided in Section 1.09.025. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.110 Service discontinuance.
The city shall have the right to refuse or to discontinue any or all municipal services to any premises for nonpayment or if necessary to protect itself against fraud or abuse. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.130 Water serviceContinuance.
The city will exercise reasonable diligence to furnish a continuous and adequate supply of water to its consumers and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery thereof. It cannot, however, guarantee complete freedom from interruption. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.140 Easements.
All easements for water service and sewage service are specifically set aside for such use, and any construction of improvements over such easements may require removal of such improvements by the owner upon notice by the city. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

3.20.150 Advance deposit requirement.
In any case where the user of municipal services is persistently late in the payment of charges, three times in a twenty-four-month period, the finance director may, as a condition to continued service or renewal of discontinued service, require an advance deposit of estimated charges for municipal services in such an amount as he/she deems proper to make the city secure. (Ord. 1050  2 (part), 2006)

Chapter 3.23
UTILITY COMMISSION
Sections:

3.23.010    Purpose.

3.23.020    Creation of the utility commissionFunctions of the commission.

3.23.030    Membership qualifications and appointment.

3.23.040    Terms of membershipVacancies and replacement.

3.23.050    Officers.

3.23.060    Meetings.

3.23.070    AgendasOrder of businessVoting.

3.23.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the city utility commission is to establish a forum to provide advice to the city council and the city manager regarding utility rates; the necessity and function of city utilities; and the associated costs to operate and maintain these city functions. (Ord. 1037  2 (part), 2005)

3.23.020 Creation of the utility commissionFunctions of the commission.
A.    The city utility commission (the commission) is created and shall study and make recommendations to the city council and city manager on matters related to the cost of utility service studies; the scope, costs, and nature of utility services provided by the city; and staff proposals for future rate changes.

B.    Staff support to the commission shall be provided as designated by the city manager or his or her designee. Staff designated to support the commission shall not be considered an officer or member of the commission. (Ord. 1037  2 (part), 2005)

3.23.030 Membership qualifications and appointment.
A.    All members must be residents and registered voters of the city.

B.    Each council member shall appoint one commission member whose term shall run concurrently with that of the appointing council member. Two additional members shall be appointed at-large by a majority vote of the city council for two-year terms. (Ord. 1037  2 (part), 2005)

3.23.040 Terms of membershipVacancies and replacement.
The city council may remove any member of the commission at any time by majority vote of the members of the city council. No public hearing shall be required prior to removal of any member of the commission and no cause for removal need be shown. A commission member is subject to disqualification and removal from the commission if he or she has three unexcused absences from any regularly scheduled meetings. A vacancy resulting from death, resignation, removal, disqualification or any other cause shall be filled either by an appointment from the council member appointing the commission member whose membership is being replaced or the city council in the case of an at-large position. (Ord. 1037  2 (part), 2005)

3.23.050 Officers.
A.    The officers of the commission shall be the chairperson and vice chairperson.

B.    The chairperson and the vice chairperson of the commission shall be elected by the commission every two years, following general election, at the first meeting in February by majority vote of the full commission. If no successor is named by the conclusion of any officers term, the officer shall continue in the office until a successor has been named. The chairperson or the vice chairperson can be replaced by majority vote of the full commission at any time. No public hearing shall be required prior to removal of the chairperson or the vice chairperson and no cause for removal need be shown.

C.    The chairperson and vice chairperson of the commission, or such other members as may be presiding in the aforementioned positions, shall not be deprived of any of the rights or privileges of any member by reason of his/her occupying the chair and may move, second, and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members.

D.    In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall perform the duties and obligations of the chairperson. (Ord. 1037  2 (part), 2005)

3.23.060 Meetings.
A.    Regular meetings of the commission shall be held in City Hall, located at 50 Natoma Street, Folsom, California. Regular meetings shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. There shall be no minimum number of meetings per quarter. A regularly scheduled meeting may be canceled at any time. Special meetings may be called in the manner specified by applicable state law.

B.    Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. When there is no quorum at a regular meeting, the chairperson, or any member of said body, shall adjourn said meeting until the next regular meeting.

C.    The chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall call the commission to order. In the absence of the chairperson and vice chairperson, the utilities director or his/her representative shall call the commission to order, whereupon a temporary chairperson will be elected from among the members present. Upon the arrival of the chairperson or vice chairperson, the temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the item before the commission. (Ord. 1037  2 (part), 2005)

3.23.070 AgendasOrder of businessVoting.
A.    Commission members may place items on an agenda by contacting the chairperson or the utilities director. Agendas shall be approved by the chairperson prior to the start of the meeting. Citizens or interested parties may address the commission during public comment on agenda items or during the business from the floor portion of the meeting. Agendas shall be published as required by state law.

B.    At the regular meetings of the commission, the following shall be the order of business:

1.    Roll call;

2.    Review of summary/minutes (if applicable);

3.    Business from the floor/good of the order;

4.    Agenda of the utility commission;

5.    Adjournment.

C.    On all matters acted upon by the commission, the voting shall be a roll-call vote of the members present. The ayes and noes of the members shall be recorded upon the summary of the meeting. Except for the election of the chairperson and vice chairperson, all actions of the commission shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of the commission present and eligible to vote at the particular meeting where action is to take place.

D.    All rules of order not herein provided shall be determined in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order, Revised.

E.    The commission may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment, whether or not a quorum has been established. If a quorum is not established, no business other than adjournment may be transacted. (Ord. 1037  2 (part), 2005)

Chapter 3.25
EMERGENCY TRANSPORTATION SERVICE CHARGES
Sections:

3.25.010    Definition.

3.25.020    Service charges and fees.

3.25.010 Definition.
As used in this code, emergency transportation service charges include the charges levied by the city for provision of emergency or medical transportation service, including a first responder paramedic service fee for provision of emergency medical first responder paramedic services whether the patient is transported or not. (Ord. 1164  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 428 (part), 1981)

3.25.020 Service charges and fees.
The fees for emergency transportation services and first responder paramedic services shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1164  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 524  1, 1984)

Chapter 3.28
FEE STRUCTURE FOR COMMUTER BUS SERVICE
Sections:

3.28.010    Fee structure for commuter bus service.

3.28.020    Service charges.

3.28.010 Fee structure for commuter bus service.
There is established a fee structure for the commuter bus service, which shall be collected when passengers board commuter bus. (Ord. 688 (part), 1990)

3.28.020 Service charges.
The fees for commuter bus services shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 688 (part), 1990)

Chapter 3.29
FARE STRUCTURE FOR FOLSOM STAGE LINES
Sections:

3.29.010    Fare structure for Folsom Stage Lines.

3.29.020    Service charges.

3.29.010 Fare structure for Folsom Stage Lines.
There is hereby established a fare structure for the Folsom Stage Lines, which shall include all fixed routes and dial-a-ride bus services. (Ord. 720  1, 1991)

3.29.020 Service charges.
The fare for the Folsom Stage Lines services shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 720  2, 1991)

Chapter 3.30
INVESTMENT OF CITY MONEYS
Sections:

3.30.010    Basic investment guidelines.

3.30.020    Specific investment guidelines.

3.30.030    Specific investment policy and procedures.

3.30.040    Collateral.

3.30.050    Assumption of treasurers duties.

3.30.010 Basic investment guidelines.
Pursuant to Section 5.03 of the City Charter, the investment of moneys held by the city and all of its agencies shall be restricted to those investments permitted by the policy set by ordinance for the investment of public moneys and as required by government code.

A.    For the purposes of the chapter, the term city shall encompass the city of Folsom, the Folsom redevelopment agency and successor agency or agencies, the Folsom public financing authority, and all other agencies and instrumentalities of the city under either the direct or indirect control of the city council, and this chapter regulates the investment of all moneys of those agencies.

B.    General state law shall be followed as to the guidelines determining the amount of and the circumstances under which city moneys may be invested.

C.    If general state law is less restrictive concerning investment instruments in which the city is permitted to invest, only those investment instruments allowed by ordinance and city investment policy shall be permitted to be made by the city.

D.    If general state law is more restrictive concerning investment instruments in which the city is permitted to invest, only those investment instruments allowed by state law shall be permitted to be made by the city. (Ord. 1170  2 (part), 2012)

3.30.020 Specific investment guidelines.
The guidelines set out in this chapter shall be complied with by all city officers who are in charge of investing city moneys.

A.    No securities may be purchased on margin.

B.    Adequate moneys shall be available at all times to meet appropriated and projected cash flow requirements of the city, with only those moneys surplus to those cash flow needs being eligible to be invested.

C.    No more than fifty percent of the citys total cash should be invested for a period longer than one year.

D.    No investment shall be made that at the time of investment has a term remaining to maturity in excess of five years unless the city council has granted express authority to make that investment.

E.    No financial futures or financial options may be purchased as city investments.

F.    The Local Agency Investment Guidelines of the California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission, dated January 2012, shall be complied with unless in direct conflict with the City Charter or this chapter.

G.    All city cash shall be consolidated into one general bank account as set out in this code, and invested on a pooled concept basis. Interest earnings shall be allocated to all city funds and subfunds according to fund and subfund cash and investment balances on at least a quarterly basis. (Ord. 1170  2 (part), 2012)

3.30.030 Specific investment policy and procedures.
It is the primary duty of the city officers having responsibility for investing city moneys to protect, preserve and maintain cash and investments placed in their trust on behalf of the citizens of the city. To that end, those investment officers shall comply with the following guidelines and procedures:

A.    Interest yield on investments shall be secondary to the basic requirements of safety and liquidity of moneys.

B.    The city investment portfolio shall be designed to equal or exceed the rate of return of the states local agency investment fund (LAIF) throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the citys risk constraints, cash flow characteristics of the investment portfolio, this chapter, this code and state law.

C.    The city investment portfolio shall be diversified to minimize risks regarding specific security types or individual financial institutions.

D.    All city investment officers shall adhere to the guidance provided by the prudent investor standard as set out in the California Government Code Section 53600.3.

E.    All participants in the investment process shall act as custodians of the public trust. Investment officers shall recognize that the investment portfolio is subject to public review and evaluation.

F.    The citys chief investment officer shall quarterly submit an investment report to the city council, which report shall include all required elements as prescribed by California Government Code Section 53646.

The citys chief investment officer shall monthly submit a report of transactions to the city council as prescribed in California Government Code Section 53607.

In both instances the city chief investment officer may include such other information as deemed appropriate.

G.    The finance director shall develop a system of internal controls over investments, which control system shall be documented in writing according to CDIAC guidelines. The system shall be designed to prevent losses of public moneys arising from fraud, employee error, misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated changes in financial markets, or imprudent actions by city employees or officers.

H.    Financial institutions in which the city has investments shall be monitored as to financial condition throughout the period in which the city has moneys deposited or invested, to assure that the condition of the institution does not materially deteriorate so as to risk the citys investments.

I.    A statement of investment policy shall be developed, and changes to the policy submitted to the city council as needed.

J.    Security purchases and holdings shall be maintained within the limits permitted by the City Charter, this chapter and the California Government Code, whichever is the most restrictive both as to percentages of the total investment portfolio which might be invested in the various types of securities and as to the maximum length of maturity. (Ord. 1170  2 (part), 2012)

3.30.040 Collateral.
Collateral for all city investments placed with the depository agent shall at all times be maintained as specified in California Government Code Section 53652 and pursuant to California Government Code Sections 53656 and 53658, or to a higher level of collateral if established by the city council, this code, or city policy.

A.    Securities purchased from brokers/dealers shall be held in a third party custodian/safekeeping account and such securities shall be held in a manner that establishes the citys right of ownership.

B.    Collateral for time deposits in savings and loans may be held by the Federal Home Loan Bank or an approved depository agent. Collateral for time deposits in banks shall be held in the citys name in the banks trust department or, alternately, in the Federal Reserve Bank. (Ord. 1170  2 (part), 2012)

3.30.050 Assumption of treasurers duties.
The duties assigned in this chapter to the finance director, which by law are to be exercised by the city treasurer, shall not be assumed by the finance director until the end of the term of the office of the present city treasurer, or until the office is otherwise vacated. (Ord. 1170  2 (part), 2012)

Chapter 3.40
FACILITIES AUGMENTATION FEEFOLSOM SOUTH AREA FACILITIES PLAN
Sections:

3.40.010    Purpose and intent.

3.40.020    Definitions.

3.40.030    Folsom south area facilities augmentation fee.

3.40.040    When fee due and payable.

3.40.050    Facilities augmentation funds and accounts.

3.40.060    Restriction on use of fund and accounts.

3.40.070    Credits against facilities augmentation fee.

3.40.080    Credit against other city fees.

3.40.090    Reimbursement.

3.40.010 Purpose and intent.
For the purpose of implementing the Folsom south area facilities plan of the public facilities element of the general plan of the city, a facilities augmentation fee and a facilities augmentation fund are established. The fee and fund are intended to augment existing city fees and thereby provide the necessary means for financing the construction of the facilities identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.020 Definitions.
A.    Folsom south area means that certain real property delineated and described in Resolution No. 1624 adopted by the Folsom city council on August 15, 1983.

B.    General facilities means those water delivery, sewer, roadway and drainage improvements identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan as prerequisites for development in the Folsom south area.

C.    Critical facilities means the following facilities which are identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan: the improvements to the treatment and water storage facilities, the upgrading of the sewer pump station facilities and the provision of an additional sewage outflow main. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.030 Folsom south area facilities augmentation fee.
A facilities augmentation fee (FAF) is established for the purpose of funding the construction of both general and critical facilities. The fee shall be imposed upon each parcel of real property within said area as set forth in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and by reference made a part hereof. Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and by this reference incorporated herein, sets forth the portion of the FAF for each parcel which is to be imposed to pay for the construction of the General Facilities. Exhibit C, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and by this reference incorporated herein, sets forth the portion of the FAF for each parcel which is to be imposed to pay for the construction of the critical facilities and includes the city administration charge of one and one-half percent. Exhibit D attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and by reference incorporated herein, sets forth each parcel of real property within the Folsom south area upon which the FAF is to be imposed. Exhibits A, B, and C shall be revised annually, to be effective on January 1st of each year commencing January 1, 1984, to assure that the estimated cost of constructing the identified facilities corresponds with current construction costs. In making the annual mandated revisions of the facilities augmentation fee, the city may rely upon a recognized construction cost index such as Engineering News Record. Said annual revisions shall be adopted by ordinance. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.040 When fee due and payable.
A.    That portion of the fee for the construction of critical facilities (Exhibit C) is due and payable at the time of recordation of any final subdivision or parcel map covering property within the Folsom south area, provided as to any property for which no map is required or which on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is covered by a recorded final subdivision or parcel map, the portion of the fee shall be due at the time of the issuance of a building permit. The portion of the fee for the construction of general facilities (Exhibit B) is due and payable at the time of the issuance of a building permit. In the event the fee (either critical or general) is due and payable at the time of the building permit issuance, the amount to be paid shall be the portion of the fee for the entire parcel of property upon which the building is to be constructed, irrespective of the portion of the parcel actually utilized.

B.    If any parcel shown on Exhibits A and B is divided, by either subdivision or parcel map, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the general facilities fee for each parcel so created shall be that percentage of the total fee which corresponds to the amount of acreage in each created parcel as compared to the total acreage of the entire parcel before division as such parcel existed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.050 Facilities augmentation funds and accounts.
There is established a Folsom south facilities augmentation fund (herein facilities augmentation fund), with a general facilities account and a critical facilities account. All facilities augmentation fees shall be deposited into this fund. The portion of each FAF which is collected to finance the construction of general facilities shall be credited to the general facilities account. The critical facilities portion of the FAF shall be credited to the critical facilities account. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.060 Restriction on use of fund and accounts.
The facilities augmentation fund shall be expended only to pay for the construction of the facilities identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan, the city administration charge of one and one-half percent established under said plan, or to pay the reimbursements provided for herein, and each of the two accounts into which the FAF is to be credited shall be available to fund only those improvements for which funds were credited into it. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.070 Credits against facilities augmentation fee.
A property owner/developer shall be entitled to credits against the FAF as follows:

A.    A property owner/developer who has installed and paid for, or subjected its property to assessment liens to cover the cost of installing general facilities identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan shall receive a credit against that portion of the FAF attributable to general facilities to the extent of the estimated cost of the general facilities installed as shown on Exhibit B or any amendment thereof. In the event the allowable credit exceeds the portion of the FAF attributable to general facilities, the difference shall be reimbursed to the property owner/developer or its assigns as provided in Section 3.40.090. In no event shall a credit be allowed against the portion of the FAF attributable to critical facilities.

B.    A property owner/developer who has installed and paid for, or subjected its property to assessment liens to cover the cost of installing, critical facilities identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan shall receive a credit against that portion of the FAF attributable to critical facilities to the extent of the estimated cost of critical facilities installed as shown on Exhibit C or any amendment thereof. In the event the allowable credit exceeds the portion of the FAF attributable to critical facilities, the overage may, in the discretion of the city council, be credited against that portion of the FAF attributable to general facilities, otherwise the amount shall be reimbursed to the property owner/developer from the critical facilities account as provided in Section 3.40.090. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.080 Credit against other city fees.
Facilities augmentation fees paid shall be credited against the following other city charges in the proportions shown below:

A.    One hundred percent of the roadway portion of the FAF for General Facilities as shown on Exhibit B, shall be allowed as a credit against the City Major Road Fee.

B.    One hundred percent of the sewer portion of the FAF for both general and critical facilities as shown on Exhibits B and C shall be allowed as a credit against fifty percent of the city sewer connection charge, except for that portion of said charge payable to Sacramento Regional County Sanitation District.

C.    One hundred percent of the water portion of FAF for both general and critical facilities as shown on Exhibits B and C shall be allowed as a credit against the capital facilities portion of the city water connection charge.

In the event that the city shall hereafter impose fees or charges for other facilities which are similar to the facilities identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan, a credit shall also be allowed against such fees or charges as determined by the city council.

The precise amount of credit to be given shall be computed at the time the FAF becomes due and payable. In the event the entire FAF is not due and payable at one time, the total amount of credit shall be computed at the time each component of the fee is due and payable and said components shall be combined to determine the precise amount of the credit due.

The amount of the credit due shall be subtracted from the amount of the city fees and charges against which credit is to be given at the time those fees and charges become due and payable. In the event the credit is less than the total amount of such other fees and charges, the property owner/developer shall be responsible for the difference. No portion of the FAF shall be allowed as a credit against the city park, drainage, or capital improvement fees or other charges which hereafter may be imposed. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

3.40.090 Reimbursement.
A reimbursement agreement shall be entered into between the city and each property owner/developer who is entitled to reimbursement under Section 3.40.070. Said reimbursement agreement shall provide for the following:

1.    Establish the amount which the property owner/developer is entitled to receive and the account(s) (general facilities, critical facilities or both) from which such reimbursement is to be made;

2.    Provide that reimbursement from the general facilities account shall be made by the city solely from general facilities fees collected by it. Payments to the property owner/developer shall be made at periodic intervals selected by the city, but not less frequently than annually. Reimbursement of a property owner/developer from the general facilities account shall have priority over the use of general facilities fees for the construction of general facilities and so long as any property owner/developer remains unpaid, no funds from the general facilities account will be expended for any other purpose. In the event that more than one property owner/developer is entitled to reimbursement from the general facilities account, reimbursement shall be made on a first come-first served basis; that is to say, that the property owner/developer who in point of time is the earliest to establish its right to reimbursement shall be entitled to be reimbursed in full before funds are paid to any other property owner/developer. For the purpose of this section, the right to reimbursement shall be deemed established as of the date of the execution of the reimbursement agreement;

3.    Provide that reimbursement from the critical facilities account shall be made by the city solely from critical facilities fees collected by it, after deducting therefrom the portion of the fee representing the city administration charge of one and one-half percent. No property owner/developer shall be entitled to be reimbursed from the critical facilities account until such time as all critical facilities called for under the Folsom south area facilities plan have been accepted by the city as complete and paid for or until funds credited to the critical facilities account are sufficient to pay the estimated cost of all uncompleted critical facilities identified in the Folsom south area facilities plan, whichever is first to occur. Once the above requirement has been satisfied, payments to the property owner/developer shall commence. Payments to the property owner/developer shall be made at periodic intervals selected by the city, but not less frequently than annually. Reimbursement of property owner/developers from the critical facilities account shall be made on a first comefirst served basis; that is to say, that the property owner/developer who in point of time is the earliest to establish its right to reimbursement shall be entitled to be reimbursed in full before funds are paid to any other property owner/developer. For the purposes of this section, the right to reimbursement shall be deemed established as of the date of the execution of the reimbursement agreement;

4.    That no interest shall be paid upon the amount which the property owner/developer is entitled to receive;

5.    Limit the duration of the citys responsibility to make reimbursements to the period ending December 31, 2013. (Ord. 514  1 (part), 1983)

Chapter 3.50
FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM
Sections:

3.50.010    Intent.

3.50.020    Direction to city manager.

3.50.030    Costs reasonably borne defined.

3.50.040    Schedule of fees and service charges.

3.50.050    Statutory public meeting.

3.50.060    Provision of data.

3.50.010 Intent.
Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees and charges levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this chapter. It is the further intent of the city council that the fees and charges provided for in this chapter shall not be deemed special taxes under Article XIIIA of the California Constitution, nor levied for general revenue purposes. (Ord. 609  1, 1988)

3.50.020 Direction to city manager.
The city manager is hereby directed to recommend to the council the adjustment of fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne in providing the regulation, products or services enumerated in this chapter and on the schedule of rate review as hereinafter established in this chapter. Costs reasonably borne shall be as are defined in Section 3.50.030. (Ord. 609  1, 1988)

3.50.030 Costs reasonably borne defined.
Costs reasonably borne, as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter are to consist of the following elements:

A.    All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred.

B.    All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communication expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system.

C.    Fixed assets recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges, calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, shall also be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset.

D.    General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city manager, city clerk, elections, city treasurer, finance department, city attorney, unallocated nondepartmental expenses, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire city organization as now organized and as it may be reorganized at any time in the future.

Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of said percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs.

E.    Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections A, B, and C of this section.

F.    Debt services costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate, or securities issues or loans. Any required coverage factors of added reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost, if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. (Ord. 609  1, 1988)

3.50.040 Schedule of fees and service charges.
The city manager, and each city department head, under the direction of the city manager, shall review the fees and service charges listed herein, on the schedule of frequency provided for in this section, and report any new or adjustment of the fee or charge which is required so as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed regulation, products or services.

Regulation, Product or Service

Percentage of Costs
Reasonably Borne to be Resolved

Review Schedule

Development Services

 

 

1.

Preliminary Project Review

100%

Annual

2.

Building Plan Checking

100%

Annual

3.

Construction Inspection

100%

Annual

4.

Construction Re-Inspection

100%

Annual

5.

Resale Inspection

100%

Annual

6.

Mobile Home Park Regulation

100%

Annual

7.

Housing Moving Review

100%

Annual

8.

Home Occupation Review

100%

Annual

9.

Variance Review

100%

Annual

10.

Site Design Review

100%

Annual

11.

Use Review

100%

Annual

12.

PUD Review

100%

Annual

13.

PUD Modification Review

100%

Annual

14.

PUD Extension Review

100%

Annual

15.

Specific Plan Review

100%

Annual

16.

Specific Plan Amendment Review

100%

Annual

17.

Rezoning Request Review

100%

Annual

18.

Zoning Verification Review

100%

Annual

19.

Lot Adjustment/Merger Review

100%

Annual

20.

Tentative Parcel Map Review

100%

Annual

21.

Tentative Parcel Map Revision Review

100%

Annual

22.

Tentative Subdivision Map Review

100%

Annual

23.

Tentative Subdivision Map Extension Review

100%

Annual

24.

Street Name Review

100%

Annual

25.

Final Map Check

100%

Annual

26.

Environmental Assessment

100%

Annual

27.

Environmental Impact Review

100%

Annual

28.

Sign Design Review

100%

Annual

29.

General Plan Review

100%

Annual

30.

Code Amendment Consideration

100%

Annual

31.

Reclamation Plan Review

100%

Annual

32.

Appeal to Planning Commission Review

100%

Annual

 

Owner-Occupied Single Family Dwelling

10%

Annual

33.

Appeal to City Council Review

100%

Annual

 

Owner-Occupied Single Family Dwelling

10%

Annual

34.

Miscellaneous Plans and Standards Review

100%

Annual

35.

Rights-of-Way or Easement Abandonment Review

100%

Annual

36.

Annexation Processing Service

100%

Annual

 

City-Initiated

0%

Annual

37.

Historical District Sign Review

100%

Annual

38.

Historical District Construction Review

100%

Annual

39.

Opinion on Planning Matter

100%

Annual

40.

Encroachment Inspection

100%

Annual

41.

Grading Plan Inspection

100%

Annual

42.

Street Cut Inspection

100%

Annual

43.

Subdivision Improvement Plan Review

100%

Annual

44.

Subdivision Improvement Plan Inspection

100%

Annual

45.

Developer Agreement Processing

100%

Annual

 

 

 

 

Public Safety Services

 

 

46.

General Code Enforcement

50%

Annual

47.

Parking Enforcement

100%

Annual

48.

Vehicle Code Enforcement

50%

Annual

49.

Abandoned Vehicle Removal

100%

Annual

50.

Card Room Regulation

100%

Annual

51.

Bingo Regulation

100%

Annual

52.

Blasting Review

100%

Annual

53.

Wide and Overload Inspection

100%

Annual

54.

Police False Alarm Response

100%

Annual

55.

Concealed Weapon Investigation Per State Law

100%

Annual

56.

Accident Investigation

100%

Annual

57.

DUI Arrest Processing

100%

Annual

58.

Domestic Violence Response

100%

Annual

59.

Fingerprinting for Private Purposes

100%

Annual

60.

Clearance Letter Processing

100%

Annual

61.

Vehicle Inspection

100%

Annual

62.

Police Photograph Sale

100%

Annual

63.

Special Event Security

100%

Annual

64.

State Mandated Fire Inspection

100%

Annual

65.

Fire Company Inspection

25%

Annual

66.

Fire Protection Plan Review

100%

Annual

67.

Special Fire Inspections

100%

Annual

*68.

Fire Report Sales

100%

Annual

69.

Fire Salvage Service

100%

Annual

70.

Lot Cleaning

100%

Annual

71.

Ambulance ServiceContract Service

100%

Annual

 

All Others

75%

Annual

72.

Fire False Alarm Response

100%

Annual

73.

Emergency Medical Assistance

25%

Annual

74.

Fire Flooding Cleanup

100%

Annual

75.

Fire/Police Lockout Assistance

100%

Annual

 

 

 

 

Recreation Services

 

 

76.

Adult Special Interest Classes

90%

Quarterly

 

Non-Resident

100%

Quarterly

77.

Youth Special Interest Classes

75%

Quarterly

 

Non-Resident

100%

Quarterly

78.

Community Special Interest Classes

75%

Quarterly

 

Non-Resident

100%

Quarterly

79.

City Adult Sports Program

50%

Seasonally

 

Non-Resident

100%

Seasonally

80.

City Youth Sports Program

50%

Seasonally

 

Non-Resident

100%

Seasonally

81.

Private Adult Ballfield Usage

50%

Seasonally

 

Non-Resident

100%

Seasonally

82.

Private Youth Ballfield Usage

25%

Seasonally

 

Non-Resident

100%

Seasonally

*83.

Special Community Events

25%

Annual

*84.

Recreational Swimming

50%

Annual

85.

Swimming Lessons

100%

Annual

86.

Trips and Tours

90%

Seasonally

 

Non-Resident

100%

Seasonally

*87.

Mini-Railroad Operation

0%

Annual

*88.

Zoo Maintenance and Operation

50%

Annual

*89.

July 4 Celebration

25%

Annual

*90.

Memorial Day Celebration

25%

Annual

91.

Flea Market

25%

Annual

92.

Recreation Buildings Maintenance Operation

25%

Annual

 

Non-Resident

75%

Annual

93.

Ballfield Lighting Maintenance

25%

Annual

 

Non-Resident

100%

Annual

94.

Sports Complex Concessions

50%

Annual

 

 

 

 

Maintenance Services

 

 

95.

Utilities Franchise Fees

100%

Annual

96.

Street Lighting (Through Creation of a 1972 Act Assessment District)

 

 

 

August 1, 1988

0%

Annual

 

August 1, 1989

25%

Annual

 

August 1, 1990

50%

Annual

 

August 1, 1991

75%

Annual

 

August 1, 1992

100%

Annual

97.

Street Landscaping (Through Creation of a 1972 Act Assessment District)

 

 

 

August 1, 1988

0%

Annual

 

August 1, 1989

25%

Annual

 

August 1, 1990

50%

Annual

 

August 1, 1991

75%

Annual

 

August 1, 1992

100%

Annual

98.

Street Tree Maintenance (Through Creation of a 1972 Act Assessment District)

 

 

 

August 1, 1988

0%

Annual

 

August 1, 1989

25%

Annual

 

August 1, 1990

50%

Annual

 

August 1, 1991

75%

Annual

 

August 1, 1992

100%

Annual

99.

Street Sweeping

 

 

 

May 1, 1988

50%

Annual

 

May 1, 1989

100%

Annual

100.

Storm Drainage (Through Creation of a 1972 Act Assessment District)

 

 

 

August 1, 1988

0%

Annual

 

August 1, 1989

25%

Annual

 

August 1, 1990

50%

Annual

 

August 1, 1991

75%

Annual

 

August 1, 1992

100%

Annual

101.

Unimproved Street Maintenance (Through Creation of 1911 and 1915 Act Assessment Districts)

100%

Annual

102.

Alley Maintenance (Through Creation of 1911 and 1915 Act Assessment Districts)

100%

Annual

103.

Water Service

 

 

 

December 1, 1988

70%

Annual

 

December 1, 1989

85%

Annual

 

December 1, 1990

100%

Annual

104.

Delinquent Turn Off/On Processing

100%

Annual

105.

Water Turn Off/On Service

100%

Annual

106.

Special Water Service Projects

100%

Annual

107.

Sewer Service

 

 

 

April 1, 1988

50%

Annual

 

April 1, 1989

60%

Annual

 

April 1, 1990

75%

Annual

 

April 1, 1991

90%

Annual

 

April 1, 1992

100%

Annual

108.

Refuse Service

 

 

 

June 1, 1988

75%

Annual

 

June 1, 1989

90%

Annual

 

June 1, 1990

100%

Annual

109.

Dumpster Rental Charges

100%

Annual

*110.

Transit Service

90%

Annual

*111.

Commuter Transit Center

75%

Annual

112.

Private Sewer Service Problem Inspection

100%

Annual

113.

State Prison Sewer Service

100%

Annual

114.

Special Sewer Service Project

100%

Annual

 

 

 

 

Administrative and Finance Services

 

 

115.

Redevelopment Agency Administration

100%

Annual

116.

Regional Sanitation Billing

100%

Annual

117.

New Business License Review

100%

Annual

118.

Bad Check Collection

100%

Annual

119.

Arena Rental

50%

Annual

120.

Agenda/Minute Mailing Service

100%

Annual

*121.

Document Printing and Copying

100%

Annual

122.

Records Research Service

100%

Annual

123.

Document Certification Service

100%

Annual

124.

Unspecified Service

100%

Annual

125.

New Service

100%

Annual

*    A Minimum fee of $10.00 shall be charged in all instances except in the cases of numbers 68, 83, 87, 88, 89, 90, 110, 111 and 121 hereof.

The hereinabove services as listed in this section are defined in that certain document entitled Cost Control System for the City of Folsom dated December 29, 1987, as produced by Management Services Institute, incorporated, and as updated by city staff.

The schedule of frequency of review of fee adjustments may be varied by the city manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate, or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract, or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirement.

The schedule of frequency of fee adjustments may be varied by the city manager, if, in his judgment and that of the requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by the existing rate schedule on a new, and unanticipated event.

All fees and charges set pursuant to this section shall take effect ten days after the city council has passed resolution setting the fee or charge and stipulating that all provisions of this section have been complied with, and no written appeal has been filed.

The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate, or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract, or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirement. The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager if, in his judgment and that of the requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by the existing rate schedule on a new, and unanticipated event. (Ord. 627,  2, 1988: Ord. 609  1, 1988)

3.50.050 Statutory public meeting.
Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 54992, 54994.1 and 54994.2 the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in said Government Code Sections 54992, 54994.1 and 6062a and the city council periodically, and at least annually, shall receive at a public regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning the fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public hearing shall be provided by the city council prior to taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually at the first regular council meeting in May. (Ord. 609  1, 1988)

3.50.060 Provision of data.
Pursuant to the California Government Code, at least ten days prior to the required public hearing set out herein, the city manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees or charges imposed. The city manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code Section 6062a. (Ord. 609  1, 1988)

Chapter 3.60
ENTRANCE FEE AT THE FOLSOM CITY ZOO
Sections:

3.60.010    Purpose.

3.60.020    Service charges.

3.60.030    Collection of zoo entrance fees.

3.60.010 Purpose.
For the purpose of offsetting costs for administering, maintaining, and improving the zoo, a zoo entrance fee is hereby established. (Ord. 627  1 (part), 1988)

3.60.020 Service charges.
The fees for entrance to the Folsom City Zoo shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 627  1 (part), 1988)

3.60.030 Collection of zoo entrance fees.
Fees shall be collected at the gate or as otherwise prescribed by the city council. The fees collected shall be used only to offset the costs of administering, maintaining and improving the zoo. (Ord. 627  1 (part), 1988)

Chapter 3.70
FEES FOR RENTAL OF CITY FACILITIES
Sections:

3.70.010    Purpose.

3.70.020    Definitions.

3.70.030    Service charges.

3.70.010 Purpose.
For the purpose of offsetting costs for administering, maintaining and improving city facilities, a fee for rental of city facilities is established. (Ord. 727  1 (part), 1991)

3.70.020 Definitions.
As used in this code fees for rental of city facilities includes but is not limited to, the fees for rental of the Community Center, R.G. Smith Clubhouse, City Park Pavilion, City Park Gazebo and Lew Howard Park Pavilion. (Ord. 727  1 (part), 1991)

3.70.030 Service charges.
The fees for rental of city facilities shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 727  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 3.80
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT NEW CONSTRUCTION FEE
Sections:

3.80.010    Findings and purpose.

3.80.020    Definitions.

3.80.030    Capital improvement and facilities new construction fee.

3.80.040    Establishment and administration of police, fire and general government funds.

3.80.050    Payment of capital improvement new construction fee.

3.80.060    Amount of capital improvement new construction fee.

3.80.070    Exemptions.

3.80.080    Appeal procedure.

3.80.090    Inflationary adjustments.

3.80.100    Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.

3.80.010 Findings and purpose.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to implement city General Plan, Urban Development Policy No. 11.6, and to provide for adequate police, fire and general governmental services and facilities to serve new residential, industrial and commercial development throughout the city. The city council finds that the existing police, fire and general governmental services and facilities will be inadequate to accommodate the needs generated by projected new residential, industrial and commercial growth in the city, and that additional services and facilities are needed to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of Folsom residents and businesses. This finding is based upon data included in August 1993 Development Impact Fee Update and the May 1996 Supplement prepared by Management Services Institute, Inc. for the city (hereafter the Nexus Studies), and on such other information provided to the city council at the public hearing concerning the adoption of this fee.

B.    The cumulative and growth inducing environmental impacts of the facilities described in the Nexus Studies have been identified in the Final Environmental Impact Report (EIR) prepared for the 1988 General Plan. Prior to action on site-specific projects, subsequent environmental review will be undertaken as necessary pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The city council finds that pursuant to Section 15162 of the CEQA Guidelines, no new effects would occur as a result of this action beyond those identified in the General Plan EIR, and no new mitigation measures are required. Therefore, the city council further finds that adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is within the scope of the Final EIR prepared for the citys General Plan project, and certified by the city council in Resolution No. 2522.

C.    Pursuant to General Plan Policies 11.5, 11.6, 11.7, 40.1, 40.3, and similar policies and goals throughout the General Plan, it is the citys policy to require new development to pay its fair share of the cost to expand public facilities and services that will be necessary to serve residential, industrial and commercial development. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the requirements of the General Plan and, under the authority of Article XI, Section 7, of the California Constitution and the authority of Title 7 of the Government Code, to establish the appropriate method of ensuring that sufficient funding for police, fire and general governmental services and facilities is available to serve residential, industrial and commercial growth in the city.

D.    The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to the payment of the capital improvement new construction fee on building permits would jeopardize residents of the community, in that it would permit construction and development to proceed without adequate police, fire and general governmental services and facilities or adequate means to finance such facilities and services.

E.    Analysis of the land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the general plan makes it possible to estimate the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the population generated by those dwelling units and the number of persons to be employed by commercial and industrial land users. It is therefore possible to arrive at a fee, based on population and jobs created, which equitably spreads the cost of police, fire and general governmental services and facilities to those who create the need for such facilities and services. It is the intent of this chapter to create such a fee, spreading the costs of police, fire and general governmental services and facilities to those who create the need for such facilities and services, without generating any surplus to the general fund.

F.    To determine the need for police, fire and general governmental services and facilities created by new residents and jobholders and to spread the cost of such facilities among those who create the need for them, the city conducted various studies, identified herein as the Nexus Studies. The Nexus Studies estimated the number and type of police, fire and general governmental services and facilities to meet the needs created by new development and the cost of such facilities and services. The fee established by this chapter shall be calculated in the manner called for in the Nexus Studies in order that the impact upon facilities and services is borne by the type of development causing the need for such facilities and services.

G.    The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges or taxes, required by law or city code as a condition of development including, but not limited to, the residential construction tax levied by Chapter 17.90, drainage fees levied by Chapter 17.95, major road fees levied by Chapter 12.04, capital improvement new construction fees levied by Chapter 17.92.

H.    The fee established by this chapter is necessary in order to assure compliance with the applicable general plan requirements that new development bear the cost for services and infrastructure which is needed to serve such development.

I.    The city council has considered the effect of the fee imposed by this chapter with respect to the housing needs of the city as a whole and of the region, particularly as required by the housing element of the general plan, and the city council finds that this chapter does not unduly adversely affect the citys ability to provide for such needs. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:

Building permit means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure pursuant to and as defined by the citys building code.

Capital improvement program means those proposed city-wide facilities identified in the Nexus Studies.

Commercial means those business activities which are permitted or allowed in the BP, C-l, C-2, C-3, CH and bed and breakfast zoning districts as set forth in Title 17 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

Director means the finance director.

Dwelling, multiple-family or multiple-family dwelling means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by two or more families, living independently of each other; provided, that multiple-family dwelling also includes forms of congregate living, including, but not limited to, senior citizen homes, retirement homes or boarding homes.

Dwelling, single-family or single-family dwelling means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by one family.

Dwelling, mobilehome or mobilehome dwelling means a structure designed for occupancy as a residence by one family that is regulated by Chapter 17.74.

Dwelling unit means a building or part of a building designed for occupancy as a residence by a family.

Facilities means those police, fire and general governmental improvements, services or infrastructure generally identified in the Nexus Studies.

Fee or capital improvement new construction fee means the fee(s) established by this chapter.

General Plan refers to the city of Folsom General Plan adopted by the Folsom city council in 1988, including all subsequent updates and amendments.

Improvement funds means those special funds established pursuant to Section 3.80.040.

Industrial means those business activities which are permitted or allowed in the M-1, M-2, M-L or MF zoning districts as set forth in Title 17 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

Nexus Studies, means the Development Impact Fee Update by Management Services Institute, Inc. dated August, 1993, and the May, 1996 Supplement thereto, and any subsequent studies conducted by the city and adopted and approved by the city council prior to the adoption of a resolution establishing the amount of the fee charged pursuant to this chapter.

Residential means those activities which are permitted or allowed in the R-1-L, R-1-ML, R-1-M, R-3, R-M or R-4 zoning districts as set forth in Title 17 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.030 Capital improvement and facilities new construction fee.
There is established a capital improvement new construction fee which shall be imposed on all residential, industrial and commercial property located in the city, unless such property is otherwise exempt as provided for in Section 3.80.070. The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges or taxes that are required by law or city code as a condition of development, including, but not limited to, the residential construction tax levied by Chapter 17.90, drainage fees levied by Chapter 17.95, and major road fees levied by Chapter 12.04. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.040 Establishment and administration of police, fire and general government funds.
The finance director is directed to establish three improvement funds entitled the police improvement fund, the fire improvement fund and the general government improvement fund. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in these improvement funds and shall be expended solely to finance the planning, construction and development of the facilities and services identified in the Nexus Studies. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.050 Payment of capital improvement new construction fee.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a structure which is subject to this chapter. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.060 Amount of capital improvement new construction fee.
The amount of the capital improvement new construction fee shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council of the city, and shall be based upon the determination in the Nexus Studies of: (1) the use of the fee and the type of development on which the fee is imposed; (2) the need for the facilities and/or services created by the new residential and commercial development; and (3) the reasonable cost of the facilities and/or services attributable to new development. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.070 Exemptions.
A.    No fee shall be charged for the following developments or projects:

1.    Completed structures;

2.    Structures under construction for which a valid building permit is in force upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless such building permit contains an express condition requiring the payment of this fee;

3.    Construction within a subdivision which is covered by a development agreement entered into between the developer and the city under Government Code Section 65864 et seq., which agreement is in full force and effect and expressly prohibits the imposition of additional police, fire and general governmental fees; and

4.    Building permits for projects with a vesting tentative map approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that the vesting tentative map did not require the payment of a fee to mitigate such impacts or include a condition for mitigation for impacts on police, fire and general governmental services or facilities.

5.    Local government capital improvement projects/facilities constructed for the benefit of the community and when such facilities are owned and occupied by the local government.

B.    If any residential structure in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy to the extent of more than one-half the value thereof, any rebuilding after the date of such destruction shall not be subject to the fee imposed by the chapter provided the area of such structure is not increased by more than 10 percent. For the purposes of this chapter, the value shall be determined by the city building inspector based upon the cost of replacement.

C.    Additions to existing commercial or industrial structures shall be subject to the fee established by the chapter.

D.    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit these regulations from applying to such projects if existing entitlements expire and/or the applicant applies for a new approval subject to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager or his designee may issue regulatory guidelines to administratively implement this section.

E.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 949  2, 2001; Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.080 Appeal procedure.
A.    The developer of any project subject to the fee established by this chapter may apply to the director for a reduction or adjustment to the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the project and either the amount of the fee or the facilities to be financed by the fee. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director not later than 20 calendar days after notification of the amount of the fee. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed reduction or adjustment. The director shall consider the application and render his/her decision in writing not later than 15 calendar days after the filing of the fee adjustment request. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director may, within 10 calendar days thereafter, appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall consider such appeals within 45 calendar days after filing. The decision of the city council shall be final, and shall be reviewable by the Superior Court under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. No building permit shall be issued for the project until the final decision pursuant to this section has been made. No application for a project shall be considered final or complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920, et seq.), or any other purpose, until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made.

B.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a project proponent or applicant may pay the fee under protest and receive a building permit. An application for reduction or adjustment pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be filed within ten calendar days after payment under protest and if not so filed, any objection shall be deemed waived. If a reduction or adjustment is made after payment pursuant to this subsection, the applicant shall be refunded the amount by which the fee is reduced or adjusted.

C.    The project proponent or applicant applying for a reduction or adjustment shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a reasonable relationship or nexus is lacking between the fee, or facilities or services to be financed by the fee, and the particular project.

D.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.090 Inflationary adjustments.
The fee established by this chapter shall automatically be adjusted each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the change in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost index. The determination shall be reported in writing to the city council by the director as soon as the information is available. The city council shall forthwith make such adjustment by resolution. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

3.80.100 Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.
When the moneys in the police, fire or general government improvement fund are disbursed for use, the fees shall be used only to finance the planning, acquisition, construction and development of the facilities identified in the Nexus Studies and any improvement plan that may be adopted by the city council to implement the recommendations in the Nexus Studies. (Ord. 871  1 (part), 1997)

Chapter 3.90
HOUSING TRUST FUND
Sections:

3.90.010    Title.

3.90.020    Findings and purpose.

3.90.030    Definitions.

3.90.040    Housing trust fund.

3.90.050    Housing trust fund fee.

3.90.060    Appeal procedure.

Appendix A

3.90.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Housing Trust Fund. (Ord. 966  1 (part), 2002)

3.90.020 Findings and purpose.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to further the policies, goals and programs of the housing element of the citys general plan and to help facilitate the development of affordable housing within the city. The city council finds that the city has become an important component in the economic makeup of the Sacramento region and that the expected future expansion of nonresidential development within the city will increase the need for workforce housing. The city council further finds that nonresidential development should contribute to the cost associated with providing affordable housing for the citys increased workforce. These findings are based upon data included in the August 21, 2002, Affordable Housing Trust Fund Fee Technical Report prepared by Economic & Planning Systems, Inc. (hereinafter Nexus Study).

B.    The city council finds that providing a variety of housing options to workers of all income levels is socially and economically beneficial to the city and its residents in that it would provide opportunities for important professionals, such as teachers and public safety personnel, to live and work in the city; it would reduce transportation expenses; and would allow a larger share of an employees income to be spent within the community.

C.    The city council further finds that the creation and establishment of a housing trust fund as a source of revenue to assist in the development of housing to meet the housing needs of the citys low, very low and extremely low income households is consistent with the policies and goals of the housing element of the citys general plan and is necessary for the health and welfare of the citys residents. Accordingly, it is the intent of the city council to establish a housing trust fund which shall be funded by an impact fee imposed on nonresidential development within the city. It is further the intent of the city council to utilize the housing trust fund to foster a mix of household incomes in residential projects assisted by the housing trust fund and to disperse affordable housing projects throughout the city to achieve a balance of housing in all neighborhoods and communities.

D.    An analysis of land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the general plan makes it possible to estimate the undeveloped nonresidential building square footage and the number of persons projected to be employed by such nonresidential development. These projections, along with a calculation of the required subsidy per dwelling unit and other relevant assumptions, were utilized in the Nexus Study to determine the amount of the housing impact fee. It is the intent of this chapter to create a fee in accordance with the Nexus Study calculations which will spread the cost of providing affordable housing to those who create the need for such housing without generating any surplus to the general fund.

E.    The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to the payment of the housing trust fund fee as a condition of issuance of building permits would jeopardize the general health and welfare of residents and the economic growth of the community in that it would permit nonresidential development to proceed without adequate workforce housing or an adequate means to finance such housing.

F.    The housing trust fund is intended to be utilized with other sources of funding including, but not limited to, fee deferrals, fee waivers, federal tax credits, tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds, community development block grants, and HOME funds.

G.    The fee established by this chapter is intended to be in addition to any other fees, charges or taxes required by law or the Folsom Municipal Code as a condition of development. (Ord. 1143  2, 2011; Ord. 966  1 (part), 2002)

3.90.030 Definitions.
Addition means adding gross square feet to an existing nonresidential development project.

Affordability covenant means a covenant restricting all low income, very low income and extremely low income units to remain affordable to low income, very low income and extremely low income households for no less than fifty-five years for rental units and no less than forty-five years for owner-occupied units.

Construction means construction of new nonresidential buildings and/or facilities.

Director means the director of the community development department.

Extremely low income households refers to the definition contained in Health and Safety Code Section 50106, including but not limited to an income limit of thirty percent of area median income, adjusted for family size and revised annually.

Gross square feet means the area included within the surrounding walls or fences of a building or facility as determined by the director. This area does not include garages or carports.

Housing trust fund fee means the fee imposed by this chapter on nonresidential development projects to fund the housing trust fund. The housing trust fund fee shall be calculated as follows: gross square feet multiplied by the applicable fee equals housing trust fund fee.

Interior remodel means any improvement that results in a change in use of a previously occupied building or facility and that increases employee density.

Low income households refers to the definition contained in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, including but not limited to an income limit of eighty percent of area median income, adjusted for family size and revised annually.

Mixed use project means, for purposes of this chapter, any privately owned project which includes both nonresidential and residential uses.

Nonresidential development project means any privately owned project that involves the construction, addition, rehabilitation, or interior remodeling of buildings or facilities, including mixed use projects, whose proposed use is or includes a commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential use.

Rehabilitation means rehabilitation, the value of which constitutes twenty-five percent of the after-rehabilitation value of the dwelling unit or units, inclusive of the land value.

Very low income households refers to the definition contained in Health and Safety Code Section 50105, including but not limited to an income limit of fifty percent of area median income, adjusted for family size and revised annually. (Ord. 1176  2, 2013; Ord. 1143  3, 2011: Ord. 966  1 (part), 2002)

3.90.040 Housing trust fund.
A.    Establishment. There is hereby established a housing trust fund. The housing trust fund shall receive all monies contributed pursuant to Section 3.90.050 and may receive income from other sources. The housing trust fund shall be administered, in accordance with this chapter, by the director and the finance director.

B.    Use and Disbursement of Monies in the Fund. Monies in the housing trust fund shall be used to promote the goals and policies of the housing element of the general plan; to implement any housing assistance plan, program, or guidelines adopted by the city council; and to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to low and very low income households, with priority given to residential projects which include very low income units, as well as other housing related purposes. Housing trust funds may be used for loans, grants, equity participation or other funding mechanisms to accomplish these purposes. The housing trust fund may be used to cover administrative, legal, consulting, or other housing related expenses, which are not reimbursed to the city through processing fees.

C.    Application for Assistance. An applicant may file an application with the planning, inspections and permitting department to request financial assistance for the construction or rehabilitation of extremely low income, very low income and low income dwelling units. The application shall be in a form approved by the director and shall specify the number of extremely low, very low and low income units to be included in the project. The application shall also include all documentation and information deemed necessary by the director for the evaluation of the application. The city council shall approve or deny all applications for financial assistance from the housing trust fund. In reviewing the applications, the city council may consider, among other factors: (1) the extent to which housing trust fund assistance affects the feasibility of a project; (2) the demonstrated need for housing trust fund assistance; (3) other sources of financial assistance, including, but not limited to, fee deferrals and waivers; and (4) the extent to which the particular development project achieves the intent and purpose of this chapter.

D.    Housing Trust Fund Agreement and Security. City council approval of housing trust fund assistance will require the applicant to enter into a housing trust fund agreement, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, that will at a minimum be: (1) site and project specific; (2) provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; (3) bind applicants successors in interest; (4) require the recordation of affordability covenants; and (5) be recorded with the Sacramento County recorders office. In addition and as applicable, the applicant shall be required to provide security in a form approved by the city attorney and to execute separate subordination agreements for each encumbrance or deed of trust other than those which secure repayment of acquisition or construction financing existing at the time of execution of the housing trust fund agreement.

E.    Annual Evaluation. The director and finance director shall report, on an annual basis, to the city council on the status of activities undertaken with the housing trust fund. The report shall include a statement of income, expenses, disbursements, and other uses of the housing trust fund. The report shall also state the number of extremely low income, very low income and low income units constructed or assisted during that year and the amount of such assistance.

F.    Processing Fees. The planning, inspections and permitting department shall collect an application processing fee (or fees) which shall be established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1176  3, 2013; Ord. 1143  4  6, 2011; Ord. 966  1 (part), 2002)

3.90.050 Housing trust fund fee.
A.    Application. Unless otherwise set forth in this chapter, all nonresidential development projects shall pay a housing trust fund fee. The housing trust fund fees are hereby set in the amounts set forth in Appendix A, which appears at the end of this chapter. The fees established by this chapter are in addition to any other fees, charges or taxes that are required by law or the Folsom Municipal Code as a condition of development.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    The housing trust fund fee requirement does not apply to projects that fall within one or more of the following categories:

a.    Residential uses (dwelling only) as set forth in Title 17, including the gross square footage dedicated solely to residential use in a mixed use project; or

b.    Any project which has a vested right to develop pursuant to contract or state law without the payment of the housing trust fund fee; or

c.    Uses operated by nonprofit organizations which provide food storage or meal service to lower income households, or which provide temporary emergency shelter or transitional housing; or

d.    Uses operated by nonprofit organizations which provide essential services (such as medical or emergency care) without cost to the recipient, and serve primarily lower income households; or

e.    Any reconstruction of a building which was damaged or destroyed by fire or natural catastrophes so long as the square footage of the building is not increased; or

f.    Nonresidential uses in mixed use projects which include dwelling units affordable to extremely low, very low and low income households. (For each extremely low, very low income and low income dwelling unit included in the mixed use project, ten thousand gross square feet of nonresidential use shall be exempt from the housing trust fund fee. Such exemption is project specific and contingent upon execution and recordation of affordability covenants for each extremely low income, very low income and low income dwelling unit.)

g.    The following uses:

i.    Child care center (with six or fewer children);

ii.    Christmas tree sales lot;

iii.    Church;

iv.    Commercial recreational vehicle storage;

v.    Mini storage/individual storage/locker buildings;

vi.    Mobile recycling units;

vii.    Mortuary/crematorium;

viii.    Parking lot, garage or facility;

ix.    Private schools (nonprofit);

x.    Public utility yard;

xi.    Small recyclable material collection facility;

xii.    Temporary parking lot.

2.    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit these regulations and requirements from applying to an exempt project if: (1) existing entitlements or vested rights expire prior to the issuance of a building permit (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit); or (2) existing entitlements or vested rights are extended or modified; or (3) there is a change in use to a nonexempt use.

C.    Payment of Fee as a Condition of Issuance of a Building Permit. Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, no building permit (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit) shall be issued for any nonresidential development project unless and until: (1) the applicable housing trust fund fee is paid to the city; or (2) the project is certified by the director as being exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Upon application to and approval by the director, the housing trust fund fee may be deferred to the final inspection of the building subject to the fee, with all deferred housing trust fund fees due at the time of final inspection on the first building in the project. Compliance with this chapter shall be a condition of approval for all development entitlements and permits required for a nonresidential development project.

D.    Calculation of Fee.

1.    The housing trust fund fee applicable to a nonresidential development project shall be determined and computed by the director upon application for each building permit (or if no building permit is required, for any use or discretionary permit) using the housing trust fund fee schedule set forth in Appendix A. The fees are based upon the determinations in the Nexus Study regarding: (1) the use of the fee and the type of development on which the fee is imposed; (2) the need for affordable housing created by nonresidential development projects; and (3) the reasonable cost of the housing demand attributable to nonresidential development projects.

2.    Applications for building permits (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit) for any nonresidential development project shall include: (1) a statement of the total gross square feet of the building or facilities; (2) plans and documentation, as required by the director, to support the statement of gross square footage; and (3) the intended use or uses for the nonresidential development project by gross square feet.

3.    For purposes of this chapter, the housing trust fund fees for an interior remodel shall be the fee applicable to the new use, less any housing trust fund fees that were previously paid based on the prior use of the building or facilities if such fees were paid within the previous five-year period. Housing trust fund fees for an addition shall be the fees applicable to the use within such addition.

4.    The housing trust fund fee for a building permit (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit) for a building exceeding two hundred thousand gross square feet which is part of a nonresidential development project shall be computed, on a per building permit basis, as follows:

Gross Square Feet

Housing Trust Fund Fee

First 200,000

100%

200,001250,000

75%

250,001300,000

50%

300,001 and above

25%

E.    Inflationary Adjustment. At the discretion of the city council by resolution the housing trust fund fees established by this chapter may be adjusted for inflation on or about January 1st of each year by a percentage equal to the increase, if any, in construction costs since the prior year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost index.

F.    Alternative to Payment of Housing Trust Fund Fee. As an alternative to payment of the housing trust fund fee, the developer of a nonresidential development project may submit a proposal to the director to mitigate the impacts of such development through the construction or rehabilitation of extremely low income, very low income and low income dwelling units or the dedication of land for the construction of extremely low income, very low income and low income dwelling units. The city council shall approve or deny all applications for the construction or rehabilitation of units or the dedication of land. A proposal for the construction of units or the dedication of land may be approved if (1) the city council finds that the proposed alternative will increase and/or improve the supply of housing affordable to extremely low, very low and low income households to an equal or greater extent than payment of the housing trust fund fee; and (2) the developer enters into a housing trust fund agreement with the city, in a form approved by the city attorney.

G.    Special Uses. The developer of any nonresidential development project may apply to the director for a reduced or adjusted housing trust fund fee based upon a special use and the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the project and the amount of the fee. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director in conjunction with the application for a building permit for a nonresidential development project (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit). The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed reduction or adjustment. The director shall consider the application and render his/her decision in writing not later than fifteen calendar days after the filing of the application. No reduction or adjustment shall be granted unless the following findings are made to justify the grant of an adjustment or reduction: (1) the building size is an inappropriate indicator of employee density; (2) the applicant has demonstrated that the use will employ less than twenty-five percent of the employees typically employed in a building or facility of the proposed size and use; and (3) the project will have a minimal impact on housing demand within the city. The project proponent or applicant applying for a reduced or adjusted fee shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a reasonable relationship or nexus is lacking between the fee and the impacts of the particular project. (Ord. 1176  4, 5, 2013; Ord. 1143  7, 2011; Ord. 966  1 (part), 2002)

3.90.060 Appeal procedure.
A.    Administrative Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director may, within ten calendar days thereafter, appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall consider such appeals within forty-five calendar days after filing. No building permit (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit) shall be issued for the project until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made. No application for a building permit (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit) shall be considered final or complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920 et seq.), or any other purpose, until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made.

B.    Protests and Legal Actions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a project proponent or applicant may pay the housing trust fund fee under protest and receive a building permit (or if no building permit is required, any use or discretionary permit) in accordance with the provisions and requirements of Government Code Section 66020.

C.    Change in Use, Zoning or Land Use Designation. In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the housing trust fund fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the owner to payment of the then applicable housing trust fund fee for such new use(s), zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 966  1 (part), 2002)

APPENDIX A HOUSING TRUST FUND FEE SCHEDULE
Use Category

Feet per
Gross Square Foot

Office

$1.65

Retail

$1.65

Light Industrial

$1.65

Heavy Industrial/Manufacturing

$1.65

Light Industrial/Manufacturing

$1.65

(Res. 10296, 2019; Res. 9146, 2013)

Chapter 3.100
TOURISM BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Sections:

3.100.010    Purpose and intent.

3.100.020    Definitions.

3.100.030    Governing law.

3.100.040    Term.

3.100.050    Notice and protest procedure.

3.100.060    Formation.

3.100.070    Annual levy.

3.100.080    Owners association.

3.100.090    Modification.

3.100.100    Annual report.

3.100.110    Disestablishment.

3.100.120    Validity.

3.100.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    The ordinance codified in this chapter is intended to be construed liberally and, if any provision is held invalid, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. Assessments levied under this part are not special taxes.

B.    This chapter establishes the procedure for the formation by resolution of tourism business improvement districts in Folsom. The provisions of this chapter shall modify the procedures of the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

Assessment means the levy imposed on businesses provided in the resolution of formation for the purpose of providing services, activities and programs that promote tourism in the city of Folsom.

City means the city of Folsom.

City council means the city council of the city of Folsom.

District means a tourism business improvement district formed pursuant to this chapter.

Hotel means any business that rents twenty or more rooms for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes for a period of less than thirty consecutive calendar days, and includes hotels, inns, motels, bed and breakfast facilities, lodging houses, rooming houses or other similar structures. Emergency and homeless shelters and group homes for disabled or homeless individuals are excluded from this definition.

Owners association means the nonprofit corporation designated by resolution of the city council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

Resolution of intention means a resolution adopted by the city council declaring its intention to create a tourism business improvement district pursuant to this chapter.

Resolution of formation means a resolution adopted by the city council forming a tourism business improvement district pursuant to this chapter.

1989 Law means the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.030 Governing law.
Unless otherwise provided for in the ordinance codified in this chapter, districts shall be governed and shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the 1989 Law, and as amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and the 1989 Law, this chapter shall control. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.040 Term.
The provisions relating to annual levying of assessments in Streets and Highways Code Sections 36534 and 36536 shall not apply. Districts may be formed for a term not to exceed twenty years. Any district whose term has expired may be renewed by following the procedures for establishment as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.050 Notice and protest procedure.
The procedures in Streets and Highways Code Sections 36523 and 36524 shall not apply. After adoption of a resolution of intention to create a district, notice shall be provided to all businesses proposed to be assessed in the district, and protest proceedings held, pursuant to Government Code Section 54954.6. The notice shall contain:

A.    The method and basis of levying the assessment in sufficient detail for the business owner to determine the approximate amount of assessment to be paid by the business.

B.    A general description of the activities or improvements that the assessment will fund.

C.    The address to which business owners may mail a protest against the assessment.

D.    The phone number and address of an individual or organization that interested persons may contact to receive additional information about the assessment.

E.    A statement that a majority protest will cause the assessment to be abandoned.

F.    The date, time, and location of the public meeting and public hearing to consider the resolution of formation. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.060 Formation.
The provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 36527 shall not apply. Districts may be formed pursuant to a resolution of formation adopted by the city council. The resolution of formation shall contain:

A.    The number, date of adoption, and title of the resolution of intention.

B.    The time and place where the public meeting(s) and public hearing(s) were held concerning the establishment of the district.

C.    The procedures and process regarding lodging any protests received at the public hearing and a determination of whether a majority protest was received.

D.    A description of the boundaries of the district and any separate benefit zones established within the district.

E.    A statement that the district has been established, including the name of the district.

F.    A statement that the businesses in the district established by the resolution of formation shall be subject to any amendments to this chapter.

G.    A description of the method and basis of levying the assessments.

H.    A finding that the businesses within the district shall be specifically benefited by the improvements and activities funded by the assessments proposed to be levied.

I.    The time and manner of collecting the assessments. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.070 Annual levy.
The provisions pertaining to the annual levy of assessments, as set forth in Streets and Highways Code Sections 36534 and 36535, shall not apply. An assessment will be levied on businesses for the term of the district and at the rate described in the resolution of formation. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.080 Owners association.
The provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 36505 pertaining to the advisory board shall not apply. A nonprofit corporation shall be designated by the city council to serve as the owners association in the resolution of intention and resolution of formation. The city will enter into a contract with the designated nonprofit. The designated nonprofit corporation shall remain in good standing under state and federal law and shall annually file a Form 990 with the Internal Revenue Service. The nonprofit corporation shall provide the city of Folsom with its annual financial statements and copy of its current Form 990. The owners association shall be responsible for implementation of district programs and shall enter into a contract with the city related to implementation of district programs and administration of district funds. References in the 1989 Law to the advisory board shall be to the owners association. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.090 Modification.
The owners association may, at any time, recommend that the city council modify the boundaries, benefit zones, basis and method of levying the assessment, and improvements and activities to be funded with revenues derived from the levy of assessments for any district formed pursuant to this chapter. Any modification shall be made pursuant to the modification provisions of the 1989 Law, subject to the request by the owners association. Where the 1989 Law refers to adoption of an ordinance, a resolution shall instead be adopted. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.100 Annual report.
The provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 36533 shall not apply. The owners association shall prepare a report for each fiscal year for which assessments are to be levied and collected to pay the costs of the activities described in the report. The report shall be prepared for the city manager on or before September 1st. The city manager shall review the report and may request additional information and shall schedule the annual report on the city council agenda. The annual report shall be presented to the city council, and shall refer to the district by name, specify the fiscal year to which the report applies, and with respect to that fiscal year shall contain all of the following:

A.    A description of the activities conducted during the previous fiscal year;

B.    An accounting of the revenue and expenditures by program for the previous fiscal year in a form and manner required by the city finance department;

C.    A proposed scope of activities to be provided for the next fiscal year, along with the designated staff to administer the proposed programs;

D.    A budget outlining the revenue and expenses for the scope of activities proposed for the next fiscal year; and

E.    The amount of any surplus or deficit revenues to be carried over from a previous fiscal year and a proposal to address the surplus or deficit in the next fiscal year(s). (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.110 Disestablishment.
In addition to the provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 36550 as modified by this chapter, there shall be a thirty-one-day period each year from January 1st through January 31st in which business owners subject to assessment may request disestablishment of the district. Upon receipt by the city council of written petitions of the owners of businesses in the district who pay fifty percent or more of the assessments levied, the city council shall adopt a resolution of intent to disestablish the district and hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Streets and Highways Code Section 36550. Where the 1989 Law refers to adoption of an ordinance, a resolution shall instead be adopted. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

3.100.120 Validity.
The validity of any assessment levied under this chapter shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty days after a resolution of formation is adopted. Any appeal from a final judgment in an action or proceeding shall be perfected within thirty days after the entry of judgment. (Ord. 1171  3 (part), 2012)

Chapter 3.110
COMMUNITY FACILITIES FINANCING
Sections:

3.110.010    Short title.

3.110.020    Purpose and intent.

3.110.030    Authority.

3.110.040    Special tax proceedings.

3.110.050    Nonexclusivity.

3.110.060    Construction.

3.110.070    Incorporation of the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982.

3.110.080    Authorized services and use of funds.

3.110.090    Hearing, continuances.

3.110.100    Goals and policies.

3.110.110    Lease of facilities.

3.110.120    Compliance with chapter.

3.110.130    Conflict of law.

3.110.140    Services existing prior to formation of district.

3.110.150    Resolution of consideration.

3.110.010 Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the city of Folsom community facilities financing law. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.020 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish a procedure for financing certain public capital facilities and services through the establishment of community facilities districts, the levy of special taxes within such districts and the issuance of bonds secured by such special taxes. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.030 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 1.01(B) of the Folsom City Charter, which grants the city the authority to make and enforce all ordinances and regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to restrictions and limitations provided in the City Charter. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.040 Special tax proceedings.
A.    Proceedings for the formation of a community facilities district or districts for the purposes set forth in Section 3.110.080 may be conducted pursuant to this chapter whether or not provided in any state law.

B.    Exemptions. Properties owned by governmental entities shall be expressly exempt from the special tax levied pursuant to this chapter unless the city affirmatively provides in the formation proceedings that: land owned by governmental entities is intended to be transferred to private ownership, land owned by governmental entities will be subject to the special tax on the same basis as private property within the district; and that the governmental entity affirmatively waives any defense based on the fact of public ownership to any action to foreclose on the property in the event of nonpayment of the special tax.

C.    School District Exemption. The exemption provided in Government Code Section 53313.4 shall apply to any district formed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.050 Nonexclusivity.
A.    The authority granted by this chapter is not intended to exclude the use by the city of any authority granted by the City Charter or state law.

B.    The procedures provided in this chapter are alternative to any other procedure provided in this code or under state law.

C.    The resolution of intention in any proceedings under any state law or other provision of the Folsom Municipal Code may provide that such provisions are supplemented by this chapter. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.060 Construction.
This chapter is to be liberally construed to assure that the purposes of this chapter are met. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.070 Incorporation of the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982.
A.    The Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (Chapter 2.5, commencing with Section 53311, of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code, as amended from time to time), is incorporated in and made a part of this chapter to supplement, but not to supplant, the provisions in this chapter.

B.    Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the mode and manner of establishing a community facilities district, for making improvements, for levying and collecting special taxes and for issuing bonds shall be as prescribed in the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.080 Authorized services and use of funds.
In addition to any services, facilities, and incidental expenses authorized for such financing under the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, a community facilities district special tax, whether approved by vote of the landowners or the registered voters of the district, may finance any of the following services notwithstanding the fact that such services may supplant services which were already available within the territory when the district was created:

A.    Any service authorized for financing pursuant to the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982.

B.    Maintenance or servicing of any street, highway, road, alley, lane, boulevard, pedestrian mall, parkway, bike path, trail or other way dedicated to or used for public use and all appurtenances including, but not limited to, medians, street signs, street lights, traffic signals, sound walls, drains, tunnels, sewers, conduits, culverts, and channels for drainage purposes, with necessary outlets, cesspools, manholes, catch basins, flush tanks, septic tanks, disposal plants, connection sewers, ditches, drains, conduits, channels, and appurtenances.

C.    Maintenance or servicing of any lakes, streams, wetlands, rivers, creeks, channels or other bodies of water and the streambeds, riverbeds, creekbeds, channelbeds or lakebeds.

D.    Maintenance of any landscaping, hardscaping open space areas, lighting or signage within or adjacent to public rights-of-way or easements.

E.    Acquisition of water supplies.

F.    Ongoing expenses associated with the acquisition or delivery of water supplies. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.090 Hearing, continuances.
The hearing on the formation of a community facilities district as required by subdivision (e) of Section 53321, subdivision (e) of Section 53334, and subdivision (f) of Section 53339.3 of the Government Code shall be held not less than ten nor more than sixty days after the adoption of the resolution of intention to establish the district, and may be continued from time to time without further notice, but shall be completed within one year of the original hearing date. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.100 Goals and policies.
The provisions of Section 53312.7 of the Government Code, concerning the adoption of local goals and policies, shall be permissive and not mandatory in connection with any proceedings taken, special tax levied or bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.110 Lease of facilities.
Notwithstanding Section 53313.5 of the Government Code, the city may enter into leases for facilities financed under this chapter, if the council determines that it is in the best interest of the city to do so. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.120 Compliance with chapter.
Any proceedings taken, special tax levied or bonds issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be held invalid for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, provided such failure is not a constitutional defect under state or federal law. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.130 Conflict of law.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the Municipal Code and the provisions of the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, this chapter shall govern. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.140 Services existing prior to formation of district.
Notwithstanding Section 53313 of the Government Code, a tax imposed under this chapter may finance any facilities or services authorized in this chapter which were provided in the territory of the community facilities district before the district was created. The tax under this chapter may finance facilities and services which are in addition to existing services, or which supplant existing services, or both. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

3.110.150 Resolution of consideration.
In addition to the types of changes set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 53331 of the California Government Code, either or both of the following changes may also be considered by the city council in a resolution of consideration:

A.    That the annual appropriations limit should be increased; or

B.    That the maximum amount of bonded indebtedness should be increased. (Ord. 1179  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 3.120
FOLSOM PLAN AREA DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Sections:

3.120.010    Purpose and finding.

3.120.020    Definitions.

3.120.030    Application of chapter.

3.120.040    Establishment and administration of the FPA development impact fee fund.

3.120.050    Payment of the FPA development impact fee.

3.120.060    Components of the FPA development impact fee.

3.120.070    Determination of fee amounts.

3.120.080    Fee adjustments.

3.120.090    Adoption in compliance with facilities plan.

3.120.100    Fee reimbursement agreements.

3.120.010 Purpose and finding.
The city council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are as follows:

A.    Proposed developments in the Folsom plan area create a need for additional public improvements, infrastructure, facilities and services with the addition of residents, businesses, and visitors.

B.    The general plan of the city and voter-approved Measure W require that new development within the Folsom plan area provides, in a time frame related to its development, an adequate level of public improvements, infrastructure, facilities and services in order to maintain adequate levels of public services and not adversely impact other areas of the city.

C.    The public facilities financing plan (PFFP) for the Folsom plan area, adopted by the city council on January 28, 2014, in Resolution No. 9298, sets forth a financing mechanism to fund approximately eight hundred seventy-seven million dollars in infrastructure and facility costs necessary to serve new developments in the Folsom plan area.

D.    The public facilities components in the PFFP constitute a net cost funded by fees of approximately two hundred forty-one million eight hundred forty thousand dollars, which include parks, trails, police and fire facilities and equipment, library and municipal center, transit services, solid waste services, general capital requirements, a new corporation yard and a community and aquatic center, some of which are to be financed through development impact fees.

E.    The nexus study demonstrates the need for the public facilities in the Folsom plan area, identifies the fair share allocation of the need for the additional public facilities to the Folsom plan area, and establishes a rational basis and relationship between the fees established under this chapter and the estimated costs to construct and acquire the necessary public facilities included within the nexus study in the Folsom plan area.

F.    The nexus study requires that the fees established under this chapter be calculated in a manner so as to pay for those required public facilities listed and identified in the nexus study and the PFFP, and equitably allocate the costs and burdens thereof throughout the areas approved for development within the Folsom plan area and, in appropriate cases, allocate costs between the Folsom plan area and other areas within the city of Folsom or the region.

G.    The fees established under this chapter are in addition to any other fees or charges, or taxes, required by law or city code as a condition of development in the Folsom plan area, subject to the applicable, vested provisions of the PFFP and approved development agreements applicable to the Folsom plan area.

H.    The fees established under this chapter are to be collected for their specified purposes in the PFFP for which individual accounts shall be established and funds appropriated, and for which a proposed construction and implementation schedule shall be adopted, and the fees identified herein are applicable only in the Folsom plan area.

I.    The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to payment of the fees on building permits would jeopardize existing and future residents of the Folsom plan area, in that it would permit construction and development to proceed without adequate public facilities or means of financing such facilities.

J.    The transportation related fees imposed by this chapter are necessary in order to assure compliance with Measure W, adopted November 2, 2004, which provides that the citys residents north of Highway 50 shall not pay fees for the construction of new transportation improvements required to serve the Folsom plan area. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this chapter:

A.    City means the city of Folsom.

B.    City manager means the city manager of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

C.    Corporation yard fee means the development impact fee established under this chapter for the Folsom plan areas fair share contribution towards the citys new corporation yard.

D.    Developer means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks the citys approval for all or part of a development.

E.    Development means the construction of any new structure in the Folsom plan area, including residential and nonresidential structures. Development does not include, with respect to residential development, remodeling, reconstruction or expansion of a structure that does not increase the number of unit(s) on the parcel and does not include, with respect to nonresidential development, remodeling, reconstruction, or installation of tenant improvements within a structure that does not increase the amount of square footage contained therein.

F.    Dwelling unit means a residential unit within a development project.

G.    FPA development impact fee means the development impact fees established under this chapter for the Folsom plan area, including the solid waste fee, the corporation yard fee, the transit fee, the Highway 50 improvements fee, the Highway 50 interchange fee, the Sacramento County transportation development fee, and the FPASP fee.

H.    FPASP fee (Folsom plan area specific plan) means the development impact fee established under this chapter for general capital facilities, library, municipal services center, police facilities, fire facilities, parks and trails for the Folsom plan area.

I.    Finance director means the citys finance director or his/her designee.

J.    Folsom plan area (FPA) means the property within the city of Folsom located south of Highway 50 within the Folsom plan area specific plan adopted by the city council on June 28, 2011, in Resolution No. 8863.

K.    Highway 50 improvements fee means the development impact fee established under this chapter for the Highway 50 improvements contemplated in the Folsom plan area specific plan, and includes those improvements incorporated in the memorandum of understanding between the city and Caltrans, dated December 17, 2014.

L.    Highway 50 interchange fee means the development impact fee established under this chapter for the fair share contributions to Highway 50 interchanges contemplated in the Folsom plan area specific plan.

M.    Nexus study means the Folsom Plan Area Specific Plan Fee and Stand Alone Fees Nexus Study dated July 17, 2015, and to be adopted by city council resolution, and any update or supplements thereto as adopted by the city council and consistent with the PFFP. The nexus study and any updates or supplements thereto are on file in the office of the city clerk.

N.    Public facilities financing plan means the public facilities financing plan (PFFP) for the Folsom plan area adopted by the city council on January 28, 2014, in Resolution No. 9298.

O.    Sacramento County transportation development fee means the development impact fee established under Chapter 16.87 of the Sacramento County Code for purposes of providing an adequate level of roadway, transit, bikeway, walkway and other transportation facilities for new developments within Sacramento County, including the Folsom plan area.

P.    Solid waste fee means the development impact fee established under this chapter for solid waste facilities and equipment for the Folsom plan area.

Q.    Transit fee means the development impact fee established under this chapter for public transit facilities and equipment for the Folsom plan area. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.030 Application of chapter.
This chapter shall apply to all new development projects in the Folsom plan area. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.040 Establishment and administration of the FPA development impact fee fund.
A.    The FPA development impact fee fund is hereby established with the following subaccounts as follows:

1.    Solid waste fee;

2.    Corporation yard fee;

3.    Transit fee;

4.    Highway 50 improvements fee;

5.    Highway 50 interchange fee;

6.    Sacramento County transportation development fee; and

7.    FPASP fee.

B.    The fees collected and deposited into the sub-accounts of the FPA development impact fee fund shall collectively be referred to as the FPA development impact fee.

C.    The solid waste fee, the corporation yard fee, the transit fee, the Highway 50 improvements fee, the Highway 50 interchange fee, and the Sacramento County development fee, once collected, shall be accounted for separately and expended solely to finance the construction and acquisition of the public facilities and equipment identified for those fees in the PFFP.

D.    The fees established by this chapter are in addition to any other fees or charges required by law as a condition of development in the Folsom plan area, subject to the applicable, vested provisions of the PFFP and approved development agreements applicable to the Folsom plan area. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.050 Payment of the FPA development impact fee.
The developer of any new development in the Folsom plan area shall pay the FPA development impact fee at or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a structure which is subject to this chapter. The amount of the fee shall be the then-current amount at the time of the building permit issuance, and shall be paid on a building-permit-by-building-permit basis. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.060 Components of the FPA development impact fee.
The FPA development impact fee includes the following components:

A.    The Solid Waste Fee. The solid waste fee is to fund solid waste vehicles and waste container purchases required to maintain the level of municipal solid waste service in the Folsom plan area described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

B.    The Corporation Yard Fee. The corporation yard fee is to fund the cost of land for the corporation yard, and the fair share of the cost of facilities and construction of the citys new corporation yard necessary to accommodate future growth in the city and the Folsom plan area, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

C.    The Transit Fee. The transit fee is to fund public transit improvements in the Folsom plan area, including, but not limited to, improvements to the transit corridor, transit parking, transit stops, and a share of the public transit vehicles, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

D.    The Highway 50 Improvements Fee. The Highway 50 improvements fee is to fund certain improvements to Highway 50 that serve the Folsom plan area such as, for example: Highway 50 segments from Sunrise to Hazel; Hazel to Folsom Boulevard; Folsom Boulevard to Scott Road; and the Hazel interchange modification, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study, and including but not limited to those improvements identified in the memorandum of understanding dated December 17, 2014, entered into between the city and Caltrans.

E.    The Highway 50 Interchange Fee. The Highway 50 interchange fee is to fund a fair share contribution toward certain Highway 50 interchanges that serve the Folsom plan area, such as, for example, the Empire Ranch Road interchange, the Oak Avenue Parkway interchange, the Scott/Bidwell interchange modifications, the Prairie City Road interchange modifications, and the Rowberry Drive Overcrossing, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

F.    The Sacramento County Transportation Development Fee. The Sacramento County transportation development fee is to fund a fair share contribution toward the improvements to roadway, transit, bikeway, walkway and other transportation facilities in Sacramento County that serve the Folsom plan area.

G.    The FPASP Fee. The FPASP fee is comprised of the following subcomponents:

1.    The general capital facilities component of the FPASP fee is to fund acquisition of general capital facilities, including, but not limited to: furniture, fixtures and equipment for city facilities (including fire and police facilities); police and fire vehicles and uniformed personnel turnout gear; public works vehicles and equipment; library materials, such as books, computers, and other materials; and other general capital needs of the city in the Folsom plan area, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

2.    The library component of the FPASP fee is to fund the construction of a branch library in the Folsom plan area, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

3.    The municipal services center component of the FPASP fee is to fund the construction of a municipal services center in the Folsom plan area that allows customers to make utility bill and license payments; register for recreation programs; obtain and file building planning and permit applications and employment applications; and request code enforcement and other public services, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

4.    The police component of the FPASP fee is to fund a police substation to serve the Folsom plan area, which is anticipated to include a public information counter area, conference rooms, lockers and showers, interview rooms and supervisor offices, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

5.    The fire component of the FPASP fee is to fund two new fire stations to serve the Folsom plan area, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

6.    The parks component of the FPASP fee is to fund the construction of one hundred twenty-five acres of parkland in the Folsom plan area comprised of two community parks, five neighborhood parks, and two local parks, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study.

7.    The trails component of the FPASP fee is to fund the construction of approximately thirty miles of trails in the Folsom plan area, which include trails, a Class I bike path, Class II bike lanes, intersection protection, trail bridges, under-crossings, and design costs, as described in the PFFP and the nexus study. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.070 Determination of fee amounts.
The amounts of the FPA development impact fee shall be calculated and determined in accordance with the nexus study and this chapter, and subject to limitations set forth in approved development agreements applicable to the Folsom plan area, depending on the type of residential development or the size of nonresidential development, and shall be adopted and amended and periodically adjusted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.080 Fee adjustments.
A.    Inflationary Adjustments. In the absence of an intervening periodic adjustment or nexus study adjustment as provided below, the FPA development impact fee established by this chapter shall automatically be adjusted each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the change in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the finance director based upon the Construction Cost Index (CCI) for twenty cities and for San Francisco, as published in the most recent Engineering News Record (or similar publication). The Sacramento County transportation development fee shall be subject to the automatic adjustment set forth by the board of supervisors in Section 16.87.140 of the Sacramento County Code.

B.    Periodic Adjustments. Subject to the limitations in the development agreements applicable to the Folsom plan area, the amount of the FPA development impact fee may also be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the city council, upon recommendation by the finance director, based on changes in the actual or estimated costs of construction and/or acquisition of the facilities or improvements to be financed thereby.

C.    Nexus Study Adjustments. The FPA development impact fee may also be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the city council; provided, that the adjustment is supported by a new or updated nexus study and is consistent with limitations set forth in approved development agreements applicable to the Folsom plan area. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.090 Adoption in compliance with facilities plan.
When the moneys in the FPA development impact fee accounts are disbursed for use, the fees shall be used to finance the planning, acquisition, construction, and development of the public facilities and equipment identified for those fees in the PFFP and the nexus study. To the extent sufficient fees are available, all public facilities and equipment financed by the fees shall be constructed or acquired in accordance with the priorities established or to be established by the city council after considering the PFFP and the citys capital improvement program, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

3.120.100 Fee reimbursement agreements.
A.    If, with the citys approval, a landowner within the Folsom plan area elects to install any eligible public facilities or equipment financed by the FPA development impact fee (such as, for example, the construction of park improvements and/or installation of park equipment), a fee reimbursement agreement in a form acceptable to the city attorney may be entered into between the city and the landowner to reimburse the installing landowner for the costs thereof from the applicable FPA development impact fee.

B.    Any such fee reimbursement agreements for the construction of improvements and/or installation of equipment will include provisions for bonding, completion and acceptance of the improvements, warranties, priority for reimbursement, provisions to allow fee reimbursements to be converted to credits that can be applied against the applicable component of the FPA development impact fee within the Folsom plan area, and other provisions relating to reimbursement and administration of the reimbursement and credit.

C.    Fee credits related to improvements or equipment financed by the FPASP component of the FPA development impact fee may not be applied against any of the other components of the FPA development impact fee. Similarly, fee credits related to improvements or equipment financed by any other component of the FPA development impact fee may only be applied against that particular component of the FPA development impact fee. (Ord. 1234  2 (part), 2015)

Chapter 3.130
FOLSOM PLAN AREA SPECIFIC PLAN INFRASTRUCTURE FEE
Sections:

3.130.010    Definitions.

3.130.020    Purpose and findings.

3.130.030    Specific plan infrastructure feeAdoption, adjustment and payment.

3.130.040    Folsom plan area and owner subareas.

3.130.050    Establishment and administration of the specific plan infrastructure fund.

3.130.060    Fee reimbursement agreementsConversion to fee credits.

3.130.070    Fee challenges.

3.130.080    Use and disbursement of fee revenues.

3.130.090    Limitations on repeal.

3.130.010 Definitions.
The following words are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:

A.    Administration means the administration of the specific plan infrastructure fund established under this chapter by the city and/or its consultants in accordance with the study and this chapter.

B.    Administration fee component means the component of the SPIF fee to fund the cost of administration of the SPIF fee.

C.    Administrator means the city of Folsom finance director or his/her designee, including any consultant employed or retained by the city for organizing, monitoring and administering the SPIF fee.

D.    Alternative Community Park West site means the approximately 47.8-acre park site identified as the alternative Community Park West site in the specific plan.

E.    Auditor means the independent auditor retained by the city of Folsom for purposes of conducting audits called for in this chapter.

F.    Building permit means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure pursuant to and as defined by the building code.

G.    City means the city of Folsom.

H.    Community parkland means the Community Park West site or the alternative Community Park West site, whichever site is required to be dedicated to the city for a community park in accordance with the specific plan. Community parkland does not include parkland dedications for neighborhood parks or for the community park designated as Community Park East in the specific plan.

I.    Community Park West site means the approximately 47.8-acre park site identified as the Community Park West site in the specific plan.

J.    Constructing owner means a landowner within the Folsom plan area who elects to construct or cause to be constructed any improvements.

K.    Constructing owners property means the property within the Folsom plan area within which any fee credits converted from fee reimbursements may be applied against the infrastructure fee component of the SPIF fee, as such property for each constructing owner is described and delineated in the applicable fee reimbursement agreement.

L.    Exempt public facilities means buildings or other improvements owned or to be owned by the city of Folsom, county of Sacramento, school district, or other public entity.

M.    Fee credits means the credits against the infrastructure fee component that become available from a constructing owners conversion of available fee reimbursements to such fee credits, in accordance with the fee reimbursement agreement related thereto.

N.    Fee reimbursement agreement means an agreement between a constructing owner and the city to provide fee reimbursements, to be funded solely by the SPIF fee, in exchange for the design and construction of improvements by the constructing owner.

O.    Fee reimbursement means a reimbursement to be paid to a constructing owner from the infrastructure fee component for financing the design and construction of improvements pursuant to a fee reimbursement agreement.

P.    Finance director means the finance director of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

Q.    Folsom owner subarea map means the map of the Folsom plan area included in the study that divides the Folsom plan area into separate owner subareas.

R.    Folsom plan area means the property within the city of Folsom located south of Highway 50 within the approved specific plan.

S.    FPA development agreements means the first amended and restated Tier 1 development agreements entered into between the city and the participating landowners (as defined therein) for properties included within the Folsom plan area and recorded against such properties on or about July 15, 2014, as such FPA development agreements may be amended from time to time.

T.    General plan means the general plan of the city, as amended by the city from time to time.

U.    Improvements means those public improvements or infrastructure shown and included in the study to be financed by the infrastructure fee component.

V.    Infrastructure fee component means the component of the SPIF fee to fund the costs of the improvements.

W.    Mitigation Fee Act means Section 66000 et seq. of the California Government Code.

X.    Owner subareas means the portions of the Folsom plan area designated by subarea on the Folsom owner subarea map, each of which will be responsible for the SPIF fee allocated to such owner subarea in accordance with the study.

Y.    Parks and recreation director means the parks and recreation director of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

Z.    Parkland fee component means the component of the SPIF fee to equalize the burden between residential land uses of the community parkland dedication amongst property owners in the Folsom plan area that underdedicate their share of parkland as provided in the study.

AA.    Participating landowner means an owner of property within the Folsom plan area whose property is subject to an FPA development agreement.

BB.    Public facility lands means those lands identified in the study within the Folsom plan area for dedication to the city for police substation, fire station, water and sewer improvements, municipal services and library uses, which dedications are included for financing in the study. Public facility lands do not include lands planned to be dedicated within the Folsom plan area for interchange improvements or parkland, which are addressed separately.

CC.    Public facilities financing plan or PFFP means the public facilities financing plan for the Folsom plan area adopted by the city council on January 28, 2014, in Resolution No. 9298.

DD.    Public lands fee component means the component of the SPIF fee to equalize the burden between land uses of the public facility land dedications amongst property owners in the Folsom plan area that underdedicate their share of public facility lands as provided in the study.

EE.    Shortfall payment means the additional payment required to be paid by development that occurs at less than its targeted land use density, as determined and calculated in accordance with the study.

FF.    Small-lot final map means a final subdivision map recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act that creates lots upon which building permits may be issued for the construction of single-family homes.

GG.    Specific plan means the Folsom plan area specific plan approved by the city council on June 28, 2011, in Resolution No. 8863, including amendments thereto approved prior to July 1, 2016.

HH.    Specific plan infrastructure fund or fund means that special revenue fund established under this chapter consisting solely from payments of the SPIF fee, including the subaccounts thereof dedicated to fund the costs of administration, community parkland, and improvements.

II.    SPIF fee means the fee established by this chapter consistent with the FPA development agreements, the public facilities financing plan and the study adopted by the city council relating to the SPIF fee.

JJ.    SPIF set-aside component means the component of the infrastructure fee component to be collected from the first two thousand five hundred residential building permits within the Folsom plan area to fund certain initial water and sewer improvements, and the component of the infrastructure fee to be collected from residential and commercial developments in the Folsom plan area to pay to the city for certain off-site roadway improvements, as determined in accordance with the study and as updated and adjusted annually.

KK.    Study means the Folsom Specific Plan Infrastructure Fee Program Nexus Study dated August 28, 2015, and to be approved by the city council, as may be updated from time to time by the city to support adjustments to the SPIF fee, including the reallocation adjustment based on approved amendments to the specific plan through July 1, 2016, as provided by the study. The study and any fee adjustment(s) and/or update(s) are and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1293  2, 2019; Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.020 Purpose and findings.
The city council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is as follows:

A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish and impose a specific plan infrastructure fee (SPIF fee) on new development within the Folsom plan area that equitably spreads the burden of public improvements and facilities and distributes the cost of public lands and community parkland to development projects within the Folsom plan area. The SPIF fee is to be imposed consistent with the FPA development agreements and the PFFP covering all properties in the Folsom plan area.

B.    The general plan of the city and voter-approved Measure W requires that new developments within the citys Folsom plan area provide, in a time frame related to its development, an adequate level of public infrastructure in order to maintain adequate levels of public services and not adversely impact other areas of the city.

C.    Development within the Folsom plan area creates a need for additional public improvements and public facility land dedications to serve the Folsom plan area. Such burdens vary by the type of land use. Such burdens should be shared equitably by development within the Folsom plan area.

D.    Analysis of the approved land uses within the specific plan for the Folsom plan area makes it possible to estimate the burden or need for various public improvements and facilities generated by different types of land uses. Analysis of the land use expected at buildout within the specific plan makes it possible to estimate the type and amount of improvements, public facility lands and community parkland necessary to support that additional land use.

E.    This chapter is intended to create and impose a fee on new development within the Folsom plan area, which equitably spreads the costs of the improvements, public facility lands and community parkland dedications to the development within the Folsom plan area which creates the need for such required improvements and land dedications, without using development impact fees from developments outside the Folsom plan area or burdening or generating any surplus to the general fund.

F.    The city and the landowners in the Folsom plan area entered into certain FPA development agreements which required the city to adopt, and the landowners to support, the SPIF fee called for in this chapter. The city adopted a PFFP which provided for certain reimbursements for advanced infrastructure and other costs. This chapter is intended to satisfy the citys obligations in the FPA development agreements and the PFFP.

G.    The city has caused the preparation of the Folsom Specific Plan Infrastructure Fee Program Nexus Study dated August 28, 2015, which will be reviewed and approved by the city council at the time the city council acts on a resolution to set the amount of the SPIF fee.

H.    The SPIF fee established by this chapter shall be calculated in the manner set forth in the study so as to pay for those required improvements and public facility lands and community parkland dedications listed and identified in the study and equitably allocate the costs and burdens thereof throughout the areas approved for development within the Folsom plan area.

I.    The failure to impose the provisions set forth in this chapter relating to payment of the SPIF fee on issuance of building permits or recordation of final small-lot subdivision maps, as and when warranted, would jeopardize the purpose of the fund to equitably spread the costs and burdens of providing the required public improvements, public facility lands and community parkland throughout the Folsom plan area, which will promote development of the Folsom plan area as planned to the benefit of the future residents of the Folsom plan area.

J.    The requirement of this chapter to pay the SPIF fee for new development within the Folsom plan area is necessary in order to assure compliance with the applicable zoning ordinance and general plan requirements for the installation of the improvements and dedication of public facility lands and community parkland funded by this chapter. (Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.030 Specific plan infrastructure feeAdoption, adjustment and payment.
A.    A SPIF fee is hereby established for the purposes articulated in this chapter and consistent with the PFFP and the study to be adopted by the city council. The initial amount of the SPIF fee shall be set by resolution of the city council following a public hearing and consistent with the Mitigation Fee Act, the FPA development agreements, the PFFP and the study.

B.    The amount of the SPIF fee payable by each owner subarea shall be adjusted annually as set forth herein.

C.    Calculation of the SPIF fee shall be determined in accordance with the study and this chapter. As more particularly detailed in the study, the amount of the SPIF fee for each owner subarea is calculated based upon (1) the location of development within the Folsom plan area, (2) the type of development, (3) the amount of parkland and public facility lands to be dedicated within the owner subarea, and (4) the extent of development within such owner subarea, including the extent, if any, by which such development is occurring at less than its target density that may require an additional shortfall payment in accordance with the study. The finance director may develop policies and procedures for the calculation and administration of the SPIF fee consistent with this chapter, the FPA development agreements, the PFFP and the study. Future studies may identify additional methods of calculation for the SPIF fee consistent with the Mitigation Fee Act, the FPA development agreements and the PFFP.

D.    Portions of the Folsom plan area zoned for exempt public facilities are exempt from the SPIF fee unless and until such zoning is changed to private use. Once the SPIF fee is paid with respect to a residential development, the SPIF fee shall not thereafter be required to be paid in connection with the issuance of any building permit to remodel, reconstruct or expand any residential structure within such development that does not increase the number of dwelling units for such development upon which the SPIF fee was based. Once the SPIF fee is paid with respect to a nonresidential development, the SPIF fee shall not thereafter be required to be paid in connection with the issuance of any building permit to remodel, reconstruct or install tenant improvements within such development that does not increase the amount of square footage for such development upon which the SPIF fee was based.

E.    The SPIF fee shall be comprised of the following components:

1.    Infrastructure Fee Component.

a.    The infrastructure fee component of the SPIF fee is to equitably spread the cost burden of improvements to roadway facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, potable water facilities, recycled water facilities, storm drainage facilities, habitat mitigation and other costs in the Folsom plan area as provided for in the PFFP among the landowners in the Folsom plan area, as provided in the study.

b.    The infrastructure fee component of the SPIF fee shall be paid at or prior to the issuance of any building permit within the specific plan. If a fee reimbursement is due pursuant to a fee reimbursement agreement when a landowner seeks to record a small-lot final map for single-family development in the Folsom plan area, the infrastructure fee component imposed shall be paid at or prior to the recordation of such small-lot final map, in accordance with the study.

c.    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary: (i) the SPIF set-aside component of the SPIF fee for the purpose of funding certain initial water and sewer improvements shall be collected from the first two thousand five hundred residential building permits within the Folsom plan area (or on account of any of the first two thousand five hundred residential building permits within the Folsom plan area paid in connection with either final small-lot maps or prior to issuance of a building permit) and deposited into the SPIF set-aside component of the fund for the sole purpose of funding certain initial water and sewer improvements; and (ii) the SPIF set-aside component of the SPIF fee for the purpose of funding certain off-site roadway improvements shall be collected from residential and commercial developments in the Folsom plan area at the time of issuance of a building permit and paid to the city, as determined in accordance with the study and as updated and adjusted annually.

2.    Parkland Fee Component.

a.    The parkland fee component of the SPIF fee is to equitably spread the cost burden of providing the necessary and required parklands in the Folsom plan area among the participating landowners in the Folsom plan area, consistent with Section 4.2.2.1 of the FPA development agreements.

b.    As described in the study, the parkland fee component of the SPIF fee imposed pursuant to this chapter as to each owner subarea shall be calculated as follows: (i) the parks and recreation director shall determine the owner subareas fair share of parkland dedication for the Folsom plan area as part of each small-lot tentative map approval within such subarea pursuant to the study (the parkland requirement); (ii) the amount of parkland included in the small lot tentative map shall be credited against this parkland requirement (the parkland fee credit) and, to the extent any additional parkland requirement remains, the value of the additional required dedication shall be determined pursuant to subsection F of this section based on the three-year rolling average of appraised value for such parkland dedications (the parkland equalization fee); and (iii) after all parkland fee credits have been applied to the area covered by the small lot tentative map, the parkland equalization fee shall thereafter be paid for each small lot final map as each map exceeds the parkland dedication credit, prior to the recordation of such small lot final subdivision map. With respect to the participating landowner whose property includes the Community Park West site, the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to Section 2.2.3.2 of the FPA development agreement between the city and such participating landowner.

3.    Public Lands Fee Component.

a.    The public lands fee component of the SPIF fee is to equitably spread the cost burden of providing the necessary and required public facility lands in the Folsom plan area among the participating landowners in the Folsom plan area.

b.    As described in the study, the public lands fee component of the SPIF fee imposed pursuant to this chapter as to each owner subarea shall be calculated as follows: (i) the finance director shall determine the owner subareas fair share of public facility lands dedication for the Folsom plan area as part of each small lot tentative map approval within such subarea pursuant to the study (the public lands requirement); (ii) the amount of public facility lands included in the small lot tentative map shall be credited against this public lands requirement (the public lands fee credit) and, to the extent any additional public lands requirement remains, the value of the additional required dedication shall be determined pursuant to subsection F of this section based on the three-year rolling average of appraised value for such public facility lands dedications (the public lands fee); and (iii) after all public lands fee credits have been applied to the area covered by the small lot tentative map, the public lands fee shall thereafter be paid for each small lot final map as each map exceeds the parkland dedication credit, prior to the recordation of such small lot final subdivision map.

4.    Administration Fee Component.

a.    The administration fee component of the SPIF fee is to equitably spread the cost burden of administering the SPIF fee program among the landowners in the Folsom plan area.

b.    The administration fee component shall be paid at the same time as either the infrastructure fee component and/or the parkland and public lands fee components are due, whether or not fee credits applicable thereto reduce the amount of such other SPIF fee components to zero.

F.    The SPIF shall be adjusted annually by the administrator, subject to approval of the finance director, on or about July 1st, as provided in this subsection.

1.    As provided in the study and in this chapter, the equitable allocations of the costs and burdens by the SPIF fee throughout the Folsom plan area shall be updated on or after July 1, 2016, based on any and all amendments to the land uses approved for development within the specific plan before July 1, 2016. This adjustment shall also include any necessary cost adjustments to the SPIF fee components consistent with the methodology below. Thereafter, the allocation of costs and burdens throughout the owner subareas area approved for development shall not be subject to change as a result of any specific plan amendments affecting the land uses approved thereunder for development.

2.    Adjustments to the portion of the SPIF fee related to the infrastructure fee component shall include percentage changes based on general changes in construction costs over the prior year and/or based on actual cost experiences and/or revised cost estimates for the improvements, as determined by the finance director. The finance directors determination of general changes in annual construction costs may be based upon averaging the Construction Cost Index (CCI) for twenty cities and for San Francisco, as published in the Engineering News Record publication for the preceding twelve months ending in December of the prior calendar year.

3.    The land value to be used for establishing the parkland fee component and the public lands fee component shall be initially established in accordance with the study methodology for such valuation at the time of the first dedication of any parkland or public facility lands. Until such first dedication occurs, the SPIF fee to be adopted by council resolution shall include placeholders for the parkland fee and public lands fee components. Thereafter, adjustments to the parkland fee and public lands fee components shall be based on a three-year rolling average of appraised value for such parkland and public land dedications, based on either updates to prior appraisals and/or new appraisals as deemed appropriate by the city at the time of such annual adjustment, in accordance with the study methodology for such land valuations. The resultant fee shall be rounded to the nearest dollar figure.

4.    Adjustments to the administrative fee component shall be made as determined by the administrator, subject to approval of the finance director, in order to provide continued and ongoing administration of the fund.

5.    Except as provided in subsection (F)(6) of this section, all costs associated with the SPIF fee adjustment shall be paid out of the administrative fee component.

6.    The city or any participating landowner as defined in the FPA development agreements may request a review and adjustment of the SPIF fee or any component thereof as provided in Section 4.2.2 of said agreement. Any participating owner requesting review and adjustment of such SPIF fee or a component thereof, other than a request to the city to perform the annual adjustment as provided above, is responsible for the costs, including but not limited to appraisal costs and staff time associated with review and adjustment of any SPIF fee, and such costs shall be paid to the city prior to commencement of the work.

G.    The SPIF fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges required by law as a condition of development in the Folsom plan area.

H.    Any challenge to the SPIF fee shall be made in strict conformance with provisions of Section 3.130.070. (Ord. 1293  3, 2019; Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.040 Folsom plan area and owner subareas.
A.    The boundaries of the Folsom plan area and the owner subareas thereof responsible for payment of the SPIF fee are established as shown on that certain map entitled Folsom Specific Plan Owner Subarea Map, which is included in the study. Adjustments to the boundaries of the owner subareas may be approved by the finance director consistent with the FPA development agreements.

B.    To maintain the revenues anticipated to be generated by the SPIF fee, except as provided in connection with any density transfers or as may otherwise be provided by the study, after July 1, 2016, development of an owner subarea at less than its target density shall require payment of an additional shortfall payment, as determined by the administrator and approved by the finance director in accordance with the study. (Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.050 Establishment and administration of the specific plan infrastructure fund.
A.    A specific plan infrastructure fund shall be established by the finance director with four separate sub-accounts thereof to fund the (1) administration fee component, (2) infrastructure fee component, which shall include a separate set-aside fee component subaccount, (3) parkland fee component, and (4) public lands fee component. All SPIF fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be accounted for in the appropriate subaccounts of the fund and expended solely to finance administration, infrastructure, community parkland, and public lands, as applicable.

B.    The fund shall be audited annually by an auditor at the direction of the finance director. The audit shall include an annual accounting of the SPIF fee program, including an accounting of SPIF fees collected, disbursements paid to constructing owners and to dedicating participating landowners, and fee credits and reimbursements outstanding and pending, including the calendar-year priorities associated with such fee reimbursement.

C.    The administrator shall administer the fund consistent with this chapter, the FPA development agreements, the PFFP and the study.

D.    The fund shall bear interest at the rates available for city funds of this or similar type. Investment policies are made consistent with the citys investment decisions, in the sole discretion of the city, and no return is guaranteed. Interest earned from moneys in the fund shall be allocated to the fund. (Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.060 Fee reimbursement agreementsConversion to fee credits.
A.    The fee reimbursement agreement is intended to reimburse constructing owners who construct improvements that are included for financing in the infrastructure fee component of the SPIF fee and to reimburse participating landowners who dedicate the community parkland and public facility lands.

B.    A fee reimbursement agreement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, shall be entered into: (1) between the city and each constructing owner in connection with the constructing owners construction of any improvements, and/or (2) between the city and each participating landowner in connection with the participating landowners dedication of the public facility lands and/or community parkland.

C.    The fee reimbursement agreements for the construction of improvements will include provisions for bonding, completion and acceptance of the improvements, warranties, priority for reimbursement based on relative calendar year priority of the fee reimbursement agreement consistent with the study, provisions to allow fee reimbursements to be converted to credits that can be applied against the infrastructure fee component of the SPIF fee within a constructing owners property within the Folsom plan area, and other provisions relating to reimbursement and administration of the program.

D.    Fee credits related to improvements or the dedication of public facility lands may be used against either the infrastructure fee component and/or the public lands fee component, but may not be applied against the parkland fee component or the administrative fee component. Furthermore, with respect to the first two thousand five hundred residential building permits, fee credits may not be applied against the SPIF set-aside component of the infrastructure fee component unless such fee credits relate to the constructing owners construction of eligible Phase 1 sewer or Phase 1 and Phase 2 water infrastructure, as those terms are defined in the study.

E.    Since the SPIF fee is for the benefit of the participating landowners in the Folsom plan area, pursuant to Section 4.2.2 of the FPA development agreements, the participating landowners shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims and/or causes of action for any loss or damage relating to the SPIF reimbursement. (Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.070 Fee challenges.
A.    The SPIF fee adopted pursuant to this chapter or any adjustment to such SPIF fee may be challenged only in full accordance with the requirements of this section.

B.    Only an owner or entity subject to the SPIF fee may challenge the SPIF fee. The SPIF fee established by the city council, or any adjustment thereto, must be challenged within twenty calendar days of the adoption or adjustment of the SPIF fee by city council resolution or within twenty calendar days of delivery of written notice to all participating landowners under the FPA development agreements of the adjustment of the SPIF fee by the finance director. Failure to challenge the SPIF fee in a timely manner constitutes a waiver of the right to challenge the SPIF fee or adjustment.

C.    The sole basis for a challenge to the SPIF fee, or any component therein, established under this chapter shall be the citys failure to comply with the Mitigation Fee Act, the PFFP, the FPA development agreements or the study, or an alleged error in the calculation of the SPIF fee consistent with the study.

D.    The application to challenge the SPIF fee shall be made in writing and filed with the administrator. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed reduction or adjustment. The administrator shall consider the application and render his or her decision in writing not later than forty-five calendar days after the filing of the fee adjustment request. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the administrator may, within twenty calendar days thereafter, appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The administrators decision shall be final if no appeal is filed within the aforementioned time limit. The city council shall consider such appeals within forty-five calendar days after filing. The decision of the city council shall be final. No building permit shall be considered final or complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920 et seq.), or any other purpose, until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made.

E.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection D of this section, a project proponent or applicant who has filed a timely application to challenge a SPIF fee or adjustment may pay the SPIF fee under protest and receive a building permit or approval to record a small-lot final map. If a reduction or adjustment is approved after payment pursuant to this subsection is made, a refund to the applicant shall be made of that amount by which the fee is reduced or adjusted.

F.    In the event of a challenge to the SPIF fee or an adjustment thereof, the city shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the calculation of the SPIF fee is correct and consistent with the study, the Mitigation Fee Act, the FPA development agreements and this chapter.

G.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the SPIF fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning, or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the then-owner to payment of the then-applicable fee for new uses, zoning, or land use designation. (Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.080 Use and disbursement of fee revenues.
A.    The administrative component of the SPIF fee shall be first priority with respect to distribution of any fees in the fund. Thereafter, when available for disbursement or use, moneys in the infrastructure fee component subaccount of the fund shall first be used and/or reserved to reimburse any outstanding fee reimbursements under any fee reimbursement agreements in accordance with the terms thereof and the reimbursement priorities established thereby, and then to fund the design and construction of any remaining improvements. When available for disbursement, moneys in the parkland fee component and public lands fee component subaccounts of the fund shall be used and/or reserved to finance the dedications of the community parkland and public facility lands, as applicable, in accordance with the terms of the fee reimbursement agreement related thereto. When available for disbursement or use, moneys in the administration fee component subaccount of the fund shall be used to finance the administration of the SPIF fee program.

B.    In the event funds in the administration fee component subaccount of the fund shall become insufficient to pay the ongoing administration of the fee, the administrator or finance director may borrow funds from the infrastructure fee component subaccount of the fund to the administration fee component subaccount in order to permit continued and uninterrupted administration of the fee, and the administrative fee component shall be adjusted at the following annual adjustment to provide the funds required to repay this loan back to the infrastructure fee component subaccount of the fund.

C.    As provided for in Section 4.4 of the FPA development agreements, in no case shall the city in any manner be subject to any liability for failing to collect any SPIF fee other than paying to the constructing owner or dedicating participating landowner, as applicable, any SPIF fee collected in accordance with this chapter, and in no case shall any payment or repayment of the SPIF fee be an obligation of the city beyond payment of moneys received, less costs of administration. The city shall have no obligation to pay any SPIF fee or make any payment or reimbursement for the SPIF fee except to the extent that such fee has been collected from development of the Folsom plan area. (Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

3.130.090 Limitations on repeal.
The SPIF fee is enacted pursuant to FPA development agreements. Accordingly, during the time any of such FPA development agreements remain in effect, the SPIF fee may not be repealed except as provided in the FPA development agreement. (Ord. 1235  1 (part), 2015)

Title 4
PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapters:

4.05    Park and Recreation Commission

4.07    Arts and Cultural Commission

4.10    Park Improvement Fee

4.12    Humbug-Willow Creek Fee

Chapter 4.05
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Sections:

4.05.010    Established.

4.05.011    MembersTermsTransition to Charter form government.

4.05.012    Eligibility for office.

4.05.013    Vacancies in office.

4.05.014    Removal from office.

4.05.015    Compensation of members.

4.05.020    Meetings.

4.05.040    Authority.

4.05.010 Established.
There shall be a parks and recreation commission of 7 members. The commission shall consist of 5 members appointed by councilmembers. Each councilmember shall appoint 1 commission member whose term shall run concurrently with that of the councilmember so appointing. Two members shall be appointed by the council for 2-year terms. (Ord. 709  1, 1990: Ord. 325  2 (part), 1975)

4.05.011 MembersTermsTransition to Charter form government.
All terms of parks and recreation commission members shall end when the city council members elected in the November 6, 1990, election are sworn into office. Thereafter, in accord with the terms of Section 4.06 of the City Charter, each councilmember shall appoint 1 parks and recreation commission member whose term shall run concurrent with that of the councilmember so appointing. Two additional members shall be appointed by the council for 2-year terms. (Ord. 709  2, 1990)

4.05.012 Eligibility for office.
A person is not eligible to hold office as a park and recreation commissioner unless he or she is, at the time of appointment, a resident and registered voter of the city. If, during his or her term of office, a member of the park and recreation commission moves his or her residence outside the city limits, or ceases to be a registered voter of the city, such members office shall immediately become vacant. (Ord. 709  3, 1990)

4.05.013 Vacancies in office.
If the office of a member of the parks and recreation commission appointed by a councilmember becomes vacant, the appointing councilmember shall fill the vacancy by appointing a parks and recreation commission member whose term shall run for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. If the office of a member of the parks and recreation commission appointed by the council becomes vacant, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointing a parks and recreation commission member whose term shall run for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 800  1, 1995: Ord. 709  4, 1990)

4.05.014 Removal from office.
The members of the parks and recreation commission who are appointed by a councilmember and the members of the parks and recreation commission appointed by the city council serve at the pleasure of the city council. Any commissioner with 3 consecutive unexcused absences from regularly scheduled meetings will be automatically removed from the commission. Excused absences will include sickness, family emergency, and death in the family and commissioners must provide notice to either the parks and recreation director or parks and recreation commission chairman prior to the meeting. The vacancy will be filled by either the appointing city councilmember or the entire city council in the case of an at-large position. (Ord. 800  2, 1995: Ord. 709  5, 1990)

4.05.015 Compensation of members.
Members of the commission shall receive such compensation for attendance at meetings and reasonable travel expenses as the city council established by resolution. (Ord. 709  6, 1990)

4.05.020 Meetings.
The park and recreation commission shall meet in open meetings at least once each month in the City Hall. (Ord. 325  2 (part), 1975)

4.05.040 Authority.
The parks and recreation commission shall advise the city council and city manager on the development and administration of all park and recreation programs, parks and facilities; and shall make recommendations to the department of parks and recreation. (Ord. 800  4, 1995: Ord. 325  2 (part), 1975)

Chapter 4.07
ARTS AND CULTURAL COMMISSION
Sections:

4.07.010    Purpose.

4.07.020    Creation of the arts and cultural commissionFunctions of the commission.

4.07.030    Membership.

4.07.035    Eligibility.

4.07.040    Terms of membershipVacancies and replacement.

4.07.050    Officers.

4.07.060    Meetings.

4.07.070    AgendasOrder of businessVoting.

4.07.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the arts and cultural commission is to advise the mayor and city council on promoting, encouraging and increasing arts and cultural programs, projects and services for the community. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 931  2 (part), 2000)

4.07.020 Creation of the arts and cultural commissionFunctions of the commission.
The city of Folsom arts and cultural commission hereafter referred to as (the commission) is hereby created and shall have the following functions:

A.    The commission shall serve in an advisory capacity and make recommendations to the mayor, city council and city manager to promote, encourage and increase support for the arts and culture within the city.

B.    Upon request of the city council or city manager, the commission shall assist with the development of special projects related to arts and cultural activities.

C.    The commission shall promote, encourage and develop arts and cultural services for the community in accordance with a master plan for the arts as adopted by the city council.

D.    The commission shall advise the mayor, city council and city manager on projects and programs designed to promote public art throughout the city.

E.    The commission shall make recommendations to the city council or city manager on the expenditure of any funds that may become available for arts and cultural programs, grants, services, events or activities. Should any grant funds be made available by the city, recommendations from the commission on funding requests shall be reviewed by an internal city grant review committee composed of the mayor, vice mayor, city manager, parks and recreation director, and finance director.

F.    The commission shall appoint subcommittees, as necessary, to carry out the functions of the commission. Any appointee to a subcommittee that is not a member of the commission shall be made with approval of the city council. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 931  2 (part), 2000)

4.07.030 Membership.
There shall be a Folsom arts and cultural commission of 7 members. Each councilmember shall appoint 1 commission member whose term shall run concurrently with that of the appointed councilmember. Two additional members shall be appointed at large by the city council for 2-year terms by a majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 931  2 (part), 2000)

4.07.035 Eligibility.
A person is not eligible to hold office as a Folsom arts and cultural commissioner unless he or she is, at the time of the appointment, a resident and registered voter of the city. If during his or her term of office, a member of the Folsom arts and cultural commission moves his or her residence outside the city limits, or ceases to be a registered voter of the city, such members office shall become immediately vacant. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003)

4.07.040 Terms of membershipVacancies and replacement.
A.    The city council may remove any member of the commission at any time by a majority vote of all councilmembers. No public hearing shall be required prior to removal of any member of the commission and no cause for removal need be shown.

B.    If a vacancy occurs on the Folsom arts and cultural commission for a commission position appointed by a city council member, such appointing city council member shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term. If a vacancy occurs on the Folsom arts and cultural commission for an at-large commission position appointed by the city council, then such position shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the at-large term. This section shall apply to vacancies resulting from death, resignation, removal, disqualification or any other cause.

C.    A commission member is subject to disqualification and removal from the commission if he or she has 3 unexcused absences from any regularly scheduled meetings. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 957  2, 2002; Ord. 931  2 (part), 2000)

4.07.050 Officers.
A.    The officers of the commission shall be the chairperson and vice-chairperson.

B.    The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the commission shall be elected every year by majority vote of the commission members. The chair and vice-chair may be replaced at any time by majority vote of the commission. No public hearing shall be required prior to the removal and no cause for removal need be shown.

C.    The chair and vice-chair or other members presiding in such positions, shall not be deprived of any of the rights or privileges of any member by reason of his/her occupying the chair and may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members.

D.    The chairperson shall preside and preserve order at all regular and special meetings of the commission. The chair-person shall state every question coming before the commission, announce the decisions of the commission on all subjects and decide all questions of order without debate.

E.    In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties and obligations of the chairperson.

F.    The terms of the office of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be 1 year. If no successor is named by the conclusion of any officers term, the officers term shall continue in office until a successor has been named.

G.    A secretary shall be assigned to the commission by the parks and recreation director. The secretary shall serve as staff support to the commission and shall be responsible for preparing agendas and agenda packets; scheduling meetings and meeting places; calling roll and recording roll; calling and recording votes; preparing minutes of the commission meetings; and other duties as required. The secretary shall not be an official voting member nor considered an officer of the commission.

H.    The parks and recreation director or his/her representative shall serve as advisor to the commission. Additionally, staff assigned from the city managers office and redevelopment agency may serve as advisors to the commission. These staff advisors shall not be official voting members nor considered officers of the commission. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 931  2 (part), 2000)

4.07.060 Meetings.
A.    Regular meetings of the commission shall be held at City Hall, 50 Natoma Street, Folsom, California on a day and time to be determined by the commission.

B.    Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. When there is no quorum at a regular meeting, the chairperson, or any member of said body shall adjourn the meeting until the next regular meeting.

C.    The chairperson (or vice-chairperson in the chairpersons absence) shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall call the commission to order. In the absence of the chairperson and vice-chairperson, the parks and recreation director or his/her representative shall call the commission to order whereupon a temporary chairperson shall be elected from among the members present. Upon the arrival of the chairperson or vice-chairperson, the temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair upon concluding the item of business before the commission. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 931  2 (part), 2000)

4.07.070 AgendasOrder of businessVoting.
A.    Agendas for meetings of the commission shall be prepared by the secretary of the commission. Items may be placed on an agenda by contacting the chairperson, parks and recreation director or his/her representative, or the secretary. Agendas shall be approved by the chairperson prior to the start of the meeting. Citizens or interested parties may address the commission by having their specific item(s) placed on an agenda or by addressing the commission during the business from the floor portion of the meeting. Agendas shall be published as required by state law.

B.    At the regular meetings of the commission, the following shall be the order of business:

1.    Roll call;

2.    Review of minutes (or summary);

3.    Agenda items of the Folsom arts and cultural commission;

4.    Business from the floor;

5.    Adjournment.

C.    On all matters acted upon by the commission, the voting shall be a roll-call vote of the members present. The ayes and noes of the members shall be recorded in the minutes or summary by the commission secretary. All actions of the commission shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of the commission present and eligible to vote at the particular meeting where action is to take place.

D.    All rules of order shall be determined in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order, Revised.

E.    The commission may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment, whether or not a quorum has been established. If a quorum is not established, no business other than adjournment may be transacted. (Ord. 1007  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 931  2 (part), 2000)

Chapter 4.10
PARK IMPROVEMENT FEE
Sections:

4.10.010    Definitions.

4.10.020    Purpose.

4.10.030    Establishment and administration of park fund.

4.10.040    Payment of park fee.

4.10.050    Amount of park fee.

4.10.060    Exempt development.

4.10.070    Fee adjustments.

4.10.080    Inflationary adjustments.

4.10.090    Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.

4.10.100    Authorization of credits.

4.10.110    Amount of credits.

4.10.120    Procedure for credits.

4.10.130    Apportionment of credits.

4.10.140    Criteria for reimbursement.

4.10.150    Procedure for reimbursement.

4.10.160    Reimbursement agreements.

4.10.010 Definitions.
The following words are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:

Building permit means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure pursuant to and as defined by the building code.

Commercial means those business activities which are permitted or allowed in the following zoning categories: BP, C-1, C-2, C-3, CH and bed and breakfast.

Director means the public works director.

Division means the division of parks and recreation within the public works department.

Dwelling, Multiple-Family. Multiple-family dwelling means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by two or more families, living independently of each other; provided, that multiple-family dwelling also includes forms of congregate living, including, without mitigation, senior citizen homes, retirement homes or boarding homes.

Dwelling, Single-Family. Single-family dwelling means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by 1 family, including without limitation, mobile homes.

Dwelling unit means a building or part of a building designed for occupancy as a residence by a family.

Facilities means those park and recreation, improvements, or infrastructure generally identified in the studies and more specifically determined from time to time by the city council. Facilities do not include land.

Fee or park improvement fee means the fee established by this chapter. The fee shall be collected prior to the issuance any building permit. The fee shall be used solely to finance the facilities.

Industrial means those business activities which are permitted or allowed in the following zoning categories: M-1, M-2, M-L and MF.

Park capital improvement program means those proposed city-wide park and recreation facilities identified in the studies.

Park improvement fund means the special fund established pursuant to Section 4.10.030.

Quimby Act means the park dedication and/or in-lieu fee requirements applicable to subdivisions adopted by the city council pursuant to Section 66477 of the California Government Code.

Studies means to the following plans and studies:

1.    General plan of 1988;

2.    Park and recreation master plan dated 1989 and the supporting data base and facilities analysis;

3.    Park capital improvement impact fee study by Harland Bartholomew and Associates dated September 1990 and June 1991 supplement thereto;

4.    MSI development impact report and impact fee report on park and recreational facilities dated April 1991;

5.    Management Services Institute Development Impact Fee Update for the City of Folsom dated August 1993 and May 1996 Update.

The studies are on file in the offices of the director and the city clerk. (Ord. 880  2(1), 1997; Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.020 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are as follows:

A.    The general plan of the city and in particular the park and recreation element thereof, requires that the city be provided, in a time frame related to its development, with an adequate level of park and recreation facilities so as to maintain not less than 5 acres of developed city parks per 1,000 population, which is below the existing ratio of park land to population.

B.    New development, and the expansion of existing development, within the city imposes a burden on the existing park and recreation facilities by adding additional population and employees and by creating a need for new park and recreation facilities to serve such development.

C.    Analysis of the land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the general plan makes it possible to estimate the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the population generated by those dwelling units and the number of persons to be employed by commercial and industrial land users. It is therefore possible to arrive at a fee, based on population and jobs created which equitably spreads the burden of park and recreation facilities to those who create the need for them and utilize them. It is the intent of this chapter to create such a fee, spreading costs of park and recreation facilities to those who create the need for such facilities, without generating any surplus to the general fund. It is a further purpose of this chapter to implement the general plan by assuring that adequate park and recreation facilities are financed and provided to serve the future needs of the city.

D.    The park capital improvement program estimated the cost of park and recreation facilities to serve the entire city is $37,609,000. Of this amount, $32,555,000 is to be funded by the park improvement fee imposed by this chapter. The facilities to be funded by the park improvement fee include certain, but not necessarily all, of the facilities identified in the park improvement program. Park and recreation facilities to serve areas where the park improvement fee is not imposed, shall be financed by other sources of revenue.

E.    In order to determine the need for park and recreation facilities created by new residents and jobholders and to spread the cost of such facilities among those who create the need for them, the city conducted various studies. The studies estimated the number and type of park and recreation facilities to meet the needs created by new development and the cost of such facilities. Based upon the studies residential development should bear 85 percent of the cost of the facilities and commercial/industrial development should bear 15 percent of such cost. The fee established by this chapter has been calculated in the manner called for in the studies in order that the impact upon facilities is borne by the type of development causing the same.

F.    The studies indicate that land for park and recreation facilities will be provided by the Quimby Act dedications and in-lieu fees and, except as provided in Section 4.10.030, that the fees established by this chapter will be utilized exclusively to provide facilities. Except in circumstances where the city and the subdivider have entered into a credit and/or reimbursement agreement in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, credit for subdivider installed park and recreation improvements to the dedicated land shall be allowed against the land dedication and/or in-lieu fees required by the Quimby Act and Section 16.32.040.

G.    The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges, or taxes, required by law or city code as a condition of development, including, but not limited to, the residential construction tax levied by Chapter 17.90, capital improvementnew construction service charge levied by Chapter 17.92, drainage fees levied by Chapter 17.95, Quimby Act fees levied by Chapter 16.32 and major road fees levied by Chapter 12.04.

H.    The fee established by this chapter is to be collected for park and recreation facilities for which an account shall be established and funds appropriated, and for which a proposed construction schedule shall be adopted.

I.    The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to payment of the fee on building permits would jeopardize residents of the community, in that it would permit construction and development to proceed without adequate park and recreation facilities or means of financing such facilities.

J.    The fee imposed by this chapter is necessary in order to assure compliance with the applicable general plan requirements that new development bear the cost for park and recreation infrastructure which is needed to serve such development.

K.    That for a period of greater than 10 days prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, data has been available to the public, and to developers and their representatives, indicating the cost or estimated cost of all the facilities to be funded, the revenue sources anticipated, and the method of spreading these costs.

L.    That the city council has considered the effect of the fee imposed by this chapter with respect to the housing needs of the city as a whole and of the region, particularly as required by the housing element of the general plan, and the city council finds that this chapter does not unduly adversely affect the citys ability to provide for such needs. (Ord. 880  2(2), 1997; Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.030 Establishment and administration of park fund.
The finance director is directed to establish a special fund entitled the park improvement fund. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the fund and shall be expended solely to finance the planning, construction and development of the facilities. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the temporary use of park improvement fees for the acquisition of parkland serving the area from which the fees were collected, provided the fees shall be repaid from Quimby Act in-lieu fees at such times, at such interest and upon such terms and conditions as shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.040 Payment of park fee.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a structure which is subject to this chapter. Calculation of the fee has been determined in accordance with the studies and this chapter depending upon the type of residential development or the size extent of commercial or industrial development. (Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.050 Amount of park fee.
The fee shall be:

Land Use Category

Amount of Fee

Residential, single-family dwelling

$2,023 per dwelling unit

Residential, multiple-family dwelling

1,736 per dwelling unit

Commercial/industrial

.25/sq. ft. of building area.

(Ord. 880  2(3), 1997; Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.060 Exempt development.
A.    No fee shall be charged for the following developments or projects:

1.    Completed structures;

2.    Structures under construction for which a valid building permit is in force upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

3.    Construction within a subdivision which is covered by a development agreement entered into between the developer and the city under Government Code Section 65864 et seq., which agreement is in full force and effect and expressly prohibits the imposition of additional park and recreation fees.

B.    If any residential structure in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy to the extent of more than one-half the value thereof, any rebuilding after the date of such destruction shall not be subject to the fee imposed by the chapter provided the area of such structure is not increased by more than 10 percent. For the purposes of this chapter, the value shall be determined by the city building inspector based upon the cost of replacement.

C.    Additions to existing commercial or industrial structures shall be subject to the fee established by the chapter. (Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.070 Fee adjustments.
A.    The developer of any project subject to the fee established by this chapter may apply to the director for a reduction or adjustment to the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the project and either the amount of the fee or the facilities to be financed by the fee. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director not later than 20 calendar days after notification of the amount of the fee. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed reduction or adjustment. The director shall consider the application and render his/her decision in writing not later than 45 calendar days after the filing of the fee adjustment request. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director may, within 20 calendar days thereafter, appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall consider such appeals within 45 calendar days after filing. The decision of the city council shall be final. No building permit shall be issued for the project until the final decision pursuant to this section has been made. No application for a project shall be considered final or complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920, et seq.), or any other purpose, until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made.

B.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A, a project proponent or applicant may pay the fee under protest and receive a building permit. An application for reduction or adjustment pursuant to subsection A shall be filed within 10 calendar days after payment under protest and if not so filed, any objection shall be deemed waived. If a reduction or adjustment is received after payment pursuant this subsection is made, a refund to the applicant shall be made of the amount by which the fee is reduced or adjusted.

C.    The project proponent or applicant applying for a reduction or adjustment shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a reasonable relationship or nexus is lacking between the fee, or the facilities to be financed by the fee, and the particular project.

D.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject to then owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.080 Inflationary adjustments.
The fee established by this chapter shall automatically be adjusted each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the change in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost index. The determination shall be reported in writing to the city council by the director as soon as the information is available. The city council shall forthwith make such adjustment by resolution. (Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.090 Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.
When the moneys in the park improvement fund are disbursed for use, the fees shall be used to finance the planning, acquisition, construction and development of the facilities. To the extent sufficient fees are available, all facilities financed by the fees shall be constructed or acquired in accordance with the priorities established or to be established by the city council after considering the capital improvement program as amended from time to time. (Ord. 701  1 (part), 1991)

4.10.100 Authorization of credits.
Whenever a person constructs facilities authorized by this chapter, or environmental mitigation associated with the construction of facilities, which were constructed pursuant to improvement plans approved by the parks and recreation director, then such person may be entitled to a credit against any fees or charges due pursuant to this chapter, subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 880  2(4), 1997)

4.10.110 Amount of credits.
Unless otherwise set forth in this chapter, the amount of credits authorized for the construction of facilities shall be determined by the parks and recreation director based on recent competitive bids, but shall not exceed the actual cost of construction. (Ord. 880  2(5), 1997)

4.10.120 Procedure for credits.
A.    Any person desiring credits for the construction of facilities shall, prior to approval of improvement plans for the facilities, execute an agreement with the city authorizing credits. Agreements for credits in an amount of $25,000 or greater must be approved by the city council. Agreements for credits in an amount less than $25,000 may be approved by the city manager or his/her designee.

B.    Tentative credits shall be allocated prior to the acceptance of facilities, so that they may be subtracted from fees at the time fees are paid. Credits shall be adjusted as necessary at the time the facilities are accepted by the city. The person receiving tentative credits shall agree that if the facilities are not accepted by the city, all tentative credits allocated shall be reimbursed to the city within 60 days of notice of nonacceptance of the facilities. The person receiving tentative credits shall further agree that if tentative credits allocated exceed the final credits, the excess amount shall be reimbursed to the city within 60 days of notice of such amount. (Ord. 880  2(6), 1997)

4.10.130 Apportionment of credits.
A.    Except as set forth in this section, credits shall only be applied against fees and charges due as a result of development or new construction within the subdivision for which the construction of facilities was required or authorized, and credits shall be equally apportioned to all lots within the subdivision. Credit agreements may not otherwise be assigned without the consent of the city council.

B.    Credits may only be apportioned to parcels not within the subdivision if within 30 days from the date that credits are authorized the parks and recreation director determines:

1.    The parcel or parcels on which credit is sought are contiguous holdings of an individual or firm at the time construction of facilities is begun;

2.    Only credits in excess of the amount of the fees which would have been due on such subdivision or parcel and each subsequent unit thereof within such contiguous holding may be apportioned to other contiguous parcels;

3.    The parcel or parcels to which such credits are to be apportioned must be served by the facilities for which credits are authorized;

4.    An agreement has been executed between the owner of the contiguous parcels and the city establishing the amount to be credited to each parcel prior to improvement plan approval for the initial parcel.

C.    When credits are apportioned, the credit amounts shall be based on the rates in effect on the date improvement plans are approved for the parcel to which credits have been apportioned. (Ord. 880  2(7), 1997)

4.10.140 Criteria for reimbursement.
Except where specifically excluded, whenever credits are authorized for the construction of facilities pursuant to this chapter, and the credit amount exceeds the amount of the fees due pursuant to this chapter, the city shall reimburse the person entitled to such credits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 880  2(8), 1997)

4.10.150 Procedure for reimbursement.
Excess credits shall only be reimbursed pursuant to the terms of a reimbursement agreement executed by the city and the person entitled to such credits. (Ord. 880  2(9), 1997)

4.10.160 Reimbursement agreements.
A.    The reimbursement agreement shall include the following terms and conditions:

1.    The amount of excess credit to be reimbursed;

2.    The schedule for such reimbursement. Such schedule shall not exceed 5 years from the date of acceptance of the facilities by the city, unless funds are not available, as determined by the finance director. If funds are not available when reimbursement is due, payment shall be postponed to the following year;

3.    Reimbursement of excess credits of $10,000 or less shall be made within 45 days of the acceptance of the facilities by the city;

4.    No prepayment penalties are allowed;

5.    Interest on the unpaid balance shall be paid annually in December at the net city treasury pool rate for the prior fiscal year. Interest shall not begin to accrue, however, until 90 days after the facilities are accepted by the city;

6.    The reimbursement agreement may only be assigned by a written amendment to the agreement executed by the finance director, the assignor(s) and the assignee(s);

7.    Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, excess credit shall not be reimbursed unless and until the facilities are accepted by the city;

8.    Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, excess credits shall not be reimbursed until all fees and charges required by this chapter have been paid for all parcels on which credit is sought and for all contiguous lots, parcels or real property owned by or recorded as the property of the same person at the time construction of facilities is begun.

B.    Except as authorized by this section, reimbursement agreements must be approved by the city council. If the city council has previously approved a credit agreement with a party, the city manager may approve a reimbursement agreement with the same party if the amount of the reimbursement does not vary from the amount of the credit agreement by more than 10 percent. Reimbursement agreements for amounts less than $25,000 may be approved by the city manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 880  2(10), 1997)

Chapter 4.12
HUMBUG-WILLOW CREEK FEE
Sections:

4.12.010    Purpose.

4.12.020    Definitions.

4.12.030    Establishment and administration of Humbug-Willow Creek fund.

4.12.040    Payment of Humbug-Willow Creek fee.

4.12.050    Amount of Humbug-Willow Creek fee.

4.12.060    Exempt development.

4.12.070    Fee adjustments.

4.12.080    Inflationary adjustments.

4.12.090    Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.

4.12.010 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are as follows:

A.    The General Plan of the city identifies the long- range planning effort to develop the Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway.

B.    New development, and the expansion of existing development within the city, generates additional population and the need for financing the planning and construction of recreational trail, and passive recreational amenities along the Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway.

C.    Analysis of the land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the General Plan makes it possible to estimate the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the population generated by those dwelling units and the square footage of commercial and industrial projects within 400 feet of the Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway. It is therefore possible to arrive at a fee, based on population and employees, which equitably spreads the burden of financing trail and recreation facilities to those who create the need for them and utilize them. It is the intent of this chapter to create such a fee, spreading costs of trail and recreational amenities to those who create the need for such facilities, without generating any surplus to the general fund. It is a further purpose of this chapter to implement the General Plan by assuring that the Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway is financed and provided to serve the future needs of the city.

D.    The Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway master plan has been adopted by the city council.

E.    The Humbug-Willow Creek recreation trail systems development impact fee study estimated the cost for planning, design, land acquisition/easements, contingencies and construction of the trails to be $4,553,912. Of this amount, $2,538,993 is to be funded by the Humbug-Willow Creek fee imposed by this chapter, or other city-approved financial mechanism. The facilities to be funded by the Humbug-Willow Creek fee include certain, but not necessarily all, of the facilities identified in the Humbug-Willow Creek recreation trail systems development impact fee study.

F.    The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charge, or taxes, required by law or City Code as a condition of development, including, but not limited to, the residential construction tax levied by Chapter 17.90, capital improvementnew construction service charge levied by Chapter 17.92, drainage fees levied by Chapter 17.95, Quimby Act fees levied by Chapter 16.32, major road fees levied by Chapter 12.04, and Chapter 4.10, Park Improvement Fee.

G.    The fee established by this chapter is to be collected for Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway development for which an account shall be established and funds appropriated, and for which a proposed construction schedule shall be adopted.

H.    The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to payment of the fee on building permits would jeopardize residents of the community, in that it would permit construction and development to proceed without adequate trail and recreation facilities or means of financing such facilities.

I.    The fee imposed by this chapter is necessary in order to assure compliance with the applicable General Plan requirements that new development bear the cost for recreational trail and recreational facilities which is needed to serve such development.

J.    That for a period of greater than 10 days prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, data has been available to the public, and to developers and their representatives, indicating the cost or estimated cost of all the facilities to be funded, the revenue sources anticipated, and the method of spreading these costs.

K.    That the city council has considered the effect of the fee imposed by this chapter with respect to the housing needs of the city as a whole and of the region, particularly as required by the housing element of the General Plan, and the city council finds that this chapter does not unduly adversely affect the citys ability to provide for such needs. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.020 Definitions.
The following words are defined for purposes of this chapter:

Building permit means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure pursuant to and as defined by the building code.

Dwelling unit means a building or part of a building designed for occupancy as a residence by a family.

Facilities means improvements as identified in the Humbug-Willow Creek master plan such as, but is not limited to, bicycle trails, pedestrian trails, information kiosks, picnic tables, benches, safety lights, signage, etc.

Fee means the fee established by this chapter. The fee shall be collected prior to the issuance of any building permit. The fee shall be used solely to finance the facilities.

Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway means the open space area as depicted on the 1988 General Plan map along Humbug and Willow Creeks, or as determined on a project by project basis.

Plan means the Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway master plan prepared by the community development department. The plan is on file in the city offices of the community development director and the city clerk.

Study means the Humbug-Willow Creek recreational trail system impact fee study dated May 1994 by Economic and Planning Systems. The study is on file in the offices of the community development director and the city clerk. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.030 Establishment and administration of Humbug-Willow Creek fund.
The finance director is directed to establish a special fund entitled the Humbug-Willow Creek fund. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the fund and shall be expended solely to finance the planning, construction and development of the facilities. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.040 Payment of Humbug-Willow Creek fee.
The fee shall be imposed upon all newly constructed residential structures and on industrial, office and commercial structures located within the 400-foot boundary of the Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a structure which is subject to this chapter. Calculation of the fee has been determined in accordance with the studies and this chapter depending upon the type of residential development and the location and size of commercial, office or industrial development. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.050 Amount of Humbug-Willow Creek fee.
The fee shall be established in accordance with a resolution to be adopted by the city council. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.060 Exempt development.
A.    No fee shall be charged for the following developments or projects:

1.    Completed structures;

2.    Structures under construction for which a valid building permit is in force upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

3.    Construction within a subdivision which is covered by a development agreement entered into between the developer and the city under Government Code Section 65864 et seq., which agreement is in full force and effect and expressly prohibits or limits the imposition of Humbug-Willow Creek fees.

B.    If any residential structure in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy to the extent of more than one-half the value thereof, any rebuilding after the date of such destruction shall not be subject to the fee imposed by the chapter provided the area of such structure is not increased by more than 10 percent. For the purposes of this chapter, the value shall be determined by the city building inspector based upon the cost of replacement.

C.    Additions to existing commercial or industrial structures within 400 feet of the Humbug-Willow Creek Parkway shall be subject to the fee established by the chapter. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.070 Fee adjustments.
A.    The developer of any project subject to the fee established by this chapter may apply to the community development director for a reduction or adjustment to the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the project and either the amount of the fee or the facilities to be financed by the fee. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director not later than 20 calendar days after notification of the amount of the fee. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed reduction or adjustment. The director shall consider the application and render his/her decision in writing not later than 45 calendar days after the filing of the fee adjustment request. Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the director may, within 20 calendar days thereafter, appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall consider such appeals within 45 calendar days after filing. The decision of the city council shall be final. No building permit shall be issued for the project until the final decision pursuant to this section has been made. No application for a project shall be considered final or complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920 et seq.), or any other purpose, until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made.

B.    Notwithstanding the provision of subsection A of this section, a project proponent or applicant may pay the fee under protest and receive a building permit. An application for reduction or adjustment pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be filed with 10 calendar days after payment under protest and if not so filed, any objection shall be deemed waived. If a reduction or adjustment is received after payment pursuant this subsection is made, a refund to the applicant shall be made of the amount by which the fee is reduced or adjusted.

C.    The project proponent or applicant applying for a reduction or adjustment shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a reasonable relationship or nexus is lacking between the fee or the facilities to be financed by the fee, and the particular project.

D.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall be subject to the owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.080 Inflationary adjustments.
The fee established by this chapter shall automatically be adjusted each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the change in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the finance director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost index. The determination shall be reported in writing to the city council by the director as soon as the information is available. The city council shall to the forthwith make such adjustment by resolution. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

4.12.090 Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.
When the moneys in the Humbug-Willow Creek fund are expended, the fees shall be used to finance the planning, acquisition, construction and development of the facilities. To the extent sufficient fees are available, all facilities financed by the fees shall be constructed or acquired in accordance with the priorities established by the city council. (Ord. 797  1 (part), 1994)

Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses

5.09    Residential Garage Sales

5.12    Taxicabs

5.15    Bingo Games

5.20    Cardrooms

5.21    Adult Related Businesses

5.25    Rules and Regulations for Massage Establishments and Massage Therapists and Practitioners

5.50    Cable Television Franchises

5.75    Cable Television Licensing

5.80    Permits for Motion Picture, Television and Commercial Film Production

5.90    Entertainment Permit

5.100    Large Family Day Care Home

Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES
Sections:

5.04.010    Definitions.

5.04.020    Revenue measure only.

5.04.030    Effect on other ordinances.

5.04.040    Administration of chapterPowers of collector.

5.04.050    EnforcementViolationRemedies.

5.04.055    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

5.04.060    Business license certificate required.

5.04.070    Business license tax imposed.

5.04.080    Business without fixed place of business in city.

5.04.090    Branch establishments.

5.04.100    Constitutional apportionment.

5.04.110    Exemptions.

5.04.120    ExemptionsProcedure for claiming.

5.04.130    Issuance of business license certificateContents.

5.04.140    Application for business license certificateFirst certificate.

5.04.150    Application for business license certificateRenewal.

5.04.160    ApplicationSworn statementConclusiveness.

5.04.170    Business license certificateValidity.

5.04.180    Business license certificateRevocation.

5.04.190    Business license certificateWithheld.

5.04.200    Business license certificate not transferable.

5.04.210    Business license certificatesDuplicates.

5.04.220    Business license certificatesPosting and keeping.

5.04.230    Records.

5.04.240    RecordsConfidentiality.

5.04.250    Failure to obtain business license certificate or to file statement or corrected statement.

5.04.260    Appeals.

5.04.270    CollectorAdditional powers.

5.04.280    Business license taxWhen payable.

5.04.290    Business license taxDelinquencies and penalties.

5.04.300    Business license taxRefunds.

5.04.310    Prior license certificates and taxesExemptions and continuing obligation.

5.04.320    Business license taxEstablishment of rates.

5.04.330    Business license taxStatutory public meeting.

5.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given by this section, unless otherwise specifically provided:

Business means any business, commercial enterprise, trade, calling, vocation, profession, or any means of livelihood whether or not carried on for gain or profit.

Business license certificate, or certificate, means the receipt given by the collector which indicates that the tax imposed by this chapter has been paid.

City means the city of Folsom, a municipal corporation, in the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

Collector means the finance director or his or her designee.

Engaged in business, carrying on business or transacting business, herein used interchangeably, means commencing, conducting, operating, managing, engaging in or carrying on of a business by any person, whether done as owner or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, servant or lessee of any of them, whether operating from a fixed location in the city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in said activities.

When any person shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other thing of value in the city; or when he shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, newspaper, radio or television, advertise, hold out or represent that he is commencing, engaging in, conducting, operating, managing, carrying on, or soliciting any business in the city; or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating he is in business in the city and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement that he is conducting a business in the city, after having been requested to do so by the administrator; then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is conducting or engaging in business in the city.

Gross receipts means the gross receipts of the preceding calendar year or part thereof, and is defined as follows:

The total amount actually received or receivable from all sales; the total amount or compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise; and gains realized from trading in stocks or bonds, interest discounts, rents, royalties, fees, commission, dividends or other emoluments, however designated. Included in gross receipts shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever, except that the following shall be excluded therefrom:

1.    Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

2.    Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold, at which time the sales price shall be included as gross receipts;

3.    Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

4.    Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon recision of a contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;

5.    Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded;

6.    Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages or other payments retained by the agent or trustee;

7.    As to a retail gasoline dealer, the portion of his receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under Part 2 of Division 2 of Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California;

8.    As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United states Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the customer or purchaser;

9.    Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business;

10.    That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors; provided, that such subcontractors are licensed under this chapter, and provided the general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractor and the amounts paid each subcontractor;

11.    As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker.

Itinerant vendor means and includes any person who engages in any of the occupations generally referred to as peddling, hawking, selling as a transient merchant or vending, and includes any person who, as an agent for another or on his own behalf, goes from place to place within the city, selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other thing of value, other than a solicitor as defined in this section. One who engages in the business of selling any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other thing of value from any fixed location within the city for a period of less than ninety days shall be considered an itinerant vendor.

Manufacture or process shall embrace all the activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced. Manufacture includes the production or fabrication of specially made or custom-made articles.

Person includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporation, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies and individuals, transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than strictly as a salaried employee.

Sale or sell means, includes and refers to the making of any transfer of title, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, to tangible personal property or other property for a consideration; and to the serving, supplying or furnishing, for a consideration, of any tangible personal property or other property fabricated or made at the special order of consumers who do or do not furnish directly or indirectly the specification therefor. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in, a sale within the contemplation of law. Sale includes both wholesale and retail sales and sales by vending machines dispensing tangible personal property.

Solicitor means any person who goes from residence to residence or place to place within the city selling or offering to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other thing of value for future delivery; or any person who by telephone or by mail or by any other means sells or offers to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other thing of value for future delivery.

Sworn statement means a written statement, declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury.

Utility or public utility means any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, heat or power, subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

Valid certificate means a certificate which complies with all the requirements of this chapter, and any certificate which does not comply with these requirements shall not be deemed to be a valid certificate for the purposes of this chapter or any other purpose. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.020 Revenue measure only.
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any other tax or fee which may be imposed by any other provision of this code or other ordinance or resolution of the city. The taxes imposed by this chapter are not property related and are not imposed as an incident of property ownership. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997)

5.04.030 Effect on other ordinances.
The payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, and its acceptance by the city, and the issuance of a certificate to any person, shall not entitle that person to carry on the business so licensed unless that person complies with all other applicable laws of the city or to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in the certificate if such building or premises is situated in a zone in which the conduct of such business is not allowed. The payment of such tax and its acceptance by the city and the issuance of a certificate shall in no way relieve the taxpayer from compliance with all applicable laws of the city, nor shall it be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.040 Administration of chapterPowers of collector.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive.

B.    This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of finance or his or her designee acting as the collector.

C.    The collector may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to supplement or clarify such provisions or aid in their enforcement. When, by reason of the provision of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of California, the business tax imposed by this chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the city, or in the state, as the case may be, the collector may make such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary or desirable to overcome the constitutional objections.

D.    The determination of the type or class of business or businesses a taxpayer is engaged in or about to engage in shall be an administrative function of the collector. In cases where a taxpayer believes he or she is placed in the wrong business or class of business or businesses, he or she may apply in writing to the collector for a change in classification setting forth in full the reason for requesting such change. The collector shall conduct an investigation and shall thereupon render a decision in writing as to the proper classification or classifications. If the taxpayer is aggrieved by the collectors decision, he or she shall have the right of appeal to the city manager under Section 5.04.260.

E.    The collector shall have such other powers as are set out in this chapter or as may be prescribed by the city council. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997)

5.04.050 EnforcementViolationRemedies.
A.    The collector shall have the authority to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time-to-time be required by the city manager. Each department of the city which issues permits or entitlements of use shall require the production of a valid unexpired certificate prior to issuance of such permit. The immediate preceding sentence shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a certificate prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state.

B.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to the enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of the provisions of this chapter or the knowing or intentional misrepresentation of a material fact to any officer or employee of the city in procuring the certificate herein provided for shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 6 months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

C.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

D.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in Section 5.04.050(B), based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be subject to the following financial sanctions.

1.    Except for a failure to pay a business license tax when due, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a level C violation as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(3).

2.    The financial penalty for the failure to pay a business license tax shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.290.

E.    The conviction and punishment of any person for engaging in any business without a valid certificate shall not relieve such person from paying taxes and penalties due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any tax or penalty prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed in this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

F.    Any sum required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city, and any person who engages in any business without first obtaining and paying for a valid certificate as required by this chapter shall be liable in an action by and in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of any such sum. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997: Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.055 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the director of finance shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Section 1.09.023. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997)

5.04.060 Business license certificate required.
It is unlawful for any person to commence, transact, engage in or carry on any business, trade, profession, calling, occupation or gainful activity within the city without first having obtained a valid business license certificate and having paid the business license tax imposed and prescribed by this chapter, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.070 Business license tax imposed.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, there are imposed upon all business, trades, professions, callings, occupations and gainful activities engaged in or carried on in the city, business license taxes in the amounts prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.080 Business without fixed place of business in city.
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city shall be required to pay the business license tax at the same rate prescribed in this chapter for persons engaged in the same type of business and conducting that business from place of business within the city. Where the application of the business license tax rate on the proportion of the taxable events occurring in the city produces a tax due amount which is below the minimum tax limit, the matter is de minimus and no tax payment is due. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.090 Branch establishments.
A separate business license certificate must be obtained for each branch of a business where activities of such business are transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each certificate shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such certificate; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments; and provided further, that any person conducting two or more types of businesses who uses a single set or integrated set of books and records, may, at his or her option, pay only one tax which shall be the tax that applies to the type of business of such person which requires the highest tax-payment, except that a business license tax of $10 for each additional branch or location shall be paid upon issuance. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.100 Constitutional apportionment.
A.    None of the business license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States and the state.

B.    In any case where a business license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed business license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his method of business and estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The collector shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the tax to be charged, the collector shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of the tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicants business in the city or at the end of each 3-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license tax therefor; provided, that no additional business license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual business license tax as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.110 Exemptions.
A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state from the payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed.

B.    The following persons, organizations and activities are exempt from payment of the business license tax:

1.    Business conducted by a charitable, nonprofit or eleemosynary corporation, association or organization if the net proceeds of the business are used exclusively by such corporation, association or organization for a purpose which would qualify as a charitable deduction under Section 1772214 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state if the net proceeds were received as a gift by the organization;

2.    The conduct of entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects, whenever the receipts are for a religious, educational or charitable purpose;

3.    The conduct of entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by a religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, amateur theatrical group, military, state, county or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts are for the purpose and objects for which the organization or association is formed, and from which profit is not derived, directly or indirectly, by any individual;

4.    A person doing business whose gross receipts do not exceed the maximum income allowed by U.S. law to persons drawing full Social Security benefits as provided by Title 42, U.S. Code, Section 403(f)(3), as presently written or as amended;

5.    A disabled veteran holding an honorable discharge from a branch of the military service of the United states who is physically unable to earn a living by manual labor and who engages in itinerant vending or soliciting. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.120 ExemptionsProcedure for claiming.
A.    Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to Section 5.04.110B shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. In the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter.

B.    The collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a business license certificate to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the business license tax required by this chapter.

C.    The collector, after issuing a notice to correct as required by Section 5.04.055, may revoke any certificate granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. The licensee shall be entitled to an administrative hearing and judicial review pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997; Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.130 Issuance of business license certificateContents.
A.    All business license certificates shall be issued by the collector upon submission of a completed application and payment of the prescribed business license tax.

B.    The certificate shall contain the following information:

1.    The name of the person to whom the certificate is issued;

2.    The business licensed;

3.    The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

4.    The date of expiration of such certificate;

5.    The following statement: This license is issued without verification that the licensee is subject to or exempt from licensing by the state of California;

6.    Such information as my be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; and

7.    A copy of the retail sales tax certificate where applicable.

C.    Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the business license tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the collector shall issue only one certificate; provided, that he may issue for each tax period for which the business license tax has been paid, one sticker, tag, plate or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.140 Application for business license certificateFirst certificate.
A.    A person making application for the first certificate to be issued hereunder, or for a newly established business, or for a new ownership of a previously established business, shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information:

1.    The exact nature or kind of business for which a certificate is requested;

2.    The place where such business is to be carried on and, if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residence of the owners of same;

3.    In the event that application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning the business;

4.    In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names of residences of the officers or partners thereof;

5.    In all cases where the amount of the business license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, or by the number of machines or vehicles or other devices, the application shall set forth such information as may be required to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by applicant;

6.    Any further information which the collector may require to enable him to issue the type of certificate applied for.

B.    If the amount of the business license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, the applicant shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the certificate to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of tax so determined shall be tentative only and such person shall, within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which the certificate was issued, furnish the collector with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the collector, showing the gross receipts during the period of such certificate and the business license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal taxes for other businesses after deducting from the payment found to be due the amount paid at the time such first certificate was issued.

C.    The collector shall not issue to any person another certificate for the same or any other business until such person shall have furnished to him the sworn statement and paid the license tax as herein required. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.150 Application for business license certificateRenewal.
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a business license certificate shall submit to the collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the business license tax to be paid by the applicant, a sworn statement upon a form to be provided by the collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicants business during the preceding year as may be required by the collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the business license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.160 ApplicationSworn statementConclusiveness.
No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector or authorized employees of the city who are authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for a certificate as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of business license tax due, and who may demand that the licensee or applicant file a corrected statement. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.170 Business license certificateValidity.
A certificate shall be valid only after collectors stamp or endorsement has been affixed thereto indicating payment has been received of the amount of the tax penalties thereon, if any. A certificate, however, which has been paid for by a check or bank draft which subsequently dishonored by the bank upon which it was drawn shall not be a valid certificate even though the collectors stamp or endorsement appears thereon, and the person operating the business for which the certificate was issued shall be deemed to be operating without a valid certificate and shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter for so operating. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.180 Business license certificateRevocation.
A.    Any certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be canceled for the following reasons:

1.    A material false statement contained in the application;

2.    Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

B.    Prior to taking any action to cancel any certificate issued pursuant to this chapter, the director of finance shall issue a notice to correct as provided for in Section 5.04.055. If the violation is not corrected within the time specified, or if the violation is not capable of correction, the director of finance shall cause the issuance of a notice of administrative violation. The procedures set forth in Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code shall thereafter govern the proceedings for revocation of the certificate.

C.    The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final and any further rights to appeal shall be governed by the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.052. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997)

5.04.190 Business license certificateWithheld.
A.    The collector shall not issue a certificate to any person for conducting any business while there is pending any action under this chapter against the person as the holder of any certificate at the same location until such action has been concluded.

B.    No certificate for any ensuing current or unexpired period shall knowingly be issued or renewed to any person who at the time of making application therefor is indebted to the city for any unpaid business license tax.

C.    If any person shall have upon two or more occasions made payment for his certificate with a check which was returned by the bank upon which it was drawn because of insufficient funds, the collector may thereafter require that such person make payment of his business license tax by cash payment or by money order or certified check.

D.    The collector shall not renew any business license certificate if the holder of the certificate failed to satisfy in full an administrative penalty imposed pursuant to a notice of administrative violation or a final order of an administrative hearing officer or court, if such order exists. If the collector determines that an administrative penalty remains unpaid at the time for mailing a renewal notice and there is no appeal pending, the collector shall state in the renewal notice that the renewal will not be accepted unless the full administrative penalty is paid in full at or before the time of renewal. The person or entity may seek review of this determination through the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.052. However, any such appeal shall be limited to a review of whether the administrative penalty has in fact been paid. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997; Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.200 Business license certificate not transferable.
No certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a certificate is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee of $5, have the license amended to authorize, the transacting and carrying on of such business under the certificate at some other location to which the business is to be moved. Provided, further, that transfer whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person, are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.210 Business license certificatesDuplicates.
A duplicate business license certificate may be issued by the collector to replace any certificate previously issued thereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing a statement and paying the collector a duplicate certificate fee of $5. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.220 Business license certificatesPosting and keeping.
A.    Any licensee, transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city, shall keep the certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

B.    Any licensee, transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city, shall keep the certificate upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued.

C.    Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a business license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment, the identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment in use during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is issued.

D.    No person shall fail to affix, as required herein, any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment for which it has been issued at the location designated by the collector.

E.    No person shall give away, sell or transfer any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol, referred to above, to another person or permit its use by another person. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.230 Records.
All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, expenditures, and any other records and data relevant to establishing and verifying the tax liability under this chapter. Such persons shall retain all such records for examination by the collector for a period of at least 3 years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the collector to examine the records at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.240 RecordsConfidentiality.
The collector or any authorized employee of the city shall not make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a business license certificate and to pay a business license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A.    The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee or agent for the collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

B.    The disclosure of information to, or the examining of records by, federal or state officials or the tax officials of another city or country if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena;

C.    The disclosure of information and the results of the examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to such taxpayers, or to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city;

D.    The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in his opinion, the public interest would suffer thereby;

E.    The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom business license certificates have been issued and the general type or nature of their business;

F.    The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of taxes or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted by the city for taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;

G.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.250 Failure to obtain business license certificate or to file statement or corrected statement.
A.    If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed or if, after demand therefor made by the collector, fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to apply for and obtain a certificate, the collector may determine the amount of business license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.

B.    If the collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in applications or statements filed, he may determine the amount of any business license tax due by means of any information he may be able to obtain.

C.    If such a determination is made, the collector shall give notice of the amount so assessed on a notice of administrative violation, as defined in Section 1.08.020. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997; Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.260 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the determination of the amount of a business license tax, or the issuance or refusal to issue, or cancellation of any business license certificate may file a request for administrative hearing with the city clerk within 15 days after notice of the decision of the collector. The hearing shall be governed in all respects by the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.030 to 1.09.049. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final, and subject only to further judicial review as allowed for in Sections 1.09.050 to 1.09.052. (Ord. 875  2 (part), 1997)

5.04.270 CollectorAdditional powers.
In addition to all other power conferred, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding 30 days and, in such case, to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, except that 7 percent simple interest shall be added to any tax determined to be payable. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.280 Business license taxWhen payable.
A.    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual business license taxes under provision of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year; provided, that business license taxes covering new operations commenced after the first day of April may be prorated for the balance of the tax period.

B.    Except as otherwise herein provided, business license taxes, other than annual taxes, required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows:

1.    Semiannual taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of July and the first day of January of each year;

2.    Quarterly taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of July, October, January and April of each year;

3.    Monthly taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of each and every month;

4.    Weekly flat rate taxes on Monday of each week;

5.    Daily flat rate taxes each day;

6.    Other flat rate taxes are payable on the first day of business and, thereafter, on the first day of any applicable period. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.290 Business license taxDelinquencies and penalties.
For failure to pay a business license tax when due the collector shall add a penalty of ten percent of the license tax on the first day of each month after the due date thereof; provided, that the total amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed 50 percent of the amount of the business license tax due. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.300 Business license taxRefunds.
No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by this chapter shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the collector within a period of 3 years from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made and all such claims for refund of the amount of the overpayment must be filed with the collector on forms furnished by him and in the manner prescribed by him. Upon the filing of such a claim and upon the determination by the collector that an overpayment has been made, he shall refund the amount overpaid. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.310 Prior license certificates and taxesExemptions and continuing obligation.
A.    Adoption of the ordinance enacting this chapter shall not relieve any person from any obligation or liability for payment to the city of a license tax arising under Folsom City Ordinance No. 315 or any other ordinance heretofore enacted by the city, and the obligation or liability shall continue.

B.    Where a business license for revenue purposes has been issued to any person by the city upon payment of a license tax pursuant to Folsom City Ordinance No. 315 or any other ordinance heretofore enacted by the city, and the period of time for which the license was issued and the tax was paid has not expired, the business license tax prescribed for said person by this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of said period of time. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.320 Business license taxEstablishment of rates.
The amount of the business license tax shall be set annually by council resolution in April. In making the annual revision of the business license tax, the city may change the tax rates set in the prior year by percentage change in the consumer price index for the prior 12-month period ending in March of the current year. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

5.04.330 Business license taxStatutory public meeting.
Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 54994.2, 54994.1, the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in said Government Code Sections 54994.2, 54994.1 and 6062a and the city council periodically, and at least annually, shall receive at a public regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning the change in the business license tax rates. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public hearing shall be provided by the city council prior to taking any action on the proposed change to the business license tax rates. At least 1 such public hearing shall be held annually at the second regular council meeting in April. (Ord. 762  2 (part), 1993)

Chapter 5.09
RESIDENTIAL GARAGE SALES
Sections:

5.09.010    Scope.

5.09.015    Definition.

5.09.020    Limitations.

5.09.030    Signs.

5.09.040    Enforcement.

5.09.045    Penalties.

5.09.050    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

5.09.010 Scope.
This chapter shall regulate the conduct of any and all sales conducted on the exterior of a residential structure, or on a residential lot including, but not limited to, sales conducted in a garage or on the front, side or back yard. (Ord. 875  4 (part), 1997)

5.09.015 Definition.
Garage sale means and includes any and all sales conducted in the garage, carport or similar area on a residential structure or conducted on the exterior of a residential structure including, but not limited to, sales held on the front, side or back yard. (Ord. 875  4 (part), 1997)

5.09.020 Limitations.
A.    No garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises by any person for more than three consecutive days in a residential neighborhood or in an area permitting a residential use.

B.    Not more than two garage sales shall be held or conducted on the same premises in any one calendar year. (Ord. 875  4 (part), 1997)

5.09.030 Signs.
A.    Signs advertising garage sales shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.59.

B.    Enforcement procedures concerning signs advertising garage sales shall be governed by this chapter. (Ord. 875  4 (part), 1997)

5.09.040 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive.

B.    The code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 875  4 (part), 1997)

5.09.045 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    The fine for a first violation of this chapter shall be thirty-five dollars. Thereafter, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, each violation of this chapter in the succeeding twelve-month period shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a subsequent violation of this chapter shall be set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(1). (Ord. 875  4 (part), 1997)

5.09.050 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the code enforcement officer shall follow the procedures set forth in Articles II and III of Chapter 1.09. The rights to judicial review set forth in Article IV of Chapter 1.09 shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, for violations of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 875  4 (part), 1997)

Chapter 5.12
TAXICABS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

5.12.100    Administration of chapter.

5.12.102    Definitions.

Article II. Taxicab Company Permits

5.12.200    Taxicab company permit required.

5.12.202    Taxicab company permit denial.

5.12.204    Taxicab company permit revocation.

5.12.206    Duration of taxicab company permitsDuty to update information.

Article III. Driver Permits

5.12.300    Taxicab driver permit required.

5.12.302    Taxicab driver permit denial.

5.12.304    Driver permit revocation.

5.12.306    Duration of taxicab driver permitsDuty to update information.

Article IV. Administrative Appeals

5.12.400    Appeals.

Article V. Fees

5.12.500    Permit feesCompany permit, driver permit.

Article VI. Operational Requirements

5.12.600    Taxicab labeling.

5.12.602    Prominent display of permits.

5.12.604    Direct routes.

5.12.606    Receipt.

5.12.608    Solicitation.

5.12.610    Compliance with all laws.

5.12.612    Condition of taxicab.

5.12.614    Rates.

5.12.616    Taxicab stands.

Article VII. Enforcement

5.12.700    Exemption.

5.12.702    Transfer of permit prohibited.

5.12.704    Enforcement.

5.12.706    Penalties.

5.12.708    Administrative violation enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

5.12.710    Criminal penalties.

5.12.712    Attorneys fees and enforcement costs.

5.12.714    Remedies cumulative.

5.12.716    Effect on existing lawful taxicab operations.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

5.12.100 Administration of chapter.
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police, in consultation with other city departments as deemed appropriate by the chief of police. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.102 Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings as used in this chapter. Words not defined shall be interpreted based on their common and ordinary usage.

A.    Advertisement includes, but is not limited to, the issuance of any card, sign, or device to any person, the causing, permitting, or allowing the placement of any sign or marking on or in any building or structure, or in any media form, including newspaper, magazine, radiowave, satellite signal, or any electronic transmission, or in any directory soliciting taxicab transportation services subject to this chapter.

B.    Applicant means a person applying for a taxicab company permit and/or a taxicab driver permit.

C.    Chief of police means the chief of the police department of the city or his/her designee.

D.    City means the city of Folsom.

E.    Driver means any person who drives, operates, or controls the movements of a taxicab within the city.

F.    Person means any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, company, or corporation.

G.    Public works director means the director of the public works department of the city or his/her designee.

H.    Taxicab means a motor-propelled vehicle capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire in the city, irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundaries of the city. The term taxicab does not include the following:

1.    A vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state agency, or any vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission.

2.    A vehicle operated solely by means of human propulsion or powered by manual labor, including, but not limited to, pedal cabs or pedicabs.

I.    Taxicab company means any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, company, corporation, or public entity that operates taxicab services of any kind within the city.

J.    Taxicab company permit means a valid permit issued by the city authorizing a taxicab company to operate a taxicab business in the city.

K.    Taxicab driver permit means a valid permit issued by the city authorizing a person to drive, operate, or control the movements of a taxicab.

L.    Taximeter means any instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed or intended to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the time the vehicle is in waiting, and to indicate upon such record by figures or designs the fare to be charged in dollars and cents. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

Article II. Taxicab Company Permits

5.12.200 Taxicab company permit required.
A.    Unless otherwise exempt under Section 5.12.700, no person shall operate a taxicab company within the city without a valid taxicab company permit issued by the chief of police. Applications for taxicab company permits shall be made to the chief of police on forms prescribed by the chief of police. No taxicab company permit shall be issued unless all of the following minimum requirements have been satisfied:

1.    The applicant has submitted the names, addresses, telephone numbers, including emergency telephone number(s), and recent color photographs of all owners, partners or principal officers of the taxicab company.

2.    The applicant has submitted a copy of the applicants controlled substance and alcohol testing certification policy and proof that the applicant has implemented a controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program covering all of its drivers (whether employees or independent contractors) operating vehicles on behalf of or in association with the applicant in compliance with state and federal law, including, but not limited to the standards set forth at Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3).

3.    The applicant has submitted evidence of insurance, in full force and effect, in such form as approved by the city attorney, issued by a solvent and responsible company authorized and licensed to do business in the state of California, insuring the applicant against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons, including taxicab passengers, or property, from the negligent operation or maintenance of such taxicab. The applicant shall provide evidence of insurance to the satisfaction of the city showing that the applicant is insured for a minimum combined single limit of three hundred fifty thousand dollars for the injury or death of one or more persons in the same accident, and one hundred thousand dollars for injury or destruction of property.

4.    The applicant has submitted a list of all taxicabs to be operated by the taxicab company, as well as proof of current California Department of Motor Vehicles registration for each taxicab listed in the taxicab company permit application. All taxicabs listed in the taxicab company permit application shall be registered to the applicant.

5.    The applicant has submitted proof that every owner, partner, manager or principal officer of the applicant has submitted to fingerprinting and a criminal background check by the Folsom police department and has successfully cleared such background check by the Folsom police department.

6.    The applicant has submitted payment of all applicable fees for the issuance of a taxicab company permit.

7.    The applicant has submitted a list of all prior permits issued, suspended and/or revoked for operation of a taxicab company or similar business in any jurisdiction, foreign or domestic.

8.    The applicant has submitted such additional information as the chief of police deems reasonably necessary for the chief of police to make a determination of the propriety of the issuance of the taxicab company permit.

9.    The applicant has submitted the serial number of the taximeter attached to each of the taxicabs and a certificate or other written evidence that the Sacramento County agricultural commissioner, a state-registered device repairman, or state-certified employee has tested and certified not more than eleven months preceding the application date the accuracy of each taximeter attached to the taxicab.

10.    The applicant has submitted a written schedule of all rates to be charged for the hire of the taxicab.

B.    Applications shall be signed by the applicant(s) attesting to the accuracy of the application under penalty of perjury. All owners, partners, managers and principal officers of a taxicab company shall be applicants for the taxicab company permit.

C.    Each applicant for a taxicab company permit shall be subject to review and a criminal background check by the Folsom police department. (Ord. 1163  2, 2012; Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.202 Taxicab company permit denial.
A taxicab company permit shall be denied by the chief of police if any of the following apply to the applicant, which shall include any owner, partner, manager or principal officer of the applicants taxicab company:

A.    The applicant is under the age of eighteen years.

B.    The applicant falsifies material information on the application.

C.    The applicant is a registered sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290, et seq.

D.    The applicant has ever been convicted (or pleaded guilty or nolo contendere) of a felony in any jurisdiction, whether foreign or domestic, for any of the following crimes: assault; battery; murder; theft; burglary; robbery; rape; pandering; pimping; crimes related to the sale or transportation of controlled substances, including marijuana; or crimes of violence.

E.    The applicant has been convicted (or pleaded guilty or nolo contendere) of a misdemeanor in any jurisdiction, whether foreign or domestic, or any offense involving moral turpitude or any offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or responsibilities of a taxicab company operator or taxicab driver within five years prior to the submission of the application.

F.    The applicant had a permit for the operation of a taxicab, a taxicab company, or similar transportation business suspended or revoked by any jurisdiction within five years prior to the submission of the application.

G.    The applicant has been held liable under any judgment, decision or determination by any court, public or regulatory agency for operating taxicabs without the required insurance within five years prior to the submission of the application.

H.    The applicant is subject to any unsatisfied court judgment arising from liability for operating a taxicab or a taxicab company, including, but not limited to, collisions or operating without the requisite insurance, within five years prior to the submission of the application.

I.    The applicant has operated a taxicab without a taximeter that has been properly sealed by the Sacramento County agricultural commissioner or similar official in any county or state, a state-registered device repairman, or a state-certified employee within five years prior to the submission of the application.

J.    The applicant has failed to submit all of the required information under Section 5.12.200. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.204 Taxicab company permit revocation.
A.    The chief of police may revoke any taxicab company permit should any event occur that would be grounds for denial of a taxicab company permit.

B.    Prior to the revocation of any taxicab company permit, the chief of police shall provide the taxicab company permit holder(s) with not less than ten days notice of intent to revoke the permit, specifying the grounds for the proposed revocation, and specifying a date, time and location at which the applicant shall have an opportunity to meet with the chief of police and present all evidence and materials as to why the taxicab company permit should not be revoked.

C.    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, transfer or sale of a taxicab company permit to a taxicab company or person other than that identified in the permit application shall cause immediate revocation of said permit. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.206 Duration of taxicab company permitsDuty to update information.
Taxicab company permits shall be valid from the date of issuance until June 30th of each year, subject to renewal upon satisfaction of the conditions for the issuance of a new taxicab company permit and payment of any renewal fee. Each taxicab company permit holder shall have an affirmative duty to update the city in writing within ten days of any change of information on the taxicab company permit application. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

Article III. Driver Permits

5.12.300 Taxicab driver permit required.
A.    Unless otherwise exempt under Section 5.12.700, no person shall drive, operate or control a taxicab without a valid taxicab driver permit issued by the chief of police. Applications for taxicab driver permits shall be made to the chief of police on forms prescribed by the chief of police. No taxicab driver permit shall be issued unless all of the following minimum requirements have been satisfied:

1.    The applicant has provided his/her full name, address, telephone number, including emergency telephone number(s), date of birth, and recent color photograph of himself/herself.

2.    The applicant has provided his/her place of residence for five years preceding the date of the application.

3.    The applicant has provided a copy of his/her valid California driver license.

4.    The applicant has provided proof of employment or an offer of employment with a taxicab company (which may include self employment with the taxicab company as an owner/operator or as an independent driver), and the applicant has provided his/her place of previous employment for five years preceding the date of his/her application.

5.    The applicant has submitted proof that he/she has submitted to fingerprinting and a criminal background check by the Folsom police department and has successfully cleared such background check by the Folsom police department.

6.    The applicant has submitted payment of all applicable fees for the issuance of a taxicab driver permit.

7.    The applicant has submitted a list of all prior permits issued, suspended and/or revoked, for operation of a taxicab in any jurisdiction, foreign or domestic.

8.    The applicant has provided evidence of insurance coverage for the operation of the taxicab in forms and amounts as specified for a taxicab company permit pursuant to Section 5.12.200(A)(3).

9.    The applicant has submitted such additional information as the chief of police deems reasonably necessary for the chief of police to make a determination of the propriety of the issuance of the taxicab driver permit.

B.    Applications shall be signed by the applicant attesting to the accuracy of the application under penalty of perjury.

C.    Each applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall be subject to review and a criminal background check by the Folsom police department. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.302 Taxicab driver permit denial.
A taxicab driver permit shall be denied by the chief of police if any of the following apply:

A.    The applicant is under the age of eighteen years.

B.    The applicant falsifies material information on the application.

C.    The applicant is a registered sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290, et seq.

D.    The applicant has ever been convicted (or plead guilty or nolo contendere) of a felony in any jurisdiction, whether foreign or domestic, for any of the following crimes: assault; battery; murder; theft; burglary; robbery; rape; pandering; pimping; crimes related to the sale or transportation of controlled substances, including marijuana; or crimes of violence.

E.    The applicant has been convicted (or plead guilty or nolo contendere) of a misdemeanor in any jurisdiction, whether foreign or domestic, or any offense involving moral turpitude or any offense that that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or responsibilities of a taxicab driver within five years prior to the submission of the application.

F.    The chief of police may deny a permit based on the applicants conviction in any jurisdiction, whether foreign or domestic, of suspension or revocation of a driver license, driving under the influence of an intoxicating and/or controlled substance or beverage, and/or conviction of two or more moving violations within a one-year period within five years prior to the submission of the application.

G.    The applicant had a permit for the operation of a taxicab or a taxicab company suspended or revoked in any jurisdiction within five years prior to the submission of the application.

H.    The applicant has been held liable under any judgment, decision or determination by any court, public or regulatory agency for operating taxicabs without the required insurance within five years prior to the submission of the application.

I.    The applicant is subject to any unsatisfied court judgment arising from liability for operating a taxicab or a taxicab company, including, but not limited to, collisions or operating without the requisite insurance, within five years prior to the submission of the application.

J.    The applicant has operated a taxicab without a taximeter that has been properly sealed by the Sacramento County agricultural commissioner or similar official in any county or state, a state-registered device repairman, or a state-certified employee within five years prior to the submission of the application.

K.    The applicant has failed to submit all of the required information under Section 5.12.300. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.304 Driver permit revocation.
A.    The chief of police may revoke any taxicab driver permit should any event occur that would be grounds for denial of a taxicab driver permit.

B.    Prior to the revocation of any taxicab driver permit, the chief of police shall provide the taxicab driver permit holder with not less than ten days notice of intent to revoke the permit, specifying the grounds for the proposed revocation, and specifying a date, time and location at which the applicant shall have an opportunity to meet with the chief of police and present all evidence and materials as to why the permit should not be revoked.

C.    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, transfer or sale of taxicab driver permit to a person other than that identified in the permit application shall cause immediate revocation of said permit. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.306 Duration of taxicab driver permitsDuty to update information.
Taxicab driver permits shall be valid from the date of issuance until June 30th of each year, subject to renewal upon satisfaction of the conditions for the issuance of a new taxicab driver permit and payment of any renewal fee. Pursuant to Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3)(A)(i), drivers shall test negative for controlled substance and for alcohol as a condition for initial permit application and subsequent renewal. Any taxicab driver permit shall become void upon termination of employment with a taxicab company, and the taxicab driver shall notify the city and return the taxicab driver permit to the city within ten days of termination of such employment. Each taxicab driver permit holder shall have an affirmative duty to update the city in writing within ten days of any change of information on taxicab driver application. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

Article IV. Administrative Appeals

5.12.400 Appeals.
A.    Any person aggrieved by or dissatisfied with any decision or determination of the chief of police made pursuant to this chapter shall have a right of appeal from that decision to the city manager pursuant to Section 2.08.060; provided, however, that the decision of the city manager shall be final and there shall be no right of appeal to the city council.

B.    The failure to file and prosecute all appeals available pursuant to the provisions provided herein shall be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and shall act as a complete bar to any legal proceeding challenging the subject decision or determination. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

Article V. Fees

5.12.500 Permit feesCompany permit, driver permit.
A.    A fee for the issuance of a taxicab company permit and a taxicab driver permit, respectively, shall be adopted by resolution of the city council to defray the cost of processing permit applications and administering this chapter.

B.    No taxicab company permit or taxicab driver permit shall be issued without payment of the permit fees established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

Article VI. Operational Requirements

5.12.600 Taxicab labeling.
Every taxicab shall, at a minimum, be plainly labeled with letters of sufficient size so that the letters are reasonably discernible with a designation of the owner or business name under which such owner is operating such taxicab. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.602 Prominent display of permits.
A.    All taxicab company permits shall be prominently displayed and visible to the public at the taxicab companys principal place of business.

B.    All taxicab driver permits shall be prominently displayed in the drivers taxicab and visible to any passenger.

C.    Every taxicab company shall include the number of its certificate, license, or permit, including but not limited to the taxicab company permit, in every written or oral advertisement of the services it offers. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.604 Direct routes.
Driver shall carry a passenger to his/her destination only by the most direct and accessible route. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.606 Receipt.
Driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare. The receipt shall identify the drivers name, taxicab number, name of taxicab company permit holder, and date and time of issuance. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.608 Solicitation.
Driver shall not leave his/her taxicab to solicit passengers. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.610 Compliance with all laws.
Any person issued a taxicab company permit and/or driver permit pursuant to this chapter shall comply with all applicable laws in the operation of the taxicab business and the taxicabs, including, but not limited to, all applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code, Government Code, Labor Code and any other applicable state, federal, or local statute, regulation, or ordinance. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.612 Condition of taxicab.
All taxicabs shall be clean, inside and out, in good mechanical condition, and shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.614 Rates.
Taxicab company shall register its rates with the chief of police and shall provide updated rates if and when rates change. Taxicab company shall post its rates prominently on the exterior and the interior of the taxicab in sufficient size so that the rates are reasonably discernible in plain sight by customers. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.616 Taxicab stands.
A.    The public works director may designate areas on public streets as taxicab zones to be occupied solely by taxicabs immediately available for hire. All such zones shall be indicated by curb painting and a sign or signs.

B.    No taxicab shall park or occupy any parking space or street while awaiting passengers other than in designated taxicab zones designated by the public works director.

C.    No taxicab driver shall permit any taxicab to be parked unattended in any taxicab zone for a period of time in excess of five minutes.

D.    A violation of this section shall be punishable as an infraction. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

Article VII. Enforcement

5.12.700 Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to the operation of taxicabs transporting passengers picked up from a point outside the city to a destination within the city, or en route from a point outside the city to a destination outside the city. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.702 Transfer of permit prohibited.
Permits issued under this chapter are the property of the city and may not be transferred, sold, assigned, or bequeathed expressly or by operation of law. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.704 Enforcement.
In addition to any other remedy available to the city, both at law and in equity, the provisions of this chapter are enforceable pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.706 Penalties.
A.    Notwithstanding any other penalty stated in this chapter, a violation of this chapter may be processed as an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level C violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(3). (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.708 Administrative violation enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
Any notice to correct an administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be no more than forty-eight hours, unless circumstances make it impossible or infeasible to correct a violation within such time frame, in which case the cited party shall take all steps reasonably necessary toward correction of the violation within forty-eight hours and shall completely correct the violation within a reasonable time as stated in the notice to correct. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.710 Criminal penalties.
A.    Any person operating a taxicab company without a taxicab company permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to operating a taxicab without a taxicab driver permit, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable as follows: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.712 Attorneys fees and enforcement costs.
In any enforcement action taken by the city pursuant to this chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person creating, causing, committing or maintaining a violation of this chapter any and all expenses of enforcement, including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys fees, expert witness fees, consultant fees, staff time, and any other expenses incurred by the city in enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.714 Remedies cumulative.
The remedies set forth herein are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Nothing contained herein shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy under the citys code or any other applicable law. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

5.12.716 Effect on existing lawful taxicab operations.
Any person lawfully operating a taxicab company or taxicab within the city upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall come into compliance with this chapter within ninety days of the effective date or shall discontinue such taxicab company or taxicab operations. (Ord. 1139  2 (part), 2011)

Chapter 5.15
BINGO GAMES
Sections:

5.15.010    License required.

5.15.020    Conditions of license.

5.15.030    Remote caller bingo.

5.15.040    Enforcement.

5.15.045    Penalties.

5.15.050    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

5.15.010 License required.
A.    A license shall be required to play bingo, when such games are authorized under the Penal Code. Only those organizations authorized by state law may apply for or be issued a bingo license. The chief of police may issue a bingo license to authorized organizations to conduct bingo games, including remote caller bingo games, upon payment of an annual license fee subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter. As used in this chapter, and pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5, bingo means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a tangible card in the players possession which conform to the numbers or symbols selected at random and announced by a caller.

B.    Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until the end of the calendar year, at which time the license shall expire. A new license shall only be obtained upon filing a new application and upon payment of the license fee. The fact that a license has been issued to an applicant creates no vested right on the part of the licensee to continue to play bingo. The city council expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any time. If this chapter is repealed, all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter cease to be effective for any purpose on the effective date of the repealing legislation.

C.    An application and annual fee for a bingo license shall be set by resolution of the city council. An additional fee, as set by resolution of the city council, for law enforcement and public safety costs incurred by the city that are directly related to bingo activities shall be collected monthly by the city.

D.    If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. Such license may be suspended or revoked by the police chief upon the violation of any provision of this chapter.

E.    A bingo license is issued to a person or organization only for use at the location approved in the license.

F.    An applicant for a bingo license shall file a verified application with the chief of police. The application shall include, among other things, the following:

1.    The true name of the applicant, together with the names of all persons directly or indirectly interested (involved) in the conduct of the bingo games.

2.    A certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board of the state certifying that the applicant is exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701d.

3.    Whether any permit or license heretofore granted to the applicant to engage in any business or do any act within the city has been revoked or denied, and, if so, the circumstances surrounding the revocation or denial.

4.    The location and description of the premises upon which the applicant proposes to conduct bingo games and a statement of the property interest of the applicant in the premises as owner, lessee, or otherwise. If applicant is not the owner of the premises, the owners shall join in the application.

5.    All criminal convictions, within five years preceding the filing of the application, of offenses involving:

a.    The operation of bingo games;

b.    Any gambling offense;

c.    Violations of narcotics law; and

d.    Offenses involving moral turpitude.

6.    A statement that the applicant understands that a State Summary Criminal History information will be sought from the Attorney General and that the information obtained therefrom may be included in the report and recommendation of the chief of police and in any hearing before the city council on said application.

7.    Such further information bearing on the identity and relevant history of the applicant or the use, location or condition of the premises as the city may require.

8.    A statement that the applicant understands that the application shall be considered by the chief of police only after full investigation and report have been made and conducted.

9.    Any other information reasonably necessary to permit the chief of police to determine that the bingo operation and games will be conducted in compliance with this chapter and all applicable state laws and regulations.

10.    Each application shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

11.    Prior to the issuance of a bingo license, the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of state law.

G.    Any organization currently licensed at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the licensing requirements in this chapter at or before the end of the calendar year in order to maintain or obtain a license.

H.    No license to conduct bingo games shall be issued until the chief of police has verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant is qualified.

I.    The chief of police shall deny or approve the application for a bingo license within thirty days of submission of a completed application. A denial of a license may be appealed to the city manager whose decision shall be final. (Ord. 1138  2 (part), 2010)

5.15.020 Conditions of license.
A.    All licensing conditions required by Sections 326.3 and 326.5 of the Penal Code shall apply to any license issued by the city, for any bingo game, including remote caller bingo games, unless expressly stated otherwise in the chapter.

B.    No person, organization, or other legal entity shall be issued a bingo license to conduct bingo games in the city unless such persons, organizations, or other legal entities possess any required licensing from the state of California, a valid certificate or letter from the State Franchise Tax Board evidencing that they are exempt from taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law by Sections 23701-a, 23701-b, 23701-d, 23701-e, 23701-k, 23701-w, 23701-f, 23701-g and 23701-l of the Revenue and Taxation Code or is a mobile home park association or a senior citizen organization or a charitable organization affiliated with a school district; and provided, that the proceeds from such games are used only for charitable purposes; and provided, that the organization possesses a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

C.    The following conditions are imposed under Sections 326.3 and 326.5 of the Penal Code, and shall apply to any license issued under this chapter:

1.    No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

2.    The licensed organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for which the organization is organized. For purposes of this subsection, property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to, the organization shall not be required to be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, that organization. No bingo games shall be conducted in or upon property that is residentially zoned, except manufactured home communities, unless within church or school buildings maintained pursuant to a valid conditional use permit.

3.    A bingo game shall be located and so arranged that the tables and players are plainly visible from the main entrance door opening to the game, which shall be unlocked during any bingo game. No wall, partition, screen, or similar structure between such door opening and any table shall be permitted if it interferes with such visibility.

4.    Bingo games may only be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and only two days each week, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter. All bingo games shall be open to police inspection of the premises and equipment at all times. Hours of operation may be further restricted pursuant to the conditional use permit.

5.    All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the licensed organization.

6.    All bingo games shall be operated and staffed only by members or unpaid volunteers of the licensed organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensed organization shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. This subsection does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at a bingo game by the organization conducting the game.

7.    No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the licensed organization shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game.

8.    All profits derived from any bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Between January 1st and 15th of each year, each licensed organization shall submit to the police chief a statement of income and expenses for the preceding period of January 1st and December 31st.

9.    No person shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. A person shall be deemed to be physically present at the place where the remote caller bingo game is being conducted if he or she is present at any of the locations participating in the remote caller bingo game in accordance with this section.

10.    The total value of prizes awarded during any bingo game shall not exceed five hundred dollars, in cash or kind or both, for each separate game which is held. Only one bingo game shall be conducted at a time.

11.    The chief of police may suspend or revoke the bingo license for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any suspension or revocation may be appealed to the city manager whose decision shall be final.

12.    Notwithstanding any other provisions in this code, any hearing required pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted informally and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The parties may present witnesses and evidence and the city manager shall render his or her decision within fifteen days of the conclusion of the hearing.

D.    The foregoing conditions shall be printed upon each license. Such license shall be displayed in the room where bingo games are conducted. (Ord. 1138  2 (part), 2010)

5.15.030 Remote caller bingo.
A.    Remote caller bingo games as provided for in Penal Code Sections 326.3 and 326.4 may be lawfully played in the city of Folsom upon issuance of a bingo license which authorizes the license holder to conduct remote caller games pursuant to the provisions of Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code.

B.    Pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.3(u)(1), remote caller bingo game means a game of bingo, as defined in subdivision (o) of Section 326.5, in which the numbers or symbols on randomly drawn plastic balls are announced by a natural person present at the site at which the live game is conducted, and the organization conducting the bingo game uses audio and video technology to link any of its in-state facilities for the purpose of transmitting the remote calling of a live bingo game from a single location to multiple locations owned, leased, or rented by that organization, or as described in subdivision (o) of Penal Code Section 326.3. The audio or video technology used to link the facilities may include cable, Internet, satellite, broadband, or telephone technology, or any other means of electronic transmission that ensures the secure, accurate, and simultaneous transmission of the announcement of numbers or symbols in the game from the location at which the game is called by a natural person to the remote location or locations at which players may participate in the game. The drawing of each ball bearing a number or symbol by the natural person calling the game shall be visible to all players as the ball is drawn, including through a simultaneous live video feed at remote locations at which players may participate in the game.

C.    Any license issued to any organization to conduct remote caller bingo games shall be subject to the provisions of Section 326.3 of the Penal Code, and the additional requirements prescribed in this chapter, unless expressly stated otherwise in this chapter.

D.    In addition to obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, any organization conducting a remote caller bingo game must first obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.60 authorizing the playing of bingo games at a particular location. The conditional use permit may impose additional conditions necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare of the community in which the game is proposed and the city of Folsom.

E.    Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.3 the value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any remote caller bingo game may amount to, but shall not exceed, thirty-seven percent of the gross receipts for that game. Progressive and cash prizes are prohibited. Every remote caller bingo game shall be played until a winner is declared. The organization conducting the remote caller bingo game may issue a check to the winner at the time of the game, or may send a check to the declared winner by United States Postal Service certified mail, return receipt requested.

F.    A remote caller bingo game may allow only that number of players permitted under the conditional use permit and in no case greater than the maximum capacity of the building in which the game is played and shall never exceed seven hundred fifty persons pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.3.

G.    Remote caller bingo games may be conducted at the licensed location as a live or remote location. (Ord. 1138  2 (part), 2010)

5.15.040 Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful to operate bingo games in violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly violate any provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to Penal Code Sections 326.3 and 326.5, or an administrative violation punishable as follows:

A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive.

B.    The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1138  2 (part), 2010)

5.15.045 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(1). (Ord. 1138  2 (part), 2010)

5.15.050 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
Notwithstanding the procedure for administrative violations provided in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, no notice to correct as provided in Section 1.09.023 shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of administrative violation. (Ord. 1138  2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 5.20
CARDROOMS*
Sections:

5.20.010    Definitions.

5.20.020    License required.

5.20.030    Application for license.

5.20.040    Referral of application.

5.20.050    Action on application.

5.20.060    Fees.

5.20.070    Cardroom regulations.

5.20.080    Value and transferProhibited.

5.20.090    Transfers excepted.

5.20.100    Employee work permits.

5.20.110    Revocation and suspension of license or work permit.

5.20.120    Exemptions.

5.20.130    Enforcement.

5.20.140    Penalties.

5.20.150    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

*    See Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations.

5.20.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

Cardroom means any space, room or enclosure, furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for the playing of cards and similar games, and the use of which is available to the public, or any portion of the public; provided, however, that this section does not apply to any bona fide nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization as defined in Section 5.20.120.

Person includes any firm, organization, association, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or corporation. (Ord. 617  2 (part), 1988)

5.20.020 License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on, or maintain or conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted, any cardroom which is used by the public for the playing of cards, and at which money or anything of value is wagered or for the use of which a fee or compensation is charged players, without first obtaining a license from the city. (Ord. 617  2 (part), 1988)

5.20.030 Application for license.
A.    An applicant for a cardroom license shall file a verified application with the city council. The application shall include, among other things, the following:

1.    The true name of the applicant, together with the names of all persons directly or indirectly interested in the conduct of said business, including all members of any firm or partnership. A corporate applicant shall list officers, directors, and all shareholders holding ten percent or more of the corporate stock;

2.    Whether any permit or license heretofore granted to applicant to engage in any business or do any act within the city has been revoked or denied, and if so, the circumstances surrounding the revocation or denial;

3.    The location and description of the premises upon which the applicant proposes to conduct a cardroom and a statement of the property interest of the applicant in the premises as owner, lessee or otherwise. If applicant is not the owner of the premises, the owners shall join in the application;

4.    The number of card tables which the applicant intends to operate;

5.    All criminal convictions, within five years preceding the filing of the application, of offenses involving:

a.    The operation of a cardroom or similar establishment,

b.    Any gambling offense,

c.    Violations of narcotic laws, and

d.    Offenses involving moral turpitude;

6.    A statement that the applicant understands that a State Summary Criminal History information will be sought from the Attorney General and that the information obtained therefrom may be included in the report and recommendation of the chief of police and in any hearing before the city council on said application;

7.    Such further information bearing on the identity and character of the applicant or the use, location, or condition of the premises as the city council may require;

8.    A statement that the applicant understands that the application shall be considered by the city council only after full investigation and report have been made and conducted by the chief of police, the building official, the fire chief, the planning director, or their authorized representatives.

B.    Each application shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 842  2 (part), 1996)

5.20.040 Referral of application.
A.    Within twenty-one days after receipt of an application, the city council shall refer the same to the following city officials for a written report and recommendation:

1.    The chief of police, concerning the character of the applicant and any law enforcement problems which the issuance of the license might tend to create;

2.    The fire chief, concerning the suitability of the proposed premises for the intended use under applicable fire and safety laws;

3.    The building inspector, concerning the suitability of the proposed premises for the intended use under applicable building laws;

4.    The planning director, concerning the compatibility of the intended use with existing planning and zoning laws and any adverse impact upon surrounding property.

B.    Such reports and recommendations shall be filed with the city council within three months after the referral; provided, that for good cause shown and after notice to the applicant, the city council may extend such time for not to exceed an additional two months.

C.    If, however, at the time the application is filed there are no licenses available pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.20.050(C) limiting the number of permissible licenses, no referral for report and recommendation shall be made and no further proceedings on said application shall be conducted. (Ord. 617  2 (part), 1988)

5.20.050 Action on application.
A.    Within one month after receipt of the reports and recommendations, the city council shall schedule a hearing on the application and shall give the applicant two weeks prior written notice of such hearing, which shall include a copy of each report and recommendation filed with the council. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from conducting a hearing on more than one application at the same time.

B.    In the conduct of such hearing witnesses may be sworn, however, formal rules of evidence applicable to proceedings before the trial courts of this state shall not be applicable. The burden of proof shall be borne by the applicant. The decision of the council shall be in the form of a resolution, but need not be supported by written findings.

C.    Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, no cardroom license shall be granted when the number of cardroom licenses in the city exceeds the ratio of one cardroom for each two thousand five hundred persons in the city according to the last preceding federal census or special census conducted under the supervision of the Department of Finance of the State of California at the time of the application; provided, that this population limitation shall not prevent the continuance of any cardroom existing and operating at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Such continued operation, however, shall be in compliance with the regulations of Section 5.20.070 in all respects. The population standard established in this section is intended to fix a maximum limitation on the number of licenses. The city council may, in its discretion, elect to authorize fewer licenses than such standard would allow.

D.    The city council may deny an application for a cardroom license if, in the opinion of the council, the cardroom is to be located in an area of the city or operated under circumstances where it might tend to cause a police problem, or create a public nuisance or where the operation of the cardroom would be incompatible with existing zoning and neighborhood land uses or where the granting of the licenses would be contrary to the public interest. (Ord. 842  2 (part), 1996)

5.20.060 Fees.
Every person operating a cardroom shall pay a license fee established by a resolution of the city council. Said fee shall be in addition to any other tax or fee which is required for any other business operated by the license holder. (Ord. 617  2 (part), 1988)

5.20.070 Cardroom regulations.
A.    No person shall operate a cardroom in violation of any of the following regulations:

1.    No person shall be permitted to hold or be interested in more than one cardroom license issued by the city.

2.    No more than nine card tables shall be permitted in any cardroom.

3.    Not more than one cardroom shall be located at any one address.

4.    No more than ten players shall be permitted at a table.

5.    No minor shall be permitted at any card table, or participate in any game played at any card table. Each licensee shall post or cause to be posted at a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the premises a clear and legible sign not less than seven inches by eleven inches in size, reading NO PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE ALLOWED.

6.    All cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation.

7.    No shills shall engage in card games. This prohibition shall not apply to house players, provided they wear a badge in a conspicuous place, which badge identifies them as employees of the licensee.

8.    Each cardroom licensee shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises a copy of the house rules and regulations and the charges for participating in the games.

9.    If a cardroom or any card table is located within a portion of any premises utilized for the sale of alcoholic beverages, all alcoholic beverages shall be secured between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each day.

10.    The following provisions shall govern the hours of operation: Cardrooms may be open for twenty-four hours per day. However, in considering a conditional use permit application for the operation of a cardroom, the planning commission shall evaluate the land use impacts of a proposed cardroom and shall determine if restrictions on the hours of operation are necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. The planning commission shall specify any limitations on the hours of operation in the conditional use permit.

11.    The following provisions shall govern patron security and safety:

a.    As part of the submittal requirements for a conditional use permit, the building owner, licensee and/or permittee shall submit a physical security plan (for the building, parking lot and surrounding area) and a security personnel deployment plan. The physical security plan and the security personal deployment plan shall be submitted to the chief of police for review prior to any action on the conditional use permit by the planning commission.

b.    In addition to any conditions imposed by the planning commission on the conditional use permit, whenever it appears to the chief of police that security personnel are necessary to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the public, the chief of police shall require that a cardroom licensee provide uniformed security personnel on the premises and the parking lot used by the cardroom for its patrons and employees as a condition of the license. Each license shall have such conditions specified on the face or on the reverse side of the license. The chief of police shall determine the necessity for the requirement for security personnel based on (i) the propensity for peace disturbances or criminal activity in the geographic area in which the cardroom is located, (ii) the propensity for criminal activity or peace disturbances on the cardroom premises, (iii) the hours of operation, and (iv) any other factors which affect the health, safety or welfare of the public and cardroom patrons. The chief of police shall notify the licensee, in writing, as to time periods and days of the week during which security is required, the number of security officers required, and the location where such officers are to be provided (whether in the parking lot or on the premises). Upon receiving the written notice of security requirements, the licensee shall conform to those requirements within forty-eight hours of service thereof and shall maintain those requirements in full force and effect until such time as the chief of police deems they are no longer necessary. A licensee may appeal the imposition of conditions imposed as follows:

(1)    The action of the chief of police in the imposition of conditions described in this subsection (A)(11)(b) shall be subject to an appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the imposition of any conditions. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police shall be final and conclusive.

c.    The licensee shall not knowingly permit any obviously intoxicated person to participate in any card game.

d.    The licensee shall not knowingly permit any illegal activity to occur on the premises or in the parking lot used by the cardroom for its patrons or employees. Illegal activity includes, but is not limited to, narcotics violations, bookmaking, illegal gambling, loansharking, receiving stolen property or prostitution.

12.    The following restrictions on the location of cardrooms shall apply:

a.    Subject to such additional restrictions specified herein, no cardroom shall be located in an area other than those permitted by Title 17. The location of cardrooms in the city of Folsom shall be determined through the regulatory land use process of obtaining a conditional use permit from the planning commission on a case by case basis. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, no new cardroom shall be located within the C-3 zoning district (central business district) along East Bidwell Street in the city of Folsom.

b.    Cardrooms may be allowed in the C-2 and C-3 zones only after the issuance of a conditional use permit from the planning commission as specified above and a license to operate from the city council.

c.    No cardroom shall be located within three hundred feet of any other cardroom, as measured from the public access of one cardroom to the closest public access of any other cardroom.

d.    No cardroom shall be located within three hundred feet of any existing church, school, park, playground or other area of juvenile congregation, hospital, or convalescence facility. Such distance shall be measured from the property line of the existing structure or facility to the nearest public access of such cardroom.

e.    No cardroom may be operated on property or within premises other than those approved during the licensing process. Any attempt to change the location of any cardroom shall result in the immediate revocation of the license.

f.    Cardrooms shall be located on the ground floor of the premises.

g.    Each cardroom shall be separated from other activities on the premises.

13.    The following provisions shall govern wagering limits: It is unlawful for any person to bet or wager at or against any card game held at a licensed gaming club except as allowed by this chapter. In addition to any conditions that may be imposed on a license, the following restrictions shall apply:

a.    There shall be no wagering limits including during tournaments. For purposes of this section, tournament shall mean a series of games played by a specified group of participants on a preestablished date and time. A cardroom licensee shall advise the chief of police of any proposed tournament and proposed wager limits no later than fifteen days prior to the scheduled date of the tournament. The chief of police shall have the power to disapprove any tournament within seven days after receipt of a tournament application. The chief of police shall establish regulations governing the operation of tournaments, which shall be available to the public. The chief of police shall review any application for proposed tournament play against such regulations and shall issue an authorization setting forth the conditions for tournament play to the applicant. The written authorization shall be posted at the cardroom in a conspicuous location. If the applicant disagrees with the determination of conditions for tournament play, the applicant may file an appeal with the planning commission within ten days of receiving the notification from the chief of police. The decision of the planning commission shall be final.

b.    It is unlawful to allow or permit money, as opposed to tokens, chips, or other representatives of money, to be used as ante or bet in any game played in the gaming club.

c.    No licensee shall allow any player to wager any sum in excess of the value of the chips or other playing tokens which such player has purchased from the gaming club, or which represent winnings achieved by the player.

d.    Other than seated players actively participating in the game, no person shall be permitted to place a wager on any card game, and a player shall only place a wager on his or her own card hand. Backline betting or side-betting is prohibited.

e.    Notice of all the provisions and restrictions provided in this section shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the cardroom. (Ord. 1131  2, 2010; Ord. 924  2 (part), 2000; Ord. 886  2, 1998; Ord. 842  2 (part), 1996)

5.20.080 Value and transferProhibited.
A.    The privilege conferred by a license is not property and shall have no value.

B.    Except as provided in Section 5.20.090, a cardroom license shall not be transferable. Any attempt to transfer, directly or indirectly, a cardroom license in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall automatically revoke the license. For the purposes of this chapter a prohibited transfer of a cardroom license shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.    A transfer of ownership or a transfer of an undivided interest in a cardroom license;

2.    The assignment or transfer of a license from a partnership to one or more of the individual partners, or the addition of a new partner;

3.    Where the cardroom license has been granted to a corporation, the issuance or transfer of shares of stock to any person, entity or group not listed as having an interest in the cardroom license when it was granted, which results in that person, entity, or group owning ten percent or more of the corporate stock;

4.    The sale, lease, or other transfer of a business where the cardroom is considered part of the business and the cardroom license is intended to pass with the sale, with or without consideration, even though the sale, lease or transfer may be made conditioned upon the successful transfer of the license to the buyer;

5.    Entering into any arrangement or agreement whereby the license or any interest therein or the transfer of the license is pledged as security for a loan or the fulfillment of an obligation or agreement. (Ord. 617  2 (part), 1988)

5.20.090 Transfers excepted.
A.    Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in this chapter against the transfer of a cardroom license, an application by a cardroom licensee for a change of location, or an application by a successor in interest in his own name to operate the same business as the former licensee, may be made to the city council in the following situations:

1.    A change of location not involving any change in identity of the licensee;

2.    A change in business organization where there is no change in the identity of the principals holding the license;

3.    The death of a licensee, where the application is made on behalf of the surviving business associates, or spouse, or children of the deceased licensee;

4.    Any situation where the city council may, in its discretion, upon prior request of a party, permit an application to be filed pursuant to this section by reason of special facts pleaded which might give rise to practical difficulty or undue hardship.

B.    An application for a transfer of a cardroom license made under this section shall be made to the city council and acted upon and considered in the same manner as an application for an original license; provided, however, that the council, in considering an application under this section, may disregard the limitations on the number of licensed cardrooms allowable in the city at any time, where it finds that practical difficulty or undue hardship would result from a denial and there is no other basis for denial. (Ord 617  2 (part), 1988)

5.20.100 Employee work permits.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ any person as a cardroom employee or permit any person to serve as an independent agent for the cardroom unless such person has first obtained a valid work permit issued by the state of California. Copies of such work permits shall be available for inspection by the citys law enforcement officials during the cardrooms hours of operation. For the purpose of this section, cardroom employees are defined as dealers, overseers and others directly connected with the operation and supervision of the card tables, or as the term cardroom employee is defined by the Division of Gambling Control. Work permits as defined in this section are not required for waitresses, bartenders, culinary workers and others not connected with the operation and supervision of the card tables. (Ord. 924  2 (part), 2000)

5.20.110 Revocation and suspension of license or work permit.
A.    The city council shall have the right for cause to revoke or suspend any cardroom license issued hereunder. Any of the grounds upon which the city council and chief of police may or shall be required to refuse to issue an initial cardroom license shall also constitute grounds for such revocation or suspension. The misrepresentation of a material fact in any application or the failure of a holder of a cardroom license to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of such license. In addition, if, for a consecutive period of six months or more, any person licensed hereunder fails to operate a cardroom, the license may be revoked.

B.    No cardroom license shall be suspended or revoked by the city council until a hearing is held thereon. Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee at least one month prior to the holding thereof, which notice shall specify the grounds for suspension and/or revocation.

C.    In any hearing before the city council on the suspension or revocation of a cardroom license, witnesses may be sworn; however, formal rules of evidence applicable to proceedings before the trial courts of this state shall not be applicable. The decision of the council shall be in the form of a resolution, supported by written findings of fact. (Ord. 924  2 (part), 2000)

5.20.120 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to cardrooms of a nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor or other similar organization not open to the general public and whose membership is restricted to those persons regularly and formally elected to membership therein and paying regular dues to such organizations. (Ord. 617  2 (part), 1988)

5.20.130 Enforcement.
A.    This title shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive.

B.    The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 875  7 (part), 1997)

5.20.140 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level E violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(5). (Ord. 875  7 (part), 1997)

5.20.150 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, for violations of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 924  2 (part), 2000; Ord. 875  7 (part), 1997)

Chapter 5.21
ADULT RELATED BUSINESSES
Sections:

5.21.010    Definitions.

5.21.020    Permit required for operation of an adult related business.

5.21.021    Application for permit for an adult related business.

5.21.022    Land use permits and fees.

5.21.023    Adult employee permits.

5.21.024    Application for adult employee permit.

5.21.025    Verification of application.

5.21.026    Investigation and recommendations for an adult related business permit.

5.21.027    Issuance of permit for an adult related business.

5.21.028    Issuance of adult employee permit.

5.21.029    Appeal of decisions to deny business and employee permits.

5.21.030    Term and renewal of adult related business permits.

5.21.031    Term and renewal of adult employee permits.

5.21.032    Name and place of businessChange of location.

5.21.033    Suspension, revocation or other action relating to adult related business permits and adult employee permits.

5.21.034    Appeals of decisions to suspend or revoke permits.

5.21.040    Register of adult related business employees.

5.21.041    Adult employee identification card.

5.21.042    Employment of persons under the ages of 18 years prohibited.

5.21.043    Display of permit.

5.21.044    Business operations tax.

5.21.045    Transfer of adult related business permit.

5.21.046    Employment of adult related business employees.

5.21.047    Hours of operation.

5.21.048    Development and operational standards.

5.21.049    Adult related businesses providing live adult entertainment.

5.21.050    Management requirements.

5.21.053    Persons under the age of 18 years prohibited on premises of adult related business.

5.21.054    Inspection.

5.21.055    Conditions of adult related business permit.

5.21.056    Violations.

5.21.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.

Adult live entertainment theater means any place, building, enclosure or structure, partially or entirely used for live adult entertainment, as defined in this section, performances or presentations characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, displaying, or describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity for observation by patrons or customers therein. Live adult entertainment means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the employees expose to public view specified anatomical areas for entertainment value or appear in a state of nudity or a state of partial nudity for any form of consideration.

Adult motion picture or video arcade means any business where coin, paper, note, or token-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to 4 or fewer persons per machine, at any one time, and where the predominant character or theme of the images so displayed is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity. For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an NC17 rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture or video arcade.

Adult motion picture theater means any business, other than a hotel or motel which regularly provides closed-circuit viewing to each individual room as a secondary service to its hotel or motel customers, with the capacity for five or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions in which the predominant character and theme is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity as defined in this section are regularly shown. This includes, without limitation, showing any such slides, motion pictures or videos by means of any video tape system which has a display, viewer, screen, or a television set. For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an NC17 rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture theater.

Adult related business means any establishment, business or concern which, as a regular course or conduct of the business, offers or engages in the display of specified anatomical areas, specified sexual activity, or men and/or women in a state of nudity, or state of partial nudity, as defined in this section, by patrons, employees or anyone on the premises, and includes without limitation the following types of establishments:

1.    Adult Related Book and Video Store. An adult related book and video store means an establishment, business or concern with more than twenty-five percent of its display area devoted to and offering for sale or rent, stock-in-trade consisting of adult related book and video products, or an establishment where twenty-five percent or more of the retail or wholesale value of merchandise displayed or offered for sale or rent consists of adult related book and video products. The term adult related book and video products means books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, paintings, sculptures, photographs, drawings, motion pictures, slides, films, tapes, video cassettes, records, DVD, CD-ROM, or other visual or audio representations or any material in digital format, which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

2.    Adult Related Sexual Device Store. An adult related sexual device store means an establishment, business or concern which sells, rents, displays, exhibits or offers for sale any of the following products:

a.    Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed or reasonably intended to be used in connection with specified sexual activities; or

b.    Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate specified anatomical areas, or goods designed or reasonably intended to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas or reasonably intended to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities. Such goods include, but are not limited to, devices that are physical representations of the human genital organs, and devices with non-sex related utility being marketed or offered for sale or rent in a manner promoting sexual or sadomasochistic uses, including, but not limited to, leather whips, straps, harnesses, restraints and ligatures.

The following items are expressly not included within the definitions in this section: (1) devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy; (2) candles and incense; (3) body oils, creams and lotions; (4) lingerie, stockings and undergarments; (5) massage devices that are not replicas of human genital organs; (6) health care or personal hygiene products; and (7) food products.

City manager means the city manager or his/her designee.

Chief of police means the chief of police or his/her designee.

Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

Establish means and includes any of the following:

1.    The opening or commencement of any adult related business as defined in this section;

2.    The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult related business, to any adult related business as defined in this section;

3.    The relocation of any adult related business; or

4.    The addition of any of the adult related businesses as defined in this section to any other existing adult related business.

Exceptions. An adult related business shall not include:

1.    Bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical and psychological personnel with necessary medical or professional credentials for the treatment of patients.

2.    Persons depicting specified anatomical areas in a modeling class operated:

a.    By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue;

b.    By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; or

c.    In a structure operated either as a profit or not-for-profit facility which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, and where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class.

Figure modeling or modeling studio means any business featuring a live person displaying specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity as defined in this section for compensation, whether monetary or any other form of consideration and for the purpose of being observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted. Figure modeling or a modeling studio does not include an artist studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists which is not open to the public and does not provide, permit or make available for viewing specified sexual activities on the premises.

Nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or anus, with less than a fully opaque fabric covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque fabric covering of any part of the areola, or the showing of completely or opaquely covered (by fabric) male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

Operate means to own, lease (as lessor or lessee), rent (as landlord or tenant or as agent for the purpose of representing a principal in the management, rental or operation of the property of such principal), manage, conduct, or direct an adult related business.

Operator means and includes the owner, manager or person in charge of any adult related business.

Partial nudity means a state of dress in which clothing covers no less than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks and nipple, areola and the lower portion below the lowest point of the areola of the female breast. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.

Regularly features, regularly shown, regular basis or regularly means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the business.

Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship, religious education incidental thereto and related religious activities.

School means any public or private educational facility primarily attended by minors, including large family day care homes, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, and special education schools, and includes school grounds.

Specified anatomical area includes the following:

1.    Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, and/or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

2.    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

Specified sexual activity includes the following:

1.    Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, sodomy, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism;

2.    Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;

3.    Human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation;

4.    Erotic or lewd touching of nude human genitals or pubic region;

5.    Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain;

6.    Erotic or lewd touching, lewd fondling or other lewd contact with an animal by a human being; or

7.    Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigations.

Zoning district means the zoning designation on the city zoning map or the corresponding designation on the general plan land use map. (Ord. 1031  2 (part), 2005; Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.020 Permit required for operation of an adult related business.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises the operation of an adult related business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit (referred to in this chapter as adult related business permit) from the city as required in this chapter. (Ord. 998  2 (part, 2003)

5.21.021 Application for permit for an adult related business.
A.    Any person desiring to obtain an adult related business permit to operate an adult related business for which a permit is required pursuant to Section 5.21.020 shall apply to the chief of police on a form provided by the city clerk. Before submitting the application, a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the finance department to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this chapter. Upon payment, the finance department shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that such permit application fee has been paid. The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police at the time of applying for a permit under this section.

The application to the chief of police shall be deemed complete when it contains the following information:

1.    The full and true name and any other names of each person with an ownership interest of at least twenty percent in the adult related business and of each operator of the adult related business;

2.    The present business addresses and telephone number and drivers license number, if any, of the applicant and any operator;

3.    The 2 previous business addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and any operator;

4.    Written proof provided in the form of a valid government issued photo identification card, issued within the United States that the applicant and any operator is at least 18 years of age;

5.    The height, weight, color of eyes and hair of the applicant and any operator;

6.    Five color portrait photographs at least 2 inches x 2 inches of the applicant and any operator;

7.    The business license or tax certificate history of the applicant and any operator for any adult related business for the preceding 5 years, including whether the person while previously operating in this or another city, county or state under license, has had a license revoked or suspended, and the reason(s) therefor;

8.    All criminal convictions of any person with an ownership interest and any operator of offenses specified in Section 5.21.027(A)(2) within 5 years of the date of application;

9.    The name and address of the lessor of the real property on which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease agreement or other documentation to establish that the owner and/or landlord of the premises consents to the establishment of an adult related business on the premises;

10.    A diagram of the site and interior of the building as the business will be operated. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches. The drawing of the site and interior of the building must be a configuration of the premises demonstrating it will comply with the requirements of this chapter;

11.    If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown on its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder holding an interest of 20 percent or more of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the residence address of each of the partners holding an interest of 20 percent or more of the ownership of the company. If 1 or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.

B.    The chief of police shall take fingerprints of the applicant and any operator.

C.    The application for a permit does not authorize conducting an adult related business until a permit has been granted. The issuance of a business operations tax certificate pursuant to this title shall not authorize conducting an adult related business until the necessary adult entertainment business permit required by Section 5.21.020 has been lawfully granted.

D.    All personal information provided by an applicant shall be deemed confidential and not disclosed except as required by law.

E.    The provisions of subsections (A)(4), (A)(5) and (C) of this section shall not apply to any corporate applicant; however, such information shall be provided for any operator. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.022 Land use permits and fees.
Adult related businesses shall comply with the terms, conditions, guidelines and regulations placed on any property in a planned development district or which is covered by a development agreement, including payment of fees applicable to such districts or agreements in the same manner as any other business seeking to locate on the property. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.023 Adult employee permits.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall be employed in an adult related business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect an adult related business employee permit (referred to in this chapter as adult employee permit) and complies with all requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws.

B.    The issuance of a business operations tax certificate pursuant to this title shall not authorize any person to perform any act for which an adult employee permit is required until the necessary permit has been lawfully approved. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.024 Application for adult employee permit.
A.    An application for an adult employee permit shall be made to the chief of police on a form provided by the city clerk. Prior to submitting an application, a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the finance department to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The finance department shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that a permit application fee has been paid. The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police at the time of applying for a permit under this section.

B.    The application to the chief of police shall be deemed complete when it contains the following information:

1.    Name, business address and telephone number of the applicant, and 2 previous business addresses immediately prior to the present address;

2.    Drivers license number, if any, of the applicant;

3.    Applicants height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

4.    Five color portrait photographs of the applicant at least 2 inches x 2 inches;

5.    Written proof provided in the form of a valid government issued photo identification card, issued within the United States that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

6.    The name and address of the adult related business(es) where the applicant is to be employed or is to perform, if known, and the name of the owner(s) of the business(es);

7.    The names and addresses of any adult related business(es) where the applicant previously engaged in or participated in live performances displaying specified anatomical areas or depicting or involving specified sexual activities or acted as a figure model;

8.    Whether the applicant has been convicted of any offense specified in Section 5.21.027(A)(2) within 5 years of the date of application; and

9.    The adult employee permit or license history of the applicant including whether applicant has had any adverse action taken against a permit or license held by the applicant, the reason therefor and the applicants business activity or occupation subsequent to the adverse action.

C.    The chief of police shall take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and shall confirm the information submitted.

D.    All personal information provided by an applicant shall be deemed confidential and not disclosed except as required by law. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.025 Verification of application.
Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be verified as provided in the California Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.026 Investigation and recommendations for an adult related business permit.
A.    Upon receiving an application for an adult related business permit, the chief of police shall:

1.    Stamp the application as received on the date of receipt, and determine whether the application contains all the information required by Section 5.21.021. If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete or has been completed improperly, the chief of police shall send written notice to the applicant at the address provided by the applicant of that fact within 10 calendar days and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of 10 calendar days or less to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time;

2.    Within 10 calendar days of the date of filing of a complete application, refer the application to the community development department and the fire department; and

3.    Within a reasonable period, not exceeding 35 calendar days after the filing of a complete application, the community development department and the fire department shall investigate the application and recommend approval or denial to the city manager. A failure to make a recommendation within the specified time period shall not be considered a recommendation for approval or denial.

B.    The community development department and the fire department shall inspect the proposed premises and make separate recommendations to the city manager, within 35 calendar days after the filing of the completed application.

1.    If the proposed location for an adult related business is not complete, the departments shall review the diagrams or plans submitted for the business and make a recommendation for approval based on the plans submitted.

2.    No adult related business may operate until the city departments have inspected the completed adult related business and verified that the business has been constructed in conformance with the plans submitted and in conformance with this chapter.

C.    Upon receiving an application for an adult employee permit, the chief of police shall review the application, conduct an investigation into the information provided and grant or deny approval of the application within 10 calendar days based on the criteria provided in this chapter for an adult employee permit. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.027 Issuance of permit for an adult related business.
A.    The city manager shall act on the application for an adult related business permit within 45 calendar days after the date of filing a completed application, and shall grant or deny the permit by the end of the sixtieth day, unless the city manager finds:

1.    That the applicant or the proposed operation fails to meet the requirements of this chapter;

2.    That the applicant or any operator has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside of the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the State of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314.1, 314.2, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or as those sections may thereafter be amended or renumbered; provided, however, that the city manager shall issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if:

(a)    the person is otherwise qualified for a permit; and

(b)    the longer of the following time periods has passed:

(i)    Five years from date of the conviction; or

(ii)    Five years from release from confinement; or

(iii)    Five years from formal release from probation period; or

(iv)    Five years from formal release from parole.

3.    That the applicant has knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application;

4.    That the applicant or any operator has had a permit for an adult related business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last 5 years;

5.    That the applicant or operator is not at least 18 years of age;

6.    That the applicant has not paid the required fee to the finance department; or

7.    That the diagrams or plans submitted by the applicant for the adult related business premise are not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.

B.    Not later than 5 calendar days after the date of the decision of the city manager, a notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant, postage prepaid, at the address shown in the application and shall state whether the decision of the city manager was to grant or deny the permit.

C.    If the city manager grants the permit or if the city manager neither grants nor denies the permit within 45 calendar days from the date a completed application is filed, the application shall be deemed granted. If the application is denied within 30 days of the filing of a completed application and the applicant files a timely notice of appeal, the applicant may operate the adult related business until the decision on the appeal is issued.

D.    If, after receiving a completed application for an adult related business permit, a city official required under this chapter fails to inspect the premises of the adult related business in the time frame required under this chapter, the inspection requirement for which the city has failed to fulfill its duty of inspection shall be deemed satisfied. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.028 Issuance of adult employee permit.
A.    Upon the filing of a completed adult employee permit application, the chief of police shall issue a temporary permit to the applicant, which temporary permit shall allow the employee to begin or continue working as an adult employee until the city makes a final decision to either grant or deny the application for an adult employee permit. The chief of police shall grant or deny the adult employee permit application within 10 calendar days after the filing of the application.

B.    The chief of police shall grant the permit unless the chief of police finds:

1.    That the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside of the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314.1, 314.2, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or as those sections may hereafter be amended or renumbered; provided, however, that the chief of police shall issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if the person is otherwise qualified for a permit; and the longer of the following time periods has passed:

a.    Five years from date of the conviction;

b.    Five years from release from confinement;

c.    Five years from formal release from probation period; or

d.    Five years from formal release from parole.

2.    That the applicant has knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application;

3.    That the applicant has had a permit relating to an adult related business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last 5 years. An applicant shall not be disqualified, however, by a permit denial, suspension, or revocation within the last 5 years if such denial, suspension, or revocation was the result of a criminal conviction for an offense listed in subsection (B)(1) and more than 5 years have passed from the date of conviction or release from confinement, probation, or parole related to the offense;

4.    That the applicant is not at least 18 years of age; or

5.    That the applicant has not paid the required fee to the finance department.

C.    Notice of Decision. The decision on an applicants permit application shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant postage prepaid, within 5 calendar days after the decision of the chief of police. If a permit is denied for an adult employee, the applicant shall cease activities within 5 calendar days of mailing of the decision, unless the applicant timely appeals the decision denying the permit pursuant to Section 5.21.029. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the applicant may continue as an adult employee until the decision on the appeal is issued. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.029 Appeal of decisions to deny business and employee permits.
A.    Adult Related Business Permits. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city manager relating to the issuance or denial of a permit for an adult related business may within 10 calendar days of the date identified in the decision of the city manager, appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. If an appeal is not filed within 10 calendar days, the decision of the city manager shall be final.

B.    Adult Employee Permits. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police relating to the issuance or denial of any adult employee permit may, within 10 calendar days of the date identified in the decision of the chief of police, appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. Pending a decision on the appeal, an employee may continue as an adult employee pursuant to the temporary permit issued to that employee. If an appeal is not filed within 10 calendar days, the decision of the chief of police shall be final.

C.    Hearing on Appeal. An appeal pursuant to subsection A or B of this section shall be set for hearing by the council at a date not later than 15 days after the filing of the notice of appeal or the next regularly scheduled city council meeting which can be noticed as required by law. The notice of hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at the address listed on the application at least 5 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The council may continue its hearing on the appeal from time to time; provided, however, that the decision on the appeal shall issue no later than 15 days after the original date set for hearing. The council shall hear all relevant evidence from competent persons relating to the granting or denial of the permit. An aggrieved applicant shall have the opportunity to present witnesses and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. The council may affirm or reject the decision of the city manager or chief of police. In its determination to affirm or revoke, the council shall apply the same criteria applicable to the decision of the city manager or the decision of the chief of police. The decision of the council to affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager or chief of police regarding any permit shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

The city council, in its sole discretion, may refer the appeal hearing to a hearing officer who shall hear all relevant evidence from competent persons relating to the granting or denial of the permit and issue a decision. If the matter is referred to a hearing officer for hearing, the hearing officer shall hold his/her hearing and issue his/her decision within 20 days of referral of the matter by the city council. The hearing officer shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue a written decision on the appeal. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. The hearing officer shall apply the same criteria applicable to the decision of the city manager or the decision of the chief of police.

D.    The city council may set an appeal fee for appeals provided in this section. The appeal fee shall be set at a level designed to recoup the cost of the appeal, including but not limited to costs of the hearing officer and court reporter. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.030 Term and renewal of adult related business permits.
A.    An adult related business permit shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked.

B.    A permit which has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for the period specified in subsection A on written application to the chief of police. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for permit applications. Before submitting the renewal application a nonrefundable renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the finance department to defray, in part, the cost of reviewing the renewal application. The application shall be filed at least 60 calendar days but not more than 90 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. When a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the permit shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued. When the application for renewal is filed less than 60 calendar days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.031 Term and renewal of adult employee permits.
A.    An adult employee permit shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked.

B.    A permit which has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for the period specified in subsection A on written application to the chief of police. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for permit applications. Before submitting the renewal application a nonrefundable renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the finance department to defray, in part, the cost of reviewing the renewal application. The application shall be filed at least 10 calendar days but not more than 60 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. When a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the permit shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued. When the application for renewal is filed less than 10 calendar days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.032 Name and place of businessChange of location.
No person granted a permit for an adult related business shall operate the adult related business under any name or at any location not specified in the permit. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.033 Suspension, revocation or other action relating to adult related business permits and adult employee permits.
A.    An adult related business permit and an adult employee permit may be suspended, revoked or other action may be taken against a permittee by the city manager in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

B.    The chief of police shall provide information to the city manager regarding the grounds for suspension, revocation or other adverse action relating to a permit under this section prior to the suspension, revocation or other action of a permit. On determining that grounds for permit suspension, revocation or other action exists, the city manager shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension, revocation or action to the permittee. The notice shall set forth the ground or grounds upon which the proposed action is based, the pertinent code sections, a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof, the action to be taken and the effective date of the action. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally.

C.    An adult related business permit required pursuant to Section 5.21.020 may be suspended or revoked or be subjected to other adverse action, if any of the following causes arise from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an operator of the adult related business:

1.    The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult related business fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

2.    The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city.

3.    The permittee or operator of an adult related business has knowingly allowed or permitted, or has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult related business:

a.    Any action included in the definition of specified sexual activities in this chapter;

b.    Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for any sexual act, including but not limited to those within the definition of specified sexual activities in this chapter;

c.    Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code;

d.    The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318, or subdivision (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code;

e.    California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4;

f.    The appearance of men or women in a state of nudity in any area of the adult related business premises by employees or patrons;

g.    The appearance of an employee or patron in a state of partial nudity or displaying specified anatomical areas on the premises, except when performing on stage as provided for in this chapter;

h.    Consuming of alcoholic beverages or possession, use or consumption of a controlled substance by employees or patrons anywhere on the premises of an adult related business premise or in the parking lot(s) owned, operated or maintained in connection with the adult related business premise where the owner or operator has knowledge of the consumption, possession or use or has failed to take reasonable efforts to prevent the consumption, possession or use;

i.    Violation of any of the development and operational standards, rules or regulations governing the conduct or operation of an adult related business by an employee or patron with knowledge by an employee or manager where no immediate action is taken by the owner or operator to stop the offending action;

j.    Employment of any person without an adult related business employee permit as required by this chapter; or

k.    Any act by an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

4.    Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed.

5.    Conviction of any of the crimes specified in Section 5.21.027 by an owner or operator of an adult related business.

D.    When the city manager finds and determines that there are grounds for action to be taken against a permittee, based upon the severity of the violation, the city manager shall impose 1 or more of the following:

1.    A warning;

2.    Conditions upon the permit reasonably related to address the violation(s);

3.    Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed 6 months; or

4.    Revocation of the permit.

E.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the adult related business for the purpose of establishing a violation of this chapter, or for purposes of permit denial, suspension, or revocation if a permittee allowed, either knowingly or through negligent failure to supervise, a violation of this chapter to occur. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.034 Appeals of decisions to suspend or revoke permits.
A.    Any permittee aggrieved by the decision of the city manager relating to the suspension, revocation or other action, except issuance of a warning, relating to an adult related business permit or an adult employee permit may, within 10 calendar days after the date of mailing of the decision to the permittee, appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. Decisions of the city manager to issue a warning are not appealable. If an appeal is not filed within 10 calendar days, the decision of the city manager shall be final. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the decision of the city manager shall be stayed until the decision on appeal is issued.

B.    Hearing on Appeal. An appeal pursuant to subsection A or B of this section shall be set for hearing by the council at a date not later than 15 days after the filing of the notice of appeal or the next regularly scheduled city council meeting which can be noticed as required by law. The notice of hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at the address listed on the application at least 5 calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. The council may continue its hearing on such appeal from time to time, provided, however, that the decision on the appeal shall issue no later than 15 calendar days after the original date set for hearing. The council shall hear all relevant evidence from competent persons relating to suspension, revocation of, or other discipline imposed upon, the permit. The decision of the council to affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager regarding any permit shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. Where the city council finds that cause exists to suspend or revoke a permit, the city councils authority to modify the decision of the city manager or chief of police includes reduction or increase of the suspension period, issuance of conditions on the permit reasonably related to the violation, and/or modifying a revocation to reflect a suspension provided the council finds that such modification will adequately address the issues which give rise to the suspension or revocation.

The city council, in its sole discretion, may refer the appeal hearing to a hearing officer who shall hear all relevant evidence from competent persons relating to the granting or denial of the permit and issue a decision. If the matter is referred to a hearing officer for hearing, the hearing officer shall hold his/her hearing and issue his/her decision within 20 days of referral of the matter by the city council. The hearing officer shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue a written decision on the appeal. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. The hearing officer shall apply the same criteria applicable to the decision of the city manager or the decision of the chief of police. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.040 Register of adult related business employees.
A.    The operator of an adult related business requiring an adult related business permit pursuant to Section 5.21.020 shall maintain a register on the premises of all employees of the business and their permit numbers.

B.    The register required by subsection A shall include the current employees, as well as employees during the previous 6 months. The register shall remain confidential, except that it shall be available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The operator of the business shall provide the register immediately upon demand during regular business hours. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.041 Adult employee identification card.
The chief of police shall provide to each adult employee granted a permit or temporary permit, an identification card containing the name, photograph and permit number of the adult employee. The identification card shall remain confidential, except that an adult employee shall deposit his or her identification card with the on-site manager of an adult related business while the adult employee is on the premises. The on-site manager shall make the identification cards available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer at all times while the adult related business is open for business. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.042 Employment of persons under the age of 18 years prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the permittee or operator of an adult related business to employ, or permit to perform services or entertainment on the premises, any person who is under the age of 18 years. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.043 Display of permit.
Every adult related business granted a permit shall display the permit in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the adult related business at all times during business hours. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.044 Business operations tax.
Nothing in this title shall relieve the owner of any adult related business, or any adult employee, from paying the applicable business operations tax pursuant to this title. The issuance of a business operations tax certificate shall not authorize conducting an adult related business until the necessary regulatory permit required by Sections 5.21.020 or 5.21.023 has been lawfully granted. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.045 Transfer of adult related business permit.
Adult related business permits are not transferable. Upon sale or relocation of an adult related business, the permit therefor shall be void; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee, the establishment may continue in business for 90 days to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit pursuant to this section, provided, however, that the executor of the estate shall be required to renew the application and comply with all other requirements of this code. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and upon such attempt the permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.046 Employment of adult related business employees.
A.    No permittee or operator of an adult related business shall employ any person unless that person possesses a valid adult employee permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each employee shall have first obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter and shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.

B.    No permittee or operator of an adult related business shall employ at an adult related business, any person who has been convicted of an offense specified in Section 5.21.027(A)(2) within the previous 5 years. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.047 Hours of operation.
An adult related business shall not be open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. An adult related business which has a license issued by the State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control may remain open as permitted by state law, but may not provide live adult entertainment as defined in this chapter after 11:00 p.m. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.048 Development and operational standards.
The following development and operational standards shall apply to adult related businesses, including those providing live adult entertainment and shall be in addition to those found in the zoning code:

A.    Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire department and building regulations and standards adopted by the city of Folsom.

B.    No adult related business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, displaying, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity as defined in this chapter, from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open in such a way as to permit the observation of men or women in a state of partial nudity or displaying sexually anatomical areas, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

C.    No person, including employees or patrons, may appear in a state of nudity nor shall a person wear clothing or other apparel which simulates the appearance of a state of nudity in an adult related business. No person shall appear or display specified anatomical areas or be in a state of partial nudity, except employees while in the employees dressing room or while an employee is performing on a stage as permitted in this chapter.

D.    All off-street parking areas and the exterior areas of an adult related business shall be illuminated as specified in the zoning ordinance. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.

E.    The building entrance to an adult related business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises.

F.    All interior areas of an adult related business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

Area

Foot-Candles

Bookstores and other retail establishments

20

Theaters and cabarets

5 (except for the stage area during performances, at which times lighting may be as low as 1.0 foot-candles on the stage, but 5.0 at all other locations within the adult related business premises)

Motels/hotels

20 (in public areas)

Modeling studios

20

G.    The adult related business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and female patrons and male employees and female employees. No person of the opposite sex may enter a male or female restroom, except an employee may enter to carry out duties of repair, maintenance or cleaning while the restroom is closed for use. The restroom shall be free of any adult material and shall not contain television monitors, or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment.

H.    No employee shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any patron and no patron shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any employee except for purposes of collecting money by hand to hand transfer, rendering emergency medical aid or handing something to the other in the ordinary course of business. It is the intent of this section to prohibit any touching of a sexual nature between patrons and employees.

I.    Adult related businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain public peace and safety and to assure compliance with the regulations relating to adult related businesses and based upon the following standards:

1.    Adult related businesses featuring live entertainment or individual viewing booths at adult motion picture theaters or adult arcades shall provide at least 1 security guard inside the facility at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy of the adult related business featuring live entertainment or individual viewing booths at adult motion picture theaters or adult arcades is greater than 35 patrons, an additional security guard shall be on duty inside the building premise. Where an adult related business features live adult entertainment, as defined in this chapter, an additional security guard shall be present outside the facility to provide patrol in the parking lots at all times the business is open.

2.    Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner to be readily identified by the public as a security guard and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security person required pursuant to this section shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, entertainer or performer or shall be the sole occupant of the managers station while acting as a security guard. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.049 Adult related businesses providing live adult entertainment.
In addition to the development and operational standards provided in Section 5.21.048 and those found in the zoning code, the following additional requirements shall also apply to adult related businesses providing live adult entertainment as defined in this chapter:

A.    No person shall perform live adult entertainment for patrons of an adult related business except upon a stage which is at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and which is separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an adult employee. Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained at the 10 foot perimeter point to establish the separation between adult employees and patrons as required by this subsection.

B.    No owner or operator of an adult related business which provides live adult entertainment and for which an adult related business permit is required pursuant to this chapter shall permit any person to be on the premises of the adult related business in a state of nudity.

C.    No owner or operator of an adult related business which provides live entertainment for which an adult related business permit is required by this chapter shall permit any person to appear in any public area of the premises in a state of dress less than a state of partial nudity, except when performing on a stage as permitted by this chapter.

D.    No person, other than an employee of the adult related business who has been issued a valid adult employee permit, may provide live adult entertainment in an adult related business and the owner and/or operator and manager may not permit any person to appear in a state of dress less than a state of partial nudity in an adult related business.

E.    The adult related business shall provide separate dressing rooms for adult employees which are exclusively dedicated to the adult employees use, and to which no patron shall be admitted. No patron shall be permitted in the employees dressing room. The adult related business shall provide a separate walkway between the dressing room facilities and the stage in a location which is not open to patrons, located at least 10 feet from patrons and which is at least 3 feet wide with a fixed solid barrier at least 30 inches in height separating the adult employees approaching or leaving the stage from all patrons.

F.    The adult related business shall provide an entrance/exit from the adult related business premise for an employee that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

G.    No employee shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any patron and no patron shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any employee except for purposes of collecting money by hand to hand transfer, rendering emergency medical aid or handing something to the other in the ordinary course of business. It is the intent of this section to prohibit any touching of a sexual nature between patrons and employees.

H.    No employee shall solicit tips or other gratuities from any patron or other employees. No gratuity or tip may be given to an employee providing live adult entertainment except by placing the tip or gratuity into a non-human receptacle placed at the rail separating the employees from the patrons and at least 10 feet from the stage. Employees, other than those providing live adult entertainment, may accept gratuities or tips but only by means of hand to hand transfer or another method not involving physical contact between the patron and the employee. Any transfer of tips or gratuities between patrons and employees shall comply with this sections prohibitions on physical contact between adult employees and patrons.

I.    Manager Stations. All indoor areas of the adult related business providing live adult entertainment within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view within a direct line of sight at all times by the management from a designated manager station. Manager stations shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Manager stations may include video monitoring of the adult related business, but all areas of the business must be visible by a direct line of sight as described in this subsection. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.050 Management requirements.
There shall be present on the premises of an adult related business at all times while the business is open, a manager who shall be in charge of all of the activities on the premises and who shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.053 Persons under the age of 18 years prohibited on premises of adult related business.
A.    It shall be unlawful for the permittee or operator of an adult related business to permit to enter, or remain within, the adult related business, any person who is under the age of 18 years.

B.    It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 18 to enter, or remain within, the adult related business. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.054 Inspection.
To the extent authorized by law, an applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, planning and inspections division, and other city and county departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult related business for the purpose of insuring compliance with this code and the development and operational standards applicable to adult related businesses, at any time it is open for business. A person who operates an adult related business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. Nothing in this section shall permit or authorize warrantless searches of property on the premises, except as otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.055 Conditions of adult related business permit.
The requirements, regulations and provisions set forth in this chapter shall be deemed conditions imposed upon every adult related business permit approved, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension, revocation or other action on the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

5.21.056 Violations.
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an adult related business in violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, patron or employee to knowingly violate any provision of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or an administrative violation punishable as follows:

A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement as set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 6 months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Notwithstanding the procedure for administrative violations provided in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, no notice to correct as provided in Section 1.09.023 shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of administrative violation.

C.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of this chapter.

D.    Based on the criteria for the imposition of administrative violations set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter committed by a patron or a non-management employee shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. Based on the criteria for the imposition of administrative violations set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter committed by an owner or manager shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A).

E.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly.

Nothing in this section shall be deemed or constituted to prevent the city from commencing any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration and/or abatement of a public nuisance. (Ord. 998  2 (part), 2003)

Chapter 5.25
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND PRACTITIONERS
Sections:

5.25.010    Purpose.

5.25.020    Definitions.

5.25.030    State certification required.

5.25.040    Time for compliance.

5.25.050    Health and safety requirements.

5.25.060    Operating requirements for massage establishments.

5.25.070    Operation requirements for off-premises massage services.

5.25.080    Display of certificate.

5.25.090    Record keeping.

5.25.100    Notification required prior to change of information.

5.25.110    Exemptions.

5.25.120    Owner and operator responsibility.

5.25.130    Unlawful to operate in violation of chapter.

5.25.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulation of massage establishments, massage therapists and practitioners by requiring persons who engage in the practice of massage to obtain and continue to maintain a valid and current state certification as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 et seq. It is the intent of the city of Folsom in adopting this chapter to protect the publics health, safety and welfare through the standards of professional competence and operational requirements established or otherwise permitted under state law. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases are defined for the purposes of this chapter as follows:

California Massage Therapy Council means the massage therapy organization formed pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600.5.

Certificate means the certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council.

Massage therapist or massage practitioner means a person who is certified by the California Massage Therapy Council as a massage practitioner or a massage therapist and who administers massage for compensation.

Certified sole proprietorship means any massage business where the owner is the only person employed or used by that business to provide massage services and the owner has a current and valid certificate.

Massage or massage therapy means the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment involving the external manipulation or pressure of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. Massage therapy includes any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external surfaces of the body with hands, apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice; or by baths, including but not limited to Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, or any other type of bath. Massage therapy does not include diagnosis, prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, nor any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, acupuncture, or podiatry is required by law.

Massage establishment means any business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination thereof that engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or conducted, for money or any other consideration, massage or massage therapy including, but not limited to, those engaged primarily in massage therapy or that provide massage as an accessory to their principal permitted use, such as aromatherapy, beauty salon, health club, skin care salon, acupuncture, chiropractic office or day spa.

Massage establishment operator or operator means a person who supervises, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the conduct of the activities within a massage establishment.

Off-premises massage services means services in which a massage therapist or massage practitioner engages in, conducts, or carries on a massage at a location other than a massage establishment at a fixed location.

Patron means a customer or client who receives a massage or massage therapy in exchange for money or other consideration.

Reflexology means massage of the feet or hands based on the belief that pressure applied to specific points on these extremities benefits other parts of the body. It is a non-invasive complementary modality involving the use of alternating pressure applied to the reflexes within the reflex maps of the body located on the feet, hands, and outer ears. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.030 State certification required.
A.    Unless exempt under Section 5.25.110, no person may practice as a massage therapist or massage practitioner within the city of Folsom without a certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council.

B.    No person shall conduct or operate a massage establishment or off-premises massage service without requiring that all persons practicing massage in, for, or on behalf of the massage establishment possess a current and valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.040 Time for compliance.
A.    Massage practitioners and massage therapists working in the city but who do not possess a certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council shall have until July 1, 2013, to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that the individual is actively applying for a certificate or enrolled in an approved massage school as defined under Business and Professions Code Section 4600(a), the chief of police may extend the compliance period for an additional period not exceeding twelve months at his or her discretion.

B.    In order to continue practicing massage during the compliance period provided in this section without a certificate, massage practitioners and massage therapists who do not currently possess a certificate shall meet the following requirements:

1.    Provide proof of certificate application to the California Massage Therapy Council, or course enrollment to satisfy the certificate requirement, to the chief of police no later than twenty calendar days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and

2.    The individual is otherwise in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter; and

3.    The individual is not required to register as a sex offender under California Penal Code Section 290, does not have any record of conviction of violation of California Penal Code Sections 266i (pandering), 315 (keeping or residing in house of ill-fame), 316 (keeping house of prostitution), 318 (prevailing upon person to visit place for gambling or prostitution), 647(b) (prostitution); 653.23 (supervision of prostitute); any sex or illegal substance related offense, or similar provisions in other jurisdictions. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.050 Health and safety requirements.
The following health and safety requirements shall be applicable to all massage establishments and off-premises massage services:

A.    All individuals working in or for a massage establishment or off-premises massage service shall be fully clothed at all times, whether or not massage services are being performed. Clothing shall be of a clean, fully opaque, nontransparent material without holes and provide complete coverage from midthigh to three inches below the collar bone.

B.    The massage establishment and off-premises massage services shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens, and all massage tables shall be covered with a clean sheet or other clean covering for each patron. After a towel, covering, or linen has once been used it shall be deposited in a closed receptacle and not used until properly laundered and sanitized. Clean towels, coverings and linens shall be stored in closed, clean cabinets when not in use.

C.    All liquids, creams, or other preparations used on or made available to patrons shall be kept in clean and closed containers. All bottles and containers shall be distinctly and correctly labeled to disclose their contents. When only a portion of a liquid, cream or other preparation is to be used on or made available to a patron, it shall be removed from the container in such a way as not to contaminate the remaining portion.

D.    All bathrobes, bathing suits and/or other garments that are provided for the use of patrons shall be either fully disposable and shall not be used by more than one patron, or shall be laundered after each use pursuant to subsection B of this section.

E.    The patrons genitals, pubic area, anus, gluteal crease, or the areola (nipple), and female patrons breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola must be fully draped at all times while any employee of the business or establishment is in the massage therapy room, cubicle, or any type of room or space with the patron. No massage service or massage therapy shall be administered to a patron that results in intentional contact, or occasional and repetitive contact, with the genitals, pubic area, anus, gluteal crease, the areola (nipple), and female breasts of a patron.

F.    No person afflicted with an infection or parasitic infestation transmissible to a patron shall knowingly administer massage service or massage therapy to a patron, or remain on the premises of a massage establishment while so infected or infested.

G.    No person shall enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage establishment or any room or space used by an off-premises massage service while consuming, using, or under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, unless properly licensed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, or a drug unless it is a drug prescribed for that individual. The responsible owner, operator, managing employee or manager shall not permit any such person to enter or remain on such premises. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.060 Operating requirements for massage establishments.
A.    Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition. Appliances, apparatus, and equipment shall be disinfected after each use.

B.    A list of services and prices shall be posted in an open, public place on the premises, and shall be described in readily understood language. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee or manager shall permit, and no massage practitioner or massage therapist shall offer to perform services other than those posted.

C.    A dressing room, which may be the room where massage is administered for each patron, shall be available on the premises with individual lockers or a separate storage area for the clothing of the patron. A separate dressing area and clothing locker or storage area is required where the massage is performed in a place other than where the patron changes his or her clothing. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.

D.    Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each business day. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.

E.    If a receptionist is present, the public entrance door of the massage establishment and the doors of all massage rooms or cubicles must remain unlocked during any time the establishment is occupied. In the absence of a receptionist, the public entrance may be locked as long as fire safety requirements are met (panic bar, no deadbolt).

F.     No massage may be given within any cubicle, room, booth or any area behind a locked door unless there is no staff available to assure security for patrons and massage staff who are behind closed doors.

G.    No person shall enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage establishment while consuming, using, or under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, unless properly licensed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, or a drug unless it is a drug prescribed for that individual. The responsible owner, operator, managing employee or manager shall not permit any such person to enter or remain on such premises.

H.     Any person operating a massage establishment from home shall have a valid home occupation permit and a city of Folsom business license, and shall comply with the following specific conditions, in addition to any other requirements for home occupations under Chapter 17.61:

1.    The massage establishment may operate from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, and from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekends;

2.    The number of massage therapists, massage practitioners or other individuals working in or employed by the massage establishment shall not exceed four persons on site, excluding clients;

3.    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this code, no signage, display or advertisement for massage may be visible from the exterior of the dwelling.

I.    The presence of any device used as an early warning system to alert the employees of a massage establishment to the presence of law enforcement officers or city authorities on the premises is prohibited in any massage establishment. Said devices may include, but are not limited to light or music dimmers, electronic detection devices, external or internal video equipment and alarm systems other than those used for fire alarms.

J.    The city may conduct reasonable inspections during regular business hours to ensure compliance with the California Business and Professions Code sections, this chapter, or other applicable fire, health, and safety requirements. (Ord. 1217  2, 2015; Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.070 Operation requirements for off-premises massage services.
A.    All equipment and apparatus shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be disinfected after each use.

B.    Each off-premises massage practitioner or massage therapist shall possess a copy of the valid and current certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council while administering massage services.

C.    A list of services and prices shall be available for review by the patron or authorized representative of the chief of police upon request and shall be described in readily understood language. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee or manager shall permit, and no massage therapist or massage practitioner shall offer to perform services other than those available for review. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.080 Display of certificate.
Every massage establishment or off-premises massage business shall conspicuously display a copy of the current and valid certificate issued to each massage practitioner or massage therapist by the California Massage Therapy Council so that it may be easily seen by any person, patron, or other person on the premises. Any person providing massage services shall have a valid massage therapist or massage practitioner certificate readily available for inspection at all times while providing such services, and shall show the certificate to any authorized representative of the city upon request. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.090 Record keeping.
The operator of any massage establishment or off-premises massage business shall maintain a copy of the current and valid certificate issued to all persons employed or otherwise working in the establishment or business as massage therapists and/or massage practitioners. Such record shall be available for inspection by city staff at all times during regular business hours. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.100 Notification required prior to change of information.
Change of the establishment name, location, address, management, or transfer/conveyance of the establishment business to another person requires the operator to notify the chief of police in writing ten calendar days prior to the change. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.110 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:

A.    Hospitals, nursing homes, and persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state;

B.    Trainers of amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team, or persons while engaging in their training responsibilities for and with athletes, and trainers working in conjunction with a specific athletic event;

C.    Accredited junior colleges and colleges and universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the course and scope of their employment;

D.    Barbers or cosmetologists lawfully engaging in such business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the state within the limitations placed on such licenses, except that the exemption provided in this provision shall apply solely and only to the massaging of neck, face and/or scalp of the patrons;

E.    Health clubs, health spas, gymnasia, or other similar facilities designed or intended for general physical exercise or conditioning in which the furnishing of massage or bathing services or facilities is subordinate and incidental, except that the person performing the massage services shall possess a state certificate as required by this chapter;

F.    Individuals practicing reflexology whose practices are limited to alternating pressure applied to the reflexes within the reflex maps of the body located on the feet, hands, and outer ears. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.120 Owner and operator responsibility.
The owner(s) or operator(s) of a massage establishment shall be responsible for ensuring that every massage practitioner and massage therapist working in the establishment comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

5.25.130 Unlawful to operate in violation of chapter.
It is unlawful, a misdemeanor, and a public nuisance to violate any provision in this chapter, including but not limited to practice massage or operate a massage establishment in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1173  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 5.50
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
Sections:

5.50.010    Title.

5.50.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the cable television ordinance. Those certain documents, marked and designated as County of Sacramento Code, Title 5, Chapter 5.50, including, but not limited to, the identification and regulation of: cable television franchises, the establishment and operation of the cable television commission, the system capability and standards, the prevailing rates, the construction and extension of the system use of streets, services, franchise fees and rates, security, indemnification, insurance, assignments, and the Video Customer Service Act, and the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The Folsom city council reserves the right, by amendments to this chapter, to exclude portions of the designated incorporated chapter and such exclusions, if any, are set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1116  2, 2008: Ord. 1083  2, 2007: Ord. 1000  2 (part), 2003)

Chapter 5.75
CABLE TELEVISION LICENSING
Sections:

5.75.010    Title.

5.75.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the cable television licensing ordinance. Those certain documents, marked and designated as County of Sacramento Code, Title 5, Chapter 5.75, including, but not limited to, the identification and regulation of: communications with regulatory agencies, issuance of licenses, system capability and standards, construction requirements, services, license fees, bonds and insurance, transfer and termination, and the Video Customer Service Act, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The Folsom city council reserves the right, by amendment to this chapter, to exclude portions of the designated incorporated chapter and such exclusions, if any, are set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1000  2 (part), 2003)

Chapter 5.80
PERMITS FOR MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION AND COMMERCIAL FILM PRODUCTION
Sections:

5.80.010    Title of chapter.

5.80.020    Findings and purpose.

5.80.030    Definitions.

5.80.040    Permit required.

5.80.050    Film permit application.

5.80.060    Application form.

5.80.070    Application evaluation.

5.80.080    Permit conditions.

5.80.090    Fees and deposit.

5.80.100    Filming date change.

5.80.110    Insurance.

5.80.120    Indemnification.

5.80.130    Duty of permittee.

5.80.140    Appeal.

5.80.150    Permit revocation and suspension.

5.80.160    Enforcement.

5.80.170    Disruption of production activity.

5.80.010 Title of chapter.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Folsom Film Permit Ordinance. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.020 Findings and purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for rules governing the issuance of permits for motion picture, television, commercial film production and new media activities in the city. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that motion picture, television, commercial, new media and nontheatrical production companies will be encouraged to use production locations within the city so long as those activities are consistent with the public health and safety and the protection of property. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:

A.    City manager shall mean the city manager of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

B.    Production activity shall mean filming, video taping, photographing, or other similar or related process conducted for the making of motion pictures, music videos, television programs, video commercial, new media and nontheatrical productions and other similar activity.

C.    Film permit shall mean written authorization from the city manager to conduct the production activity described in the permit.

D.    New media shall mean digital, computerized, or networked information and communication technologies in networkable, dense, compressible, streaming or interactive format through virtual digital environment such as, for example, the Internet, website, mobile computing, computer multimedia, computer games, CD-ROMs, and DVDs.

E.    News media shall mean a production activity conducted for the purpose of reporting on spontaneous, unplanned persons or events which are in the news for television, newspaper, and other news services.

F.    Production studio shall mean a building, portion of a building, or a group of buildings designed and constructed for use by the entertainment industry for the purpose of motion picture, television, commercial film or new media productions.

G.    Sound stage shall mean a building or portion of a building usually insulated from outside noise and natural light for use by the entertainment industry for the purpose of motion picture, television, commercial film or new media production. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.040 Permit required.
A.    It is unlawful to conduct a production activity as defined in Section 5.80.030(B) on any public or private property, facility or residence without first obtaining a film permit from the city manager.

B.    Permit required under this chapter is in addition to any other regulatory requirements including, but not limited to, motion picture operational permit required under the Folsom Fire Code (Section 8.36.080).

C.    Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:

1.    News Media. Reporters, photographers, cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest.

2.    Personal Video/Still Photography. The filming or video taping of motion pictures or still photography solely for noncommercial use.

3.    Commercial Still Photography. Weddings, school pictures, and organized sports or clubs pictures.

4.    Production Studio or Sound Stage. Production activities conducted in a production studio or sound stage as defined in Section 5.80.030(F) and (G).

5.    Investigation and Judicial Proceeding. Production activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or court civil or criminal proceeding.

6.    Education. Filming activities conducted by students enrolled in local Folsom college, high school, junior high school, elementary school or other educational or public agency institutions solely for noncommercial educational purposes that do not impact public streets and/or public places. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.050 Film permit application.
A.    Completed applications for a filming permit shall be filed with the city manager as far in advance of the time that the proposed production activity is to commence as practicable.

B.    Application deadlines may be waived for good cause by the city manager. Good cause shall be found if the city manager determines that there is sufficient time to process the application and for the city to prepare for the requested production activity.

C.    The city will strive to respond to the application within forty-eight hours from receipt of a complete application packet. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.060 Application form.
Permit application shall be on a form furnished by the city. Incomplete applications shall not be accepted. The application shall at the minimum include the following information:

A.    Name, business address and telephone number of the applicant.

B.    Location(s) and approximate daily call times of the proposed production activity.

C.    Plans to use any public facilities, streets, sidewalks, trails of any type, and/or parks, including dates and times of intended use.

D.    Description of scenes to be filmed, including details of any stunts, action, chase scenes, pyrotechnics, open flame, explosion or special effects.

E.    Name of person in charge on location and the telephone number at the site where the activity is to be conducted.

F.    Written proof of permission to film on private and public property within the city.

G.    Description of all vehicles which will be parked on city streets during production activities and a proposed parking plan.

H.    Such other information concerning time, safety and impact on public welfare of the production activity as the city manager may require to evaluate the approval or denial of a film permit under this chapter.

I.    Insurance certificate. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.070 Application evaluation.
A.    The application shall be reviewed by all city departments likely to be affected by the motion picture, television or commercial film production activities, including but not limited to police, fire, community development, public works, parks and recreation, and utilities. No permit shall be issued for any activity described in this chapter without first obtaining recommendation from the aforementioned city departments.

B.    The application shall be approved or denied as soon as practical following receipt of the complete application. The following criteria shall be considered when approving or denying the application:

1.    The extent to which production activity will disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles in the proposed permit area.

2.    Whether the location of the production activity will interfere with street maintenance work, a previously authorized excavation or encroachment permit, or a previously scheduled event or activity.

3.    Whether a particular production activity would interfere with parking, crowd control, litter, noise and impacts to city personnel.

4.    The extent to which the proposed production location is on city-owned property and whether the production activity will interfere with municipal functions or other previously authorized events or activities on city property.

5.    Whether the production activity creates a substantial risk of injury to persons or property.

6.    Whether the applicant failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to contain a material misrepresentation.

7.    Whether the particular production activity would violate federal, state or local law including, but not limited to, license or permit requirements, or an order or judicial decree issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.

C.    When the grounds for permit denial can be corrected by imposing reasonable permit conditions, the city manager shall impose such conditions rather than denying the permit.

D.    Any emergency road work or construction by city crews and/or private contractors under permit or contract to the appropriate city department, as well as previously authorized events or activities on city property, shall have priority over production activities. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.080 Permit conditions.
The city manager may condition the issuance of a film permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of production activities including but not limited to the following:

A.    Requirements for the presence of Folsom police department, fire department, utilities department, parks and recreation department, and/or public works department employees when required for the particular production activity at the applicants expense.

B.    Requirements for security or private emergency medical transport services at applicants expense.

C.    Requirements concerning posting of no parking signs and placement of other traffic and/or crowd control devices at the applicants expense.

D.    Requirement for utilities.

E.    Requirement for valid licenses and permits required by applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations.

F.    Restrictions on the use of intense lighting equipment, generators, gunfire, explosions or other noise-creating or hazardous devices.

G.    Restrictions on parking on public streets or facilities.

H.    Requirements for litter control and/or post-filming cleanup.

I.    Restrictions on hours of production activity.

J.    Restrictions on noise level from production activity.

K.    The applicant shall reimburse the city for any costs incurred by city, including any personnel provided for the purpose of ensuring public health and safety, permit compliance and/or to provide traffic or crowd control in connection with the production activity.

L.    Requirements concerning notice to affected residents and businesses within three hundred feet of the production activity, or a greater distance if warranted by the particular production activity. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.090 Fees and deposit.
A.    A schedule of fees for city services and use of city property shall be established by city council resolution. The applicant shall prepay such fees prior to issuance of the film permit.

B.    To ensure cleanup and restoration of public streets and public places used for production activity, the applicant may be required to post a deposit in an amount determined by the city manager at the time of permit issuance. In the event permittee fails to clean up areas used for production activity after completion of the activity, the city may, but is not obligated to, use said deposit to clean up trash and debris and to restore public areas to the same condition as they existed prior to filming. Any unused deposit shall be refunded to the permittee within thirty calendar days of verification by city staff that all required cleanup and restoration activities have been completed. Use of deposit by the city shall not relieve the applicant from any obligation imposed upon the applicant under this chapter. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.100 Filming date change.
Upon reasonable notice by the permittee in advance of the production activity, the city manager shall be authorized to change or extend the date(s) for which the film permit has been issued without requiring a new application. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a revised application shall be required if substantial changes are made to the proposed production activity described in the original application. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.110 Insurance.
A.    The applicant for a film permit shall possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury, wrongful death, and property damage arising from the production activity whenever city property, streets, personnel or facilities are used for any production-related purposes, including but not limited to parking and crowd control. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as additional insured the city of Folsom, its officers, employees and agents and the policy shall stipulate that this insurance will operate as primary insurance for activities of the permittee and that no other insurance effected by the city or other named insureds will be called on to cover a loss covered thereunder. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the production activity.

B.    Coverage shall be provided by a comprehensive commercial, general liability and automobile insurance policy in the amount of one million dollars per occurrence. The insurance coverage afforded by the policy shall provide at a minimum the equivalent of insurance coverage provided by insurance service office (ISO) comprehensive general liability insurance coverage.

C.    Satisfactory insurance or evidence of permission to self-insure in full compliance with Workers Compensation Law of California.

D.    Proof of insurance coverage as specified in subsections A, B and C of this section must be verified by the city manager prior to issuance of a film permit. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.120 Indemnification.
A.    Prior to the issuance of the film permit, the permit applicant shall sign an agreement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, to reimburse the city for any costs incurred to repair or replace city property which is damaged as the result of the production activity.

B.    The agreement shall also provide that the permittee shall be required to protect, defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the production activity. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.130 Duty of permittee.
A.    Permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit and this chapter. Failure to comply with all permit terms and conditions is grounds for permit revocation by the city manager.

B.    Permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the cleanup of trash and debris.

C.    Within seventy-two hours of completion of shooting at the scene unless otherwise extended by the city manager, the permittee shall clean up areas used for or affected by production activity, free of trash and debris, and shall restore said areas to the same condition as they existed prior to the production activity.

D.    Permittee shall clean and restore all city-owned property utilized or affected during the production activity to the same condition as existed prior to the filming.

E.    Permittee shall retain a copy of the film permit on location. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.140 Appeal.
The permit applicant may appeal a permit denial, permit condition, permit revocation or refusal to waive a deadline under this chapter by filing an appeal to the city manager if the decision was made by the city managers designee, or to the city council if the decision was made by the city manager, under the procedure set forth in Section 2.08.060. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.150 Permit revocation and suspension.
A.    The city manager may revoke the film permit if the permittee, or any officers, agents, employees, volunteers, or contractors of the permittee fail to comply with the conditions and requirements of the permit or this chapter, or if the city manager determines after issuance that any information provided in the permit application is materially false. Revocation of a permit issued under this chapter shall be made in writing.

B.    Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to immediate suspension by the city if necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. A Folsom police officer or fire marshal may suspend the film permit when the production activity poses an immediate hazard to persons and/or property, and the permittee will not or cannot prevent or eliminate the hazard after being instructed to do so by the officer. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.160 Enforcement.
A.    Violations of this chapter shall constitute misdemeanors. Violation not abated at the end of the day shall constitute a new violation on the following day. In addition to all other remedies at law or in equity, violations may be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year; and a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same provision within one year.

B.    Violations of this chapter may also be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.09. Notwithstanding other provisions of Chapter 1.09, no notice to correct and stop order as provided therein shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of violation and imposition of administrative penalties.

C.    The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude any other remedy, and nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable law. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

5.80.170 Disruption of production activity.
A.    No person, after first being warned by a peace officer to cease the conduct, shall engage in conduct which disrupts production activity undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under the authority of this chapter.

B.    For purposes of this section, conduct which disrupts production activity includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:

1.    Creating or causing audible interference to the recording of sound;

2.    Interfering with the ability of a production to achieve consistent light levels by shining or reflecting light onto a set or at a camera or by utilizing other artificial means to adversely affect lighting;

3.    Interfering with the production activity by introducing or causing to inject smoke or foreign materials into the location where production activity is taking place;

4.    Interfering with the entrance or egress of production equipment or personnel;

5.    Placing obstacles at any location where production activity is taking place.

C.    Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1128  2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 5.90
ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT
Sections:

5.90.010    Purpose.

5.90.020    Definitions.

5.90.030    Creation of an entertainment district.

5.90.040    Establishing conditions applicable to an entertainment district.

5.90.050    Entertainment permit requiredCompliance with other laws.

5.90.060    Exemption from the permit requirement.

5.90.070    Application of chapter.

5.90.080    Hours of operationResponsible person.

5.90.090    Disturbing the peaceDisorderly conduct.

5.90.100    Intoxicated customers.

5.90.110    Observation of noise abatement laws required.

5.90.120    Disorderly conduct within twenty feet prohibited.

5.90.130    Orderly dispersal required.

5.90.140    Threat to public safety.

5.90.150    Application for permit.

5.90.160    Application review and permit issuance.

5.90.170    Fees.

5.90.180    Display of permits.

5.90.190    Duration of permit.

5.90.200    Permit not transferable.

5.90.210    Suspension, modification or revocation of permit.

5.90.220    Effect of revocation.

5.90.230    Appeals.

5.90.240    ViolationPenalty.

5.90.010 Purpose.
The city council of the city of Folsom encourages the development of arts and culture in Folsom, and recognizes that many entertainment venues provide a means for such development. The council further recognizes that the varied entertainment venues in the city provide a rich and diverse cultural experience for the residents of the city and visitors to the city.

The council also recognizes that many entertainment venues provide a safe place for families and young adults to gather.

The city council further recognizes that the operation of entertainment establishments can present, if improperly managed, an environment with the demonstrated potential for excessive noise generation and disorderly conduct by patrons, particularly at closing times, with the attendant adverse health and safety impacts on the surrounding business and residential community. It is recognized that some entertainment establishments in Folsom operate without conditions imposed through a conditional use permit (CUP) while others have been issued CUPs with conditions. The city council finds it is beneficial to all businesses within an entertainment area or district and for the residents who reside near such establishments that the businesses operate with similar reasonable and appropriate operating conditions.

Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to set forth reasonable regulations relating to the operation of establishments that offer entertainment for the public health, safety and welfare of the businesses, residents, patrons and others present in or near entertainment areas or districts. The further purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations to provide that entertainment establishments participate in controlling patron conduct in and around the establishments, making adequate provisions for security, underage drinking and crowd control, noise and minimizing disturbances as a result of the operation of the entertainment. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this chapter:

ABC license means the license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

Admission charge means any charge for the right or privilege to enter any place of entertainment including a minimum service charge, an event charge, a cover charge, a charge for the use of seats and tables, or any other similar charge. It also includes the purchase or presentation of a ticket, token or equivalent directly or indirectly required as a condition for entrance. It does not include tips, gratuities, voluntary donations, or suggested donations to be provided to employees or for any person providing entertainment.

Chief of police means the chief of police of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

City manager means the city manager of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

Dance and dancing mean movement of the human body, accompanied by music or rhythm.

Director means the director of the city of Folsom public works and community development department or his/her designee.

Disorderly conduct means any of the following: consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property, public drunkenness, obstructing the free passage of pedestrians over public sidewalks, the obstruction of free passage of vehicles within the public right-of-way, littering, fighting, shouting, conduct that violates any provision of Chapters 8.42 (noise ordinance), 9.42 (public urination or defecation) and 9.88 (firearm), and such other conduct that constitutes a public nuisance or a violation of law.

Entertainment means any activity conducted for the purpose of diverting or entertaining a clientele in a premises open to the general public. Examples of such activity may include, but not be limited to, presentations by single or multiple performers such as hypnotists, mimes, comedians, musical song or dance acts; plays, concerts, dancing, any type of contest, whether by performers or patrons of the establishment; live musical performances, instrumental or vocal, when carried on by more than two persons or whenever sound or music is amplified; musical entertainment provided by a disc jockey or karaoke, or any similar entertainment involving amplified, reproduced music; dancing to live or recorded music.

Entertainment district means an area or areas with specific boundaries designated by resolution of the city council.

Entertainment permit means a special permit issued by the city under this chapter related to the operation of an establishment offering entertainment open to the public in the entertainment district.

Owner means the owner of a business that is a sole proprietorship, or an authorized member of a partnership, corporation or other business entity.

Permittee means a person or business entity that has been issued an entertainment permit as provided in this chapter.

Reasonable efforts means the adoption, carrying out and posting of operating policies that are consistent with the requirements of this code and the entertainment permit and the adherence to those policies, the documented training of employees in the carrying out of the establishment operating policies, notifying the police of apparent criminal activity, and the taking of all additional measures, consistent with sound business judgment, necessary to accomplish the required result.

Responsible person means the permittee, owner, proprietor, promoter, manager, assistant manager or other person present and exercising control over the operation of an entertainment establishment, whether or not that person is a named permittee.

Theater means any commercial establishment where regular sporting events, concerts, motion picture screenings, dance lessons, student recitals or theatrical and performance arts are given, usually with a stage, and usually with ascending row seating or some arrangement of permanent seating. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.030 Creation of an entertainment district.
The city council may designate an entertainment district by council resolution. The resolution shall set forth the geographic boundaries of the district. Prior to establishing the entertainment district, the city shall provide notice to all businesses and residences within the boundaries of the district of the date and time for the city council meeting to consider creation of the district. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.040 Establishing conditions applicable to an entertainment district.
A.    The city council shall establish conditions applicable to any business in the entertainment district that requires an entertainment permit. The city council shall generally apply uniform conditions based on the type of business operating in the district. Each permittee issued an entertainment permit shall be required to follow the conditions established for the district. Examples of conditions the city council may require include, but are not limited to, the following: allowable hours of entertainment, hours for amplified music, and security requirements based on the type of entertainment offered.

B.    In the event of a conflict between the conditions established by the city council pursuant to subsection A of this section and one or more conditions in a use permit existing on the owners premises, the owner may continue with entertainment under the use permit as nonconforming use for a period not exceeding six months from the date of adoption of the entertainment permit conditions, and shall thereafter comply with all conditions established by the city council for the entertainment permit. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.050 Entertainment permit requiredCompliance with other laws.
A.    Unless exempt pursuant to Section 5.90.060, it is unlawful for any person or entity to provide, host, organize, own or otherwise allow any entertainment that is open to the public in an area designated by the city council as an entertainment district without an entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

B.    Any person or business entity providing entertainment must comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and any conditions established by the city council when creating an entertainment district.

C.    Neither the obtaining of an entertainment permit nor compliance with the operating standards provided in this chapter shall obviate the need for, or excuse any noncompliance with, the zoning code, building code, fire code or any other or additional permit requirement or standard made applicable to the entertainment and/or the establishment providing, hosting, organizing or otherwise allowing the entertainment under any other provision of this code or state or federal law. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.060 Exemption from the permit requirement.
The following types of entertainment are exempt from the permit requirement in this chapter. This exemption does not relieve any establishment from complying with all other applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations including, but not limited to, regulations related to noise levels, disorderly conduct and nuisances.

A.    Entertainment sponsored by the city of Folsom, the county of Sacramento, any public agencies, schools, school districts or by any other political subdivision of the state of California.

B.    Entertainment lawfully conducted at any city park, building, recreational facility, public plaza or public right-of-way under a city-issued permit or contract.

C.    Entertainment limited to the use of a radio, juke box, television, video games, video programs, or recorded music by an establishment that does not permit dancing.

D.    Entertainment provided for members and their guests at a private club, society, association, or religious organization who are exempt from taxation pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code when admission is not open to the public and all proceeds, if any, arising from such entertainment are used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of such club, society, association, or religious organization. For purposes of this section, private club, society or association means a corporation, organization or association operated solely for objects of national, social, fraternal, patriotic, political, or athletic nature, in which membership is by application and regular dues are charged, and the advantages of which club belong to members, and the operation of which is not primarily for monetary gain.

E.    Entertainment provided for invited guests at a private event conducted entirely on private property such as a wedding reception, banquet, or celebration where there is no admission charge.

F.    Street performers such as musicians, singers or mimes without amplified music or sound.

G.    Theaters.

H.    Book readings, book signings, poetry recitations, and any other similar entertainment consisting of the spoken word, including plays.

I.    Fundraisers for a political or charitable cause; provided, that one hundred percent of the proceeds are used for the purposes of the political or charitable cause.

J.    Entertainment consisting of ambient or incidental nonamplified music provided for guests or patrons by musicians such as a piano player, harpist, strolling violinist, mariachi band, guitarist or band. This exemption shall not apply if there is an admission charge required to observe or attend such entertainment. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.070 Application of chapter.
This chapter is intended to implement minimum standards applicable to the operation of all entertainment activities in the entertainment district. This chapter sets forth requirements for all persons and business entities providing entertainment in an entertainment district. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the citys authority to impose and enforce conditions in applicable city permits, including those approved by the city council when approving an entertainment district, or provisions of this code or state or federal law requiring entertainment establishments to comply with operating standards that are more strict, comprehensive or onerous than the minimum standards imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.080 Hours of operationResponsible person.
A.    The hours of operation for entertainment in an entertainment district shall be set by resolution of the city council.

B.    A responsible person must be present in the entertainment establishment during all hours that the entertainment establishment is open and offering entertainment. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.090 Disturbing the peaceDisorderly conduct.
Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to prevent the admittance of any person whose conduct is described in Penal Code Section 415 (fighting, loud noise, offensive words in public places) or 647 (disorderly conduct), or who exhibits disorderly conduct as defined in Section 5.90.020, at the premises or on any parking lot or similar facility used by the establishment. Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to remove any persons exhibiting such conduct from the establishment and the vicinity. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.100 Intoxicated customers.
Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to prevent the admittance of any intoxicated person. For purposes of this section, a person is intoxicated when he or she exhibits readily apparent outward manifestations of drug or alcohol intoxication, including, but not limited to, inability to walk or stand in a normal manner, bloodshot or glassy eyes, flushed face, incoherent or slurred speech, alcoholic breath, belligerence or other loud or boisterous conduct, extreme agitation or nervousness or mental confusion, where such manifestations lack other apparent cause. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.110 Observation of noise abatement laws required.
Each responsible person shall ensure compliance with all laws applicable to noise abatement, including those contained in Chapter 8.42 as it exists or is hereafter amended. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.120 Disorderly conduct within twenty feet prohibited.
Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize disorderly or unlawful conduct within the establishment and within twenty feet of the property lines of the establishment. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.130 Orderly dispersal required.
Each responsible person shall use reasonable efforts to cause the orderly dispersal of individuals from the vicinity of the establishment at closing time, and shall not allow them to congregate within twenty feet of the property lines of the establishment in a disorderly fashion. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.140 Threat to public safety.
A.    The chief of police may suspend an entertainment permit and require a permittee or responsible person to suspend operations and disperse all persons for the remainder of its daily operation whenever conduct by disorderly patrons reaches a magnitude that presents an immediate and ongoing threat to the public safety or well-being of the patrons and/or the general public in the vicinity. Circumstances constituting an immediate threat to the public safety include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.    There is an immediate ongoing and likely to continue threat of bodily harm or injury to a person or persons.

2.    There is a clear and present danger of riot, disorder or unlawful interference with traffic upon the public streets.

3.    When the occupancy rules are being violated.

B.    It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any directive issued by the chief of police under the authority of this section. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.150 Application for permit.
A.    The owner of a business offering entertainment shall be the applicant for an entertainment permit. All applications for permits shall be filed with the director on such forms as he or she may prescribe, and shall contain at a minimum the following information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the responsible person for the entertainment, a description of the proposed entertainment, maximum number of persons expected to be present within the entertainment establishment at any one time, the proposed dates, hours and location of the proposed entertainment, security arrangement, property owners consent, and any other information as the director shall deem necessary for the proper processing and review of the application.

B.    Except as provided below, the director shall either approve or deny the permit application within twenty calendar days of receipt of the complete application. The director may extend the time for consideration of the application by not more than five calendar days.

C.    Any owner of a business offering entertainment in the city must apply for an entertainment permit within thirty days of the city council approving an entertainment district in the area in which the business operates. If no application has been filed, no entertainment is permitted until an entertainment permit has been issued. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.160 Application review and permit issuance.
A.    The director shall review the application and may obtain recommendations and reports from such other city departments as he/she deems necessary concerning the application.

B.    The director shall approve the issuance of the entertainment permit if he or she finds all of the following:

1.    Issuance of the permit and conduct of the entertainment at the proposed location, as conditioned, are consistent with federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and any existing special permit(s).

2.    The owner has agreed in writing to adhere to this chapter and any conditions imposed in the entertainment district in which the business operates.

3.    The proposed location has a current fire department occupancy permit and has received a fire and life safety inspection within the previous fiscal year.

4.    It does not appear, based upon the information before the director, that the applicant has provided false or misleading material information in the application.

C.    Where the director determines that a permit application should be denied, he or she shall inform the applicant of the reason(s) for the denial in writing.

D.    The permit shall include the conditions approved by the city council relating to the operation of a business offering entertainment in that district. Conditions shall be listed on, or attached to, the permit. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.170 Fees.
Every application for an entertainment permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution of the city council. This application fee shall be in addition to the citys business license tax and any other license or permit fee imposed by this code upon the applicant. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.180 Display of permits.
The permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous place in the entertainment establishment for which it was issued and shall be immediately produced upon the request of any police or code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.190 Duration of permit.
An entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date it was issued, subject to any conditions or restrictions existing at the time it was issued, until change of ownership of the business or the premises at the permit location, or until suspended or revoked under Section 5.90.210. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.200 Permit not transferable.
Entertainment permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable to another person, owner or location. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.210 Suspension, modification or revocation of permit.
A.    In addition to the authority of the chief of police to suspend an entertainment permit under Section 5.90.140, the director may suspend, modify or revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon notice to the permittee and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section, for any of the following reasons:

1.    The entertainment has been conducted in a manner contrary to the findings for the issuance of a permit set forth in Section 5.90.160(B);

2.    The permittee has failed to comply with one or more conditions of the permit;

3.    The permittee has failed to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to the citys noise ordinance;

4.    The permittee or his/her employees, agents, representatives or responsible persons have failed to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules or regulations in connection with the entertainment;

5.    The entertainment has been conducted in an illegal or disorderly manner or has been conducted in such a manner as to constitute an unreasonable burden on the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring properties;

6.    The applicant has knowingly made a false statement of material fact or has knowingly omitted a material fact in the application; or

7.    The entertainment has created or is creating a nuisance.

B.    The directors determination to suspend, modify or revoke any entertainment permit shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for said determination. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.220 Effect of revocation.
In the event an entertainment permit is revoked by the director, no application for another entertainment permit for any proposed entertainment activity at the same location shall be considered by the director for a period of one year from the date of revocation, unless proof of bona fide change of ownership has been presented to the director. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.230 Appeals.
A.    In the event a decision to deny, suspend, modify or revoke an entertainment permit is made by a designee of the director, the applicant shall have the right to appeal from said action to the director within ten calendar days after the notice is personally served upon or mailed to the applicant or permittee. A written notice of appeal shall be timely filed with the director, and on receipt of said notice, the director shall set the matter for hearing within fifteen calendar days of the filing of said notice of appeal. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the applicant at least five calendar days prior to the date set for such hearing. Notice may be given either by personal delivery to the applicant, or by depositing it in the U.S. mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her address as it appears in the application.

B.    Within five calendar days after the hearing, the director shall send written notice to the applicant either granting the permit or containing a statement of the grounds relied upon for suspending, modifying, revoking or denying the permit. The decision of the director under this section may be appealed to the city manager within ten calendar days. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the decision of the city manager shall be final.

C.    If a written notice of appeal is not timely filed pursuant to this section, the decision of the director or his/her designee shall be final.

D.    No entertainment may be provided on the premises specified in the application or the entertainment permit while an appeal is pending. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

5.90.240 ViolationPenalty.
A.    In addition to all other remedies at law or in equity, unless exempt under Section 5.90.060 any person and/or business entity providing entertainment in the entertainment district without a valid entertainment permit or failing to comply with any directive issued by the chief of police under Section 5.90.140 is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the first violation. Successive violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for the second violation within one year, and a fine not exceeding three thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year of the initial violation. Violation not abated at the end of the day shall constitute a new violation on the following day.

B.    Except as provided in subsection A of this section, in addition to all other remedies at law or in equity, any person and/or business entity violating any provision of this chapter or who violates any condition of the entertainment permit is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the first violation. Successive violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for the second violation within one year, and a fine not exceeding three thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year of the initial violation. Violation not abated at the end of the day shall constitute a new violation on the following day.

C.    Violations of this chapter may also be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.09 as a Level B violation for the first and second offenses within one year, with a minimum penalty of five hundred dollars per day for the first violation and a minimum penalty of one thousand dollars per day for the second violation within one year. Each successive violation after the second violation within one year shall be enforced as Level C violation, with a minimum penalty of three thousand dollars per day for each additional violation. Notwithstanding other provisions of Chapter 1.09, no notice to correct and stop order as provided therein shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of violation and imposition of administrative penalties.

D.    The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other criminal, civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code shall prevent the city from using any other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this section or to abate a public nuisance. (Ord. 1184  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 5.100
LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOME
Sections:

5.100.010    Purpose.

5.100.020    Definitions.

5.100.030    Application of chapter.

5.100.040    Permit requiredCompliance with other laws.

5.100.050    Standards.

5.100.060    Application review and permit issuance.

5.100.070    Fees.

5.100.080    Display of permit.

5.100.090    Duration of permit.

5.100.100    Permit not transferable.

5.100.110    Suspension, modification or revocation of permit.

5.100.120    Effect of revocation.

5.100.130    Appeal.

5.100.010 Purpose.
The city council finds that child day care services are an essential service for working parents in the city and that child care services in family homes are desirable to parents and provide children with a residential environment that is conducive to healthy and safe development. Regulations in this chapter are intended to address large family day care home uses consistent with the provisions of state law and in a manner that recognizes the need for such services and the importance of minimizing the effects on surrounding properties. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this chapter:

A.    Administrative permit means a nondiscretionary permit issued to a person or business entity for the purpose of operating a large family day care home in a single-family dwelling that complies with the standards, restrictions, and requirements contained in this chapter.

B.    Applicant means the person or business entity applying for an administrative permit under this chapter for the purpose of operating a large family day care home.

C.    City manager means the city manager of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

D.    Large family day care home means a family day care home under Section 1597.465 of the Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time, providing care for more than eight children and up to and including fourteen children operated in the providers home with a license from the California Department of Social Services under the standards of state law, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day while the childrens parents or guardians are away.

E.    Director means the director of the city of Folsom community development department or his/her designee.

F.    Fire department means the Folsom fire department.

G.    Permittee means a person or business entity that has been issued an administrative permit as provided in this chapter.

H.    Provider means a person or business entity operating a large family day care home.

I.    Small family day care home means a family day care home providing care for up to eight children and operating with a license from the California Department of Social Services under the standards of state law. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.030 Application of chapter.
A.    Existing Large Family Day Care Home. The lawful operation of large family day care homes existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may continue without complying with the requirements of Sections 5.100.050(G) through (L); provided, that the provider applies and obtains a business license and an administrative permit under this chapter within four months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; however, if the large family day care home use is abandoned or discontinued for a period of twelve consecutive months or more, subsequent use of the property as a large family day care home shall be in conformity with all provisions of this chapter.

B.    New Large Family Day Care Homes. This chapter shall apply to all new large family day care homes operating or seeking to operate after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C.    Small Family Day Care Homes. This chapter does not apply to small family day care homes providing care for up to eight children and operating under a license from the California Department of Social Services pursuant to Section 1597.44 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.040 Permit requiredCompliance with other laws.
A.    Large family day care homes operating in the city are required to have a valid administrative permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

B.    Neither the obtaining of an administrative permit nor compliance with the operating standards provided in this chapter shall obviate the need for, or excuse any noncompliance with, the zoning code, building code, fire code or any other or additional licensing or permitting requirement or standards made applicable to the large family day care home under any other provision of this code or state or federal law. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.050 Standards.
In order to be eligible for an administrative permit issued under this chapter, the applicant shall meet the following minimum criteria:

A.    City Business License. All large family day care homes are required to obtain a business license from the city.

B.    State License. All large family day care homes are required to have a valid and current day care license issued by the California Department of Social Services.

C.    Noise. In order to protect adjacent residential dwellings from noise impacts, outdoor activities are restricted to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. The large family day care home is subject to compliance with the citys noise ordinance.

D.    Traffic Control. To ensure that children are not placed at risk and that street traffic is not unduly interrupted, each large family day care home shall ensure a minimum of two on-street parking spaces are available adjacent to the large family day care home property, whether on public road or private street, for children drop-off and pick-up, in addition to the driveway of the large family day care home.

E.    Session Separation. In the event the large family day care home operates more than one session at any given day where children are expected to be picked up at the end of the session, there shall be at least thirty minutes of separation between the end of a session and the start of the next session in order to minimize congregation of vehicles picking up and dropping off children and traffic impact to the surrounding neighbors. Existing large family day care homes operating multiple sessions per day shall comply with this provision within one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

F.    Indoor Areas. All indoor areas where children are regularly present and cared for must comply with the citys building and zoning codes, subject to inspection and approval by the citys building department and fire marshal.

G.    Providers Residence. The large family day care home shall be the principal residence of the day care provider, and the use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the property as a residence.

H.    Zoning. Large family day care homes are permitted only in single-family residences as an accessory use of the single-family residential property.

I.    Separation. In order to maintain the integrity of residential neighborhoods, large family day care homes shall not be located closer than three hundred feet from an existing state-licensed large family day care home, measured from the closest point of the lot line. Certain exceptions, in the form of legitimate physical and topographical barriers and buffers such as an open space corridor, highway, or arterial that would provide comparable separation may be allowable as determined by the director.

J.    Parking. In addition to the standard single-family parking requirement of two covered parking spaces located outside the required front yard and street-side yard setback areas, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee that does not reside at the large family day care home. The driveway of the large family day care home may serve to meet the employee parking requirement.

K.    Signs. No sign shall be allowed in conjunction with the large family day care home facility.

L.    Garage Conversion. No garage conversion shall be permitted for purpose of operating a large family day care home. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.060 Application review and permit issuance.
A.    Upon receiving an application for an administrative permit from an applicant, the director shall review the application and may obtain recommendations and reports from such other city departments as he/she deems necessary concerning the application.

B.    The director shall approve the issuance of the administrative permit if he or she finds all of the following:

1.    The proposed operation of the large family day care home has a current and valid family day care home license issued by the California Department of Social Services.

2.    The proposed operation of the large family day care home at the proposed location meets all of the standards under Section 5.100.050.

3.    The proposed location has a current fire department occupancy permit and has received a fire and life safety inspection.

4.    It does not appear, based upon the information before the director, that the applicant has provided false or misleading material information in the application.

C.    Where the director determines that a permit application should be denied, the director shall inform the applicant of the reason(s) for the denial in writing.

D.    The standards set forth under Section 5.100.050 relating to the operation of a large family day care home shall be listed on, or attached to, the administrative permit. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.070 Fees.
Every application for an administrative permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution of the city council. This application fee shall be in addition to the citys business license tax and any other license or permit fee imposed by this code upon the applicant. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.080 Display of permit.
The administrative permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous place in the large family day care home for which it was issued and shall be immediately produced upon the request of any police and fire department personnel or code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.090 Duration of permit.
An administrative permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date it was issued, until change of ownership of the large family day care home business or the premises at the permit location, or until suspended or revoked under Section 5.100.110. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.100 Permit not transferable.
Administrative permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable to another person, provider, business entity or location. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.110 Suspension, modification or revocation of permit.
A.    The director may suspend, modify or revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon notice to the permittee and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this chapter, for any of the following reasons:

1.    The large family day care home has been conducted in a manner contrary to the findings for the issuance of a permit set forth in Section 5.100.050;

2.    The permittee has failed to comply with one or more standards of the permit;

3.    The permittee or his/her employees, agents, or representatives have failed to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules or regulations in connection with the large family day care home; or

4.    The applicant has knowingly made a false statement of material fact or has knowingly omitted a material fact in the application.

B.    The directors determination to suspend, modify or revoke any administrative permit shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for said determination. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.120 Effect of revocation.
In the event an administrative permit is revoked by the director, no application for another administrative permit for a proposed large family day care home activity at the same location shall be considered by the director for a period of one year from the date of revocation, unless proof of bona fide change of ownership of the large family day care home has been presented to the director. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

5.100.130 Appeal.
A.    In the event a decision to deny, suspend, modify or revoke an administrative permit is made by a designee of the director, the applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal from said action to the director within fifteen calendar days after the notice is personally served upon or mailed to the applicant or permittee. A written notice of appeal shall be timely filed with the director, and on receipt of said notice, the director shall set the matter for hearing within fifteen calendar days of the filing of said notice of appeal. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the appellant at least five calendar days prior to the date set for such hearing. Notice may be given either by personal delivery to the appellant, or by depositing it in the U.S. mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her address as it appears in the application.

B.    Within five calendar days after the hearing, a written notice to the appellant either granting the permit or containing a statement of the grounds relied upon for suspending, modifying, revoking or denying the permit shall be personally served upon or mailed to the appellant. The decision of the director under this section may be appealed to the city manager within fifteen calendar days of the date of service or mail of the decision to the appellant. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the decision of the city manager shall be final.

C.    If a written notice of appeal is not timely filed pursuant to this section, the decision of the director or his/her designee shall be final.

D.    The director may order, on the basis of health and safety concerns, that no large family day care home activity may be provided on the premises specified in the application or the administrative permit while an appeal is pending. (Ord. 1219  2 (part), 2015)

Title 6
(RESERVED)
Title 7
ANIMALS
Chapters:

7.02    General Provisions and Definitions

7.04    Animal Care, Custody, and Control

7.06    Dog and Cat Licensing

7.08    Rabies and Disease Control

7.10    Animal Impoundment, Disposition, and Adoption

7.12    Dangerous and Vicious Animals

Chapter 7.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sections:

7.02.010    Short title.

7.02.020    Definitions.

7.02.030    Enforcement responsibilityAppealability of determinations.

7.02.040    Entering on private propertyWarrants.

7.02.050    Authority to arrest and to issue notices to appear.

7.02.060    Obstructing officers unlawful.

7.02.070    Use of equipment to impound.

7.02.080    Animal service fees.

7.02.090    Removing animal from custody of animal services officer or holding shelter without permission prohibited.

7.02.100    Violations.

7.02.110    Remedies cumulative.

7.02.010 Short title.
This title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, the animal services ordinance of the city. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meaning. Words, terms or phrases which are not defined shall be construed and understood according to their ordinary and common usage and meaning.

Animal services department means the department within the city primarily responsible for implementation and enforcement of this title. The animal services department shall be under the direction and supervision of the city manager or the city managers designee. The animal services department shall be comprised of the chief of animal services and such additional animal services officers and administrative staff as determined appropriate by the city manager.

Animal services officer means those persons within the animal services department charged with enforcement of this title, including the chief of animal services.

Animal shelter means the facilities designated by the city for the impoundment, holding, and handling of animals on behalf of the city.

At large means an animal off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by leash, lead, or tether not exceeding eight feet in length; provided, however, that an animal otherwise meeting this definition shall not be considered at large under the following situations: (A) the animal is assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties or participating in search and rescue efforts at the specific request of a law enforcement authority; or (B) the animal is enrolled in and actually participating in an animal training or obedience course, exhibition, or competition on private or public property with the permission of the owner of the property; or (C) the animal is assisting the owner or person in charge of livestock in the herding or control of such livestock; or (D) at a public or private dog park.

Chief of animal services means the animal services officer designated by the city manager as the chief of animal services, who shall be in charge of and oversee the animal services department.

Dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal means:

1.    Any animal which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior thirty-six-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the animal are off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal; or

2.    Any animal which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less than severe injury as that term is defined herein; or

3.    Any animal which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior thirty-six-month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury by attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal.

Domestic animal means animals commonly kept as pets or raised as farm or livestock animals and generally not dangerous to humans, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, domestic birds, fish, horses, donkeys, mules, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, rabbits, fowl, rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, small snakes, reptiles, frogs, and small turtles and tortoises.

Euthanize means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death, or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes the painless loss of consciousness and death during such loss of consciousness by injection.

Harbor means the feeding, caring for, and/or sheltering of an animal for three or more consecutive days.

Health officer means the county health officer unless the city manager or city council designates a city health officer within the city other than the county health officer.

Impound means taking physical control of and holding an animal by an animal services officer or other authorized person.

Livestock means animals commonly used in farming, including, but not limited to, swine, sheep, goats, horses, cattle, equine or bovine animals, chickens, llamas, and alpacas.

Owner means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trust, organization, or entity of any kind owning, harboring, or having control, custody, or possession of an animal. All persons over the age of eighteen years residing at the same property address shall be rebuttably presumed to be the owner of any animal owned, possessed, harbored, or controlled on the property.

Quarantine means the strict confinement of an animal at a location designated by the chief of animal services, which may be the animal shelter, private premises of the owner, or other location, and kept under restraint by leash, closed cage, paddock, or other restraint as specified in an order of quarantine of the animal services department or other authorized public official.

Service dog means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items.

Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being or animal that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations, or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery.

Vaccination means a protective inoculation against rabies with an anti-rabies vaccine recognized and approved by the California Department of Public Health.

Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.

Vicious animal means any animal, including a dog (except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties), which has, on one or more occasions, committed any one or more of the following acts and which acts are not exempted pursuant to Section 7.12.070:

1.    Without provocation, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being; or

2.    In an unprovoked manner, kills a domestic animal, as defined in this section, excluding a rabbit or fowl, at a place other than upon the private property where the attacking animal is maintained; or

3.    Physically attacks, mauls or bites any person, without provocation, at a place other than upon the private property where the animal is maintained; or

4.    Physically attacks, mauls or bites any person, without provocation, when the owner thereof knows, or should reasonably know, that the animal poses a threat to public safety and has made no substantial effort to prevent the attack, or when the owner has purposefully encouraged or commanded the animal to attack, maul or injure any person; or

5.    Any animal previously determined to be and currently listed as a dangerous animal which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, engages in another attack upon a domestic animal or a human being; or

6.    Any animal seized under Penal Code section 599aa (seizure of fighting animals) and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the Penal Code (animal fighting).

For purposes of this definition, an animal is determined to have killed another animal if it causes injuries so severe that they require the injured animal to be euthanized.

Wild animal means any animal which is not normally domesticated in this state as described in California Fish and Game Code Sections 2116. (Ord. 1127  2 (part), 2010; Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.030 Enforcement responsibilityAppealability of determinations.
A.    Animal services officers are authorized and empowered, and it shall be their duty, to enforce the provisions of this title. The city manager may designate, from time to time, additional persons authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this title, which may include, but not be limited to, personnel from the citys police department, code enforcement department, and/or community development department.

B.    The chief of animal services shall be primarily responsible for implementing, interpreting and enforcing the provisions of this title. Except as otherwise set forth herein, any person aggrieved by a determination by the chief of animal services may appeal such determination to the city manager whose decision, notwithstanding other provisions of this code, shall be final. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.040 Entering on private propertyWarrants.
Subject to any restrictions imposed upon the city under applicable constitutional, federal, state, or local law concerning or requiring inspection, search, and/or other forms of warrants for entry onto private property, when an animal services officer has reason to believe that there has been a violation of this title, he or she may enter upon any premises for the purpose of inspecting for violations and/or enforcing the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.050 Authority to arrest and to issue notices to appear.
Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 830.9, 836, and 836.5, any animal services officer shall have the power to investigate complaints of violations of any provisions of this title, and may arrest a person without a warrant whenever the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed an infraction or a misdemeanor in his or her presence amounting to a violation of this title, and the animal services officer may issue a citation to such person to appear in court to answer to such charges. Any animal services officer may also arrest a person without a warrant whenever the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a felony, whether or not committed in the presence of the animal services officer. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.060 Obstructing officers unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully resist, delay, or obstruct any animal services officer in the discharge of his or her duties. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.070 Use of equipment to impound.
In performance of their duties, animal services officers shall have the authority to employ the use of a tranquilizer gun, taser, firearm, pepper spray, direct stop spray and any other animal control equipment or device in common use within the state necessary to take up and impound an animal or implement the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.080 Animal service fees.
Fees will be charged to owners and other persons for animal services activities as established from time to time by resolution of the city council including, but not limited to, licensing fees, license replacement fees, animal redemption fees, impound fees, boarding fees, animal surrender fees, veterinary fees, sterilization fees, animal disposal fees, potentially dangerous animal fees, and vicious animal fees. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.090 Removing animal from custody of animal services officer or holding shelter without permission prohibited.
No person shall remove any animals from the custody or control of an animal services officer or from a city animal shelter or vehicle without permission from an animal services officer. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.100 Violations.
A.    Unless otherwise specified to be an infraction, violations of this title shall be misdemeanors. The prosecuting authority shall have discretion to charge any misdemeanor as an infraction. Infractions shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year; and a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. If a specific fine or punishment is specified for a violation of this title, that specific fine or punishment shall control over the provisions of this section.

B.    Violations of this title may also be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.09. Notwithstanding other provisions of Chapter 1.09, no notice to correct and stop order as provided therein shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of violation and imposition of administrative penalties. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.02.110 Remedies cumulative.
The remedies set forth in this title are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude any other remedy, and nothing contained in this title shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable law. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

Chapter 7.04
ANIMAL CARE, CUSTODY, AND CONTROL
Sections:

7.04.010    Animal care.

7.04.020    Keeping wild animals.

7.04.030    Limitation on number of dogs and cats.

7.04.040    Running at large prohibitedImpoundment.

7.04.050    Dogs prohibited in food establishments.

7.04.060    Excessive noise or barking prohibited.

7.04.070    Sanitary enclosures.

7.04.080    Restrictions in keeping certain livestock and other animals.

7.04.010 Animal care.
All animal owners shall at all times ensure that their animals have adequate food and water, proper, clean, and sanitary shelter, protection from the weather and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and ensure the humane care and treatment of all such animals at all times. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, tease, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, nor cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, or combat between animals or animals and humans, excluding police dogs, within the city, nor shall any parent allow or permit his or her minor child to so treat any animal. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.04.020 Keeping wild animals.
Except as otherwise expressly authorized by state or federal law, no person shall have, keep, or maintain any wild animals within the city. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.04.030 Limitation on number of dogs and cats.
No person shall own or harbor more than three dogs nor more than three cats, over the age of four months, at or in any one dwelling unit, as defined by the citys zoning code, or at or in any other single industrial or commercial establishment within the city. This limitation shall not apply to duly licensed and lawfully operating business or commercial operations engaged in the sale or care of animals including, but not limited to, pet stores, animal breeders, kennels, catteries, animal shelters, animal care facilities, animal hospitals/clinics, or veterinarians; provided, however, that nothing herein shall relieve such business or commercial operations from complying with all applicable local, state, or federal laws concerning the operation of those businesses or commercial operations. Violation of this section may be charged as an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the prosecuting authority. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.04.040 Running at large prohibitedImpoundment.
Except in a designated dog park, no person shall allow or permit his or her dog to be or remain at large on any public street, road, alley, park, square, school, or other public place or upon any private property other than the property of the owner or custodian of such dog without the consent of the owner of such property, within the corporate limits of the city. An animal services officer may seize and impound any dog found running at large, and, except as otherwise set forth herein, such animals will be impounded at the citys animal shelter. Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.04.050 Dogs prohibited in food establishments.
Except for service dogs, dogs used by law enforcement personnel or other dogs as permitted by state or federal law, no person shall allow, permit or take any animal whether loose, on leash or in arms, into any restaurant, grocery store, or food establishment in the city. Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.04.060 Excessive noise or barking prohibited.
No person owning or harboring any animal shall permit or allow the animal to make loud or disturbing noises without provocation so as to constitute a nuisance, including, but not limited to, chronic howling, yowling, barking, whining, or other utterances. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to apply to reasonable animal noises emanating from legally operated veterinary hospitals, humane societies, animal shelters, farm or agricultural facilities, or areas where keeping of farm animals is permitted. Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.04.070 Sanitary enclosures.
A.    Every person keeping any animal shall at all times keep cages, coops, kennels, runs, pastures, or other enclosures wherein such animal is kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall remove animal waste material therefrom at least every day, or more often as is necessary so as not to become a nuisance to any person in the neighborhood. This section is not intended to apply to the open back yard areas of the owners residence.

B.    No person shall at any time maintain any premises, or any portion thereof, in the city, upon which any animal is kept in an unsanitary condition. No person shall maintain any such premises, or portion thereof, upon which any animal is kept, in such condition as to cause the same to be infested with flies or insects or to create any noxious or offensive odors.

C.    Violation of this section may be charged as an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the prosecuting authority. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.04.080 Restrictions in keeping certain livestock and other animals.
A.    No horse, mule, burro, cow, bull, goat, sheep, hog, or donkey shall be kept or maintained in the city within seventy-five feet of any dwelling house, school, church, public hall or public building and in the event any such animals are kept or maintained within one hundred fifty feet of any such building, any shelter maintained for such animals shall be maintained in a sanitary manner in accordance with such standards as may be established for the maintenance of such shelter by the city health officer or chief of animal services.

B.    Not more than one horse, mule, burro, cow, bull, goat, sheep, hog, or donkey shall be kept or permitted upon any premises of an area of less than six thousand square feet and not more than two horses, mules, burros, cows, bulls, goats, sheep, hogs, or donkeys shall be kept or permitted on any premises of an area less than ten thousand square feet and an additional four thousand square feet of land must be available for each such animal over two.

C.    Turkeys and geese shall not be kept within any zoning district of the city other than agricultural and agricultural combining districts. Additionally, not more than any combination of two chickens, ducks, pigeons and/or rabbits shall be kept as pets within any zoning district of the city other than agricultural or agricultural combining districts, and said animals shall be kept or maintained at least twenty feet from any property line.

D.    Nothing herein shall relieve any property owner from complying with any other applicable law concerning the keeping of animals upon property, including, but not limited to, the citys zoning code.

E.    Violation of this section may be charged as an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the prosecuting authority. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

Chapter 7.06
DOG AND CAT LICENSING
Sections:

7.06.010    License.

7.06.020    License fee.

7.06.030    License applicationLicense issuance.

7.06.040    Exemptions from license.

7.06.050    Tagging an animal not described in application.

7.06.060    Lost tagsDuplicate.

7.06.070    ViolationsInfractions.

7.06.010 License.
A.    Every person owning or harboring a dog or cat within the city shall obtain a license tag pursuant to the provisions of this title. Licenses shall be obtained upon the dog or cat reaching four months of age or within thirty days of the person acquiring the dog or cat, whichever is later.

B.    License tags shall be attached to the collar of the dog or cat by the owner and shall be worn by the animal at all times when the animal is in the city and not confined indoors. The owner or person in control of the dog or cat shall show the license tag at any time upon demand by an animal services officer. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.06.020 License fee.
A.    The fee for, and duration of, a dog and cat license shall be established by resolution of the city council, and the city council may provide for one-, two-, and/or three-year licenses. The license fee for a dog or cat which has been spayed or neutered shall be no more than one-half the license fee of an unaltered animal. There shall be no license fee for a dog license for any service dog.

B.    Failure to register and pay the required fee within the time required by this title shall cause such fee to become delinquent. Delinquency and penalty fees, as may be established by resolution of the city council, shall be added to the regular fee and collected by the city at the time of such delinquent registration. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.06.030 License applicationLicense issuance.
Each application for a dog or cat license tag shall state the age, sex, color, and breed of the animal for which the license is desired and the address of the owner. The application shall also be accompanied by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian covering the license period or a certificate from a licensed veterinarian that the vaccination would endanger the animals health, as provided in Section 7.08.040. The animal services department shall issue a license tag following receipt of a complete application and payment of the licensing fee. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.06.040 Exemptions from license.
The following animals shall be exempt from obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter:

A.    Animals owned and used by the city, municipal corporations, or other public agencies in their official business, including, but not limited to, police and law enforcement dogs.

B.    Animals within a licensed kennel or cattery.

C.    Animals brought into the city by a city resident which are already properly licensed by another public agency, including, but not limited to, a county; provided, however, that the owner of the animal shall obtain a license from the city prior to the expiration of the license from the other public agency. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.06.050 Tagging an animal not described in application.
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a license tag to the collar of any animal except the animal that is described in the application for such license tag. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.06.060 Lost tagsDuplicate.
Lost license tags may be replaced upon payment of a fee as established by the city council. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.06.070 ViolationsInfractions.
Violation of the licensing provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

Chapter 7.08
RABIES AND DISEASE CONTROL
Sections:

7.08.010    Restrictions on keeping of animals capable of transmitting rabies.

7.08.020    Rabies reports.

7.08.030    Vaccination required.

7.08.040    VaccinationExemption.

7.08.050    Quarantine.

7.08.060    Quarantine of service dog.

7.08.070    Quarantine of dog used by law enforcement agency.

7.08.080    Disposition of rabid animal carcass.

7.08.010 Restrictions on keeping of animals capable of transmitting rabies.
Except as otherwise set forth herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, or possess any dog or cat within the city limits unless such animal has been properly immunized with a rabies vaccine approved by the California Department of Public Health. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.08.020 Rabies reports.
A.    Bite/Scratch Victim. Every person, or parent or guardian of such person, bitten or scratched within the city by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall immediately notify animal services.

B.    Medical Provider. Every veterinarian practicing in this city and every person providing professional medical treatment for animal bites or scratches within the city by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall immediately notify animal services after treating any animal bite or scratch upon a person or other animal. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.08.030 Vaccination required.
A.    No person shall own or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four months within the city limits unless such dog or cat has been vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian or other authorized person with a rabies vaccine approved by and in the manner prescribed by the California Department of Public Health.

B.    Every cat or dog shall have a medically current vaccination with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the California Department of Public Health. A veterinarian or other authorized person shall administer the vaccination, and a certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner.

C.    Violation of this section may be charged as an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the prosecuting authority. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.08.040 VaccinationExemption.
A dog or cat need not be vaccinated for rabies where a licensed veterinarian has certified that the vaccination would endanger the dogs or cats life or health, and the local health officer endorses on the certificate his or her approval. The certificate must bear the date of issuance and must be renewed each year. Any such dog or cat subject to this exemption shall not be allowed off the premises of the owner. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.08.050 Quarantine.
A.    The animal services department has the power and authority to ensure that all animals falling into the following categories are quarantined at the place and under the conditions prescribed by the health officer or chief of animal services and applicable state laws and regulations:

1.    Animals known or suspected to be inflicted with rabies or other animal disease dangerous to humans, as determined by the chief of animal services.

2.    Animals known or suspected to be inflicted with rabies or other animal disease dangerous to humans, as determined by the chief of animal services, that have bitten or otherwise exposed a human to the disease.

3.    Animals, of a species subject to rabies, which have been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal.

B.    Animal services officers are authorized to order an animal quarantined when the animal meets the criteria set forth in this section. The animal services officer ordering the quarantine shall issue a written notice to the owner of or to any person harboring an animal within the city to quarantine such animal for a period of not less than ten days, or for such period as required by state law or determined to be appropriate by the animal services officer. The animal shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission from the animal services officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal to run at large or fail to keep the animal quarantined after being so notified.

C.    Upon demand made by an animal services officer, the owner of an animal shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a person, or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies or other animal disease dangerous to humans, for supervised quarantine at the animal shelter, or other location designated by the chief of animal services, the costs of which shall be borne by the owner. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies or other suspected disease, and upon payment of any applicable fees, including, but not limited to, impoundment, boarding, veterinary, or other fees. At the discretion of the animal services officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner. For stray animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the animal shelter.

D.    Upon determination by a licensed veterinarian that a quarantined animal has likely been inflicted with rabies or other animal disease dangerous to humans and cannot reasonably be cured, the animal may be ordered euthanized by the chief of animal services. Except in an emergency, no animal may be euthanized without reasonable and diligent efforts to notify the owner prior to euthanasia. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.08.060 Quarantine of service dog.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a service dog shall not be quarantined in the absence of evidence that he or she has actually been exposed to rabies unless his or her owner fails:

A.    To keep the dog safely confined to the premises of the owner;

B.    To keep the dog available for examination at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.08.070 Quarantine of dog used by law enforcement agency.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a dog used by any state, county, city or city and county law enforcement agency shall not be quarantined after biting any person if such bite occurred while the dog was being used for any law enforcement purpose. The law enforcement agency shall make the dog available for examination by the animal services department at any reasonable time. The law enforcement agency shall also notify animal services if the dog exhibits any abnormal behavior. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.08.080 Disposition of rabid animal carcass.
Upon notice of the death of any suspected rabid animal, or animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies, the chief of animal services shall notify the health officer and, if directed by the health officer, shall hold the carcass of the animal or an adequate specimen thereof for a reasonable period, not to exceed ten days. The chief of animal services shall not be responsible for the gathering of a specimen from the carcass of an animal. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

Chapter 7.10
ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT, DISPOSITION, AND ADOPTION
Sections:

7.10.010    Impounding of animalsCollection of fees.

7.10.020    Redemption of impounded animals.

7.10.030    Fines for impoundment of unaltered dogs or cats.

7.10.040    Duration of impoundment.

7.10.050    Returning animals to known owners.

7.10.060    Disposition authorized.

7.10.070    Abandonment.

7.10.080    Voluntary surrenderFees.

7.10.090    Placement of impounded animals for adoption.

7.10.100    Animals not subject to redemption or adoption.

7.10.110    Disposition of dead animals.

7.10.120    Killing of severely injured animal authorized.

7.10.010 Impounding of animalsCollection of fees.
The animal services officer may seize and impound any animal found on or off any premises in violation of any portion of this title or any animal running at large. The owner of the animal shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred by reason of the animal services officer seizing, keeping, and/or caring for such animal. The city shall have all available remedies in the collection of such fees as it would in the collection of any other debt owed to the city. Except as otherwise provided herein, impounded animals shall be taken to the citys animal shelter or other appropriate location for the shelter of animals as determined by the animal services officer. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.020 Redemption of impounded animals.
A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, or where redemption is not permitted by this title or other applicable law, redemption of an impounded animal by the owner shall be made by presenting animal services or animal shelter personnel proof of the owners identity and any required license certificate, or other satisfactory proof of ownership of the animal. No such animal shall be released until redemption fees, costs of care and feeding, veterinary fees incurred, if any, and any fees and penalties provided by this title have been paid. Redemption fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. No dog or cat shall be released from impoundment until such dog or cat has been licensed as provided by this title.

B.    Any animal services officer, at his or her discretion, may refuse to permit the redemption of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this title, or any other applicable law, until in his or her opinion the need for the retention of such animal no longer exists. Circumstances justifying continued retention may include, but are not limited to, the condition of the premises at which the animal is to be housed, the need to properly secure the animal on the owners property, and the need to provide proper veterinarian care to the animal. The owner shall be responsible for all fees and expenses of continued retention. This provision shall not apply to animals impounded during or pursuant to an investigation regarding the designation of the animal as potentially dangerous or vicious. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.030 Fines for impoundment of unaltered dogs or cats.
Pursuant to California Food and Agricultural Code Sections 30804.7 and 31751.7, the owner of a nonspayed or unneutered dog or cat that is impounded by the city shall be fined thirty-five dollars on the first occurrence, fifty dollars on the second occurrence, and one hundred dollars for the third or subsequent occurrence or as otherwise increased under the Food and Agricultural Code from time to time. These fines are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fines or impound fees imposed by the city. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.040 Duration of impoundment.
A.    All impounded dogs and cats shall be kept at the animal shelter, or other location designated by the chief of animal services, for a period of not less than seven days, not including the day of impoundment, unless sooner redeemed by the owner.

B.    All other impounded domestic animals, including, but not limited to, a rabbit, guinea pig, hamster, potbellied pig, bird, lizard, snake, turtle, or tortoise shall be kept at the animal shelter, or other location designated by the chief of animal services, for at least seven days, not including the day of impoundment, unless sooner redeemed by the owner.

C.    Except as otherwise set forth herein, all impounded livestock shall be kept in the animal shelter, or other location designated by the chief of animal services, for at least fourteen days, not including the day of impoundment, unless sooner redeemed by the owner, and if not redeemed within that time shall be turned over to the California State Bureau of Livestock Identification for disposition by that office. If an inspector from the California State Bureau of Livestock Identification makes a request upon the city to turn over the impounded livestock prior to the expiration of the fourteen-day impoundment period, the city shall deliver possession of such impounded livestock to the inspector.

D.    During the holding period required by this section, and prior to the adoption or euthanasia of any impounded animal, the animal shelter shall scan the animal for a microchip which may identify the owner of that animal, and the animal shelter shall make reasonably diligent efforts to contact the owner and notify him or her that his or her animal is impounded. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.050 Returning animals to known owners.
When any animal is impounded, and its ownership is known to the animal services officer, in lieu of taking the animal to the animal shelter, the animal services officer, at his or her discretion, may return the animal to its owners and may cite the owner of the animal for any violations of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.060 Disposition authorized.
Except as otherwise provided in this title, an impounded animal which is not redeemed within the specified holding period shall be considered to be abandoned by its owner and shall become the property of the city. Such animal may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized. No animal which is impounded shall be euthanized prior to a reasonably diligent attempt to contact the animals owner, if known. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.070 Abandonment.
The refusal or failure of the owner of any impounded animal to pay the fees and charges, after due notification, shall constitute an abandonment of the animal. Any animal not claimed by its owner within the period specified in this title shall become the property of the city and may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized. Abandonment does not relieve the owners obligation to pay all fees related to the impounding and keeping of the animal. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.080 Voluntary surrenderFees.
A.    An owner may surrender his or her animal to the animal services department for placement for adoption, which animal may or may not be accepted by the animal services department, at the discretion of the chief of animal services. Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to, and accepted by, the animal services department shall immediately thereafter become the property of the city. It shall be understood that no guarantee of placement will be made, and humane disposal will be at the discretion of the animal services officer.

B.    Any owner of an animal who voluntarily surrenders an animal to the animal services officer shall be subject to a fee for each animal, as established by the city council.

C.    The surrender of an animal by an owner to the animal shelter, subsequent to impoundment for a violation of title or any provisions of state law, shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to pay such applicable charges, fees, or fines incurred prior to such surrender. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.090 Placement of impounded animals for adoption.
Except as otherwise provided herein or other applicable law, any animal that is impounded pursuant to this title may, after the time for redemption and prior to the euthanasia of that animal, be released to an animal rescue or animal adoption organization if requested by the organization prior to the scheduled euthanasia of that animal. In addition to any required spay or neuter fee, the animal rescue or animal adoption organization may assess a fee for animals adopted or released. No dog or cat shall be released for adoption or rescue without being spayed or neutered. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.100 Animals not subject to redemption or adoption.
Consistent with Food and Agricultural Code Section 17006, animals impounded by or surrendered to the city that are irremediably suffering from a serious illness or severe injury, as determined by a veterinarian, shall not be held for owner redemption or adoption and may be humanely euthanized by the city. Newborn animals that need maternal care and cannot reasonably survive without their mothers that have been impounded by or surrendered to the city without their mothers may be euthanized without being held for owner redemption or adoption. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.110 Disposition of dead animals.
A.    Any owner of a dead animal who voluntarily releases such animal to the animal services department, or any owner of a dead animal taken into custody by the animal services officer whose ownership can be determined, shall be subject to an animal disposal fee.

B.    Any person possessing a dead animal shall take the responsibility of disposing of it in a safe and sanitary manner. Upon the receipt of information that the carcass of an animal has not been properly disposed of in accordance with this section or applicable law, the animal services officer shall dispose of the carcass and the owner of such animal shall be subject to an animal disposal fee. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.10.120 Killing of severely injured animal authorized.
An animal services officer, any city police officer, or other peace officer may, with the approval of his or her immediate supervisor, humanely kill within the corporate limits of the city, without transporting to an animal shelter or veterinarian, any animal reasonably determined by the animal services officer, police officer or peace officer to be too severely injured to move and that it would be more humane to kill the animal than allow it to suffer. The animal services officer, police officer, or peace officer shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner of the animal before killing it, taking into account all the circumstances of the situation and recognizing that notification of the owner may not be feasible. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

Chapter 7.12
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
Sections:

7.12.010    Purpose of chapter.

7.12.020    Initial determination and hearing for potentially dangerous or vicious animal.

7.12.030    Hearing decisionAppeal.

7.12.040    Failure to appear at hearing.

7.12.050    Finality of decision.

7.12.060    Impoundment pending hearing.

7.12.070    Circumstances under which an animal may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious.

7.12.080    Additional designation and licensing of potentially dangerous animals.

7.12.090    Keeping and controlling potentially dangerous animals.

7.12.100    Notification of death, sale, transfer or permanent removal of potentially dangerous animal.

7.12.110    Periodic inspectionsRemoval of designation of potentially dangerous animals.

7.12.120    Disposition of vicious animals.

7.12.130    Prohibition of animal ownership by vicious animal owner.

7.12.140    Fines for violations.

7.12.010 Purpose of chapter.
This chapter is enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of occupants of the city from potentially dangerous or vicious animals. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers of the city and California Food and Agricultural Code Sections 31621 and 31683, which authorize cities to establish administrative hearing procedures for determining whether a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.020 Initial determination and hearing for potentially dangerous or vicious animal.
A.    If an animal services officer or a law enforcement officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the chief of animal services shall impound the animal, prepare a written report of the animal services officers findings, and set a hearing before an independent hearing officer for the city for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the animal services officer or law enforcement officer to find probable cause shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant and shall be submitted as evidence in any such hearing. The chief of animal services shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal that a hearing will be held before an independent hearing officer at which time he or she may present evidence as to why the animal should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious.

B.    The owner or keeper of the animal shall be served with notice of the hearing and a copy of the animal services officers report, either personally or by first-class certified mail. The hearing shall be held promptly and not less than seven days nor more than fourteen days after service of notice upon the owner or keeper of the animal, unless otherwise agreed by the owner and the city. The hearing shall be open to the public. The hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports, statements or affidavits of witnesses, authorize or limit the use and scope of discovery, and may set the time to produce records or witnesses. The formal rules of evidence and procedure shall not apply to the proceedings. Any relevant evidence may be admitted, in the hearing officers discretion, if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of whether such evidence would be admissible over objection in a judicial proceeding. Evidence is relevant if it has a tendency in reason to prove or disprove a material fact that is in dispute. The city shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, in demonstrating that the animal in question is potentially dangerous or vicious. The hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious and may make such orders as authorized by this chapter and other applicable law.

C.    Notwithstanding the foregoing, should the animal services officer make a determination that there exists probable cause to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, and the owner or keeper of the animal consents in all particulars to the recommendations of the animal services officer regarding disposition of the case and the determination regarding the animal, no hearing need be held. In such a case, the owner or keeper of the animal must present evidence to the city that they have paid all damages associated with the incident giving rise to the animal services officers determination, or made arrangements to do so. The owner or keeper of the animal shall sign an agreement with the city of Folsom in a form to be approved by the city attorney which sets forth all of the terms and conditions regarding continuing ownership of the animal and complete compliance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1127  2 (part), 2010; Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.030 Hearing decisionAppeal.
A.    After the hearing conducted pursuant to Section 7.12.020, the owner or keeper of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued, either personally or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, by the hearing officer. If a determination is made that the animal is potentially dangerous, the owner or keeper shall register the animal with the city and pay a potentially dangerous animal registration fee pursuant to Section 7.12.080 and in accordance with the time established by the hearing officer, but in no case more than thirty days after the date of the determination. If the city or the owner or keeper of the animal contests the determination, he, she or it may, within five days of personal service of the notice of determination, or ten days if service is made by mail, appeal the decision of the hearing to the Superior Court pursuant to California Food and Agricultural Code Section 31622. The person filing the appeal shall serve personally or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, notice of the appeal upon the other party.

B.    The court hearing the appeal shall conduct a hearing de novo, without a jury, and make its own determination as to potential danger and viciousness and make other orders authorized by this title or other applicable law, based upon the evidence presented. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner and within the time periods set forth in Food and Agricultural Code Section 31621(a). The issue shall be decided upon the preponderance of the evidence, and the city shall bear the burden of proof in demonstrating that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious. If the court rules the animal to be potentially dangerous or vicious, the court may issue any appropriate orders and establish a time schedule to ensure compliance with this chapter, but in no case more than thirty days after the ruling. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.040 Failure to appear at hearing.
The hearing officer or court hearing the appeal may decide all issues for or against the owner or keeper of the animal even if the owner or keeper fails to appear at the hearing. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.050 Finality of decision.
The determination of the court hearing the appeal shall be final and conclusive upon all parties, and there shall be no right to a further appeal. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.060 Impoundment pending hearing.
A.    Unless otherwise directed by a hearing officer or court, animals seized pursuant to this chapter shall be impounded at the animal shelter pending the hearings to be held pursuant to this chapter. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable to the city for all city costs and expenses of keeping the animal.

B.    When an animal has been impounded pursuant to this chapter and it is not found contrary to public safety by the chief of animal services, the chief of animal services may permit the animal to be confined at the owners expense in a kennel or veterinary facility approved by the chief of animal services. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.070 Circumstances under which an animal may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious.
An animal may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious under any of the following circumstances:

A.    The injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal;

B.    The injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was committing or attempting to commit a crime, including, but not limited to, injury or damage sustained from law enforcement dogs or animals;

C.    The animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault;

D.    The injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time the injury or damage was sustained was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal;

E.    The injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the animal was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.080 Additional designation and licensing of potentially dangerous animals.
All potentially dangerous animals shall be properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this title. The animal services department shall include a potentially dangerous designation in the registration records of the animal, either after the owner or keeper of the animal has agreed to the designation or the court or hearing officer has determined the designation applies to the animal. The owner shall annually pay to the city a potentially dangerous animal fee in addition to all regular licensing fees, as established by resolution of the city council, to provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of and monitoring the animal. The owner shall also agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officer and agents from any damage or injury caused by the vicious animal. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.090 Keeping and controlling potentially dangerous animals.
A potentially dangerous animal, while on the owners property, shall, at all times, be kept indoors, or in a securely fenced yard from which the animal cannot escape, and into which children cannot enter. A potentially dangerous animal may be off the owners premises only if it is restrained by a substantial leash or other restraint, and if it is under the direct control of a responsible adult at all times. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.100 Notification of death, sale, transfer or permanent removal of potentially dangerous animal.
If a potentially dangerous animal dies, or is sold, transferred, or permanently removed from the city, the owner of the potentially dangerous animal shall notify the animal services department of the changed condition and new location of the animal in writing within three days. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.110 Periodic inspectionsRemoval of designation of potentially dangerous animals.
A.    The animal services department shall have the right to monitor and periodically inspect all potentially dangerous animals and the premises upon which they are kept within the city. The owner or keeper of such animals shall allow for such monitoring and inspection upon reasonable notice by the animal services department, which notice need not be more than twenty-four hours, and may be less, depending on the circumstances.

B.    If there are no additional instances of the behavior defining a potentially dangerous animal, as specified herein, within a thirty-six-month period from the date of designation as a potentially dangerous animal, the animal shall be removed from the citys list of potentially dangerous animals. The animal may be, but is not required to be, removed from the list of potentially dangerous animals prior to the expiration of the thirty-six-month period if the owner or keeper of the animal demonstrate to the satisfaction of the chief of animal services that changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner or keeper, such as training of the animal, have substantially mitigated the risk to the public safety. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.120 Disposition of vicious animals.
A.    An animal determined to be a vicious animal may be ordered euthanized by the hearing officer when it is found, after proceedings pursuant to this chapter, that the release of the animal would create a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.

B.    If it is determined by the hearing officer or court that an animal found to be vicious shall not be euthanized, the hearing officer or court shall impose conditions upon the ownership of the animal that protect the public health, safety, and welfare, which may include, but not be limited to, requiring the owner or keeper to keep the animal in an enclosure comprised of a sufficiently high fence and/or covered structure with adequate flooring suitable to prevent the entry of young children and escape of the animal by digging or going over, through, or around the fence or structure, and to confine the vicious animal in conjunction with other measures to be taken by the owner or keeper of the animal and designed to prevent the animal from escaping.

C.    All vicious animals allowed to be kept by the owner shall be properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this title. The animal services department shall include a vicious animal designation in the registration records of the animal, either after the owner or keeper of the animal has agreed to the designation or the court or hearing officer has determined the designation applies to the animal. The owner shall annually pay to the city a vicious animal fee in addition to all regular licensing fees, as established by resolution of the city council, to provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of and monitoring the animal. The owner shall also agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officer and agents from any damage or injury caused by the vicious animal.

D.    The animal services department shall have the right to monitor and periodically inspect all vicious animals and the premises upon which they are kept within the city. The owner or keeper of such animals shall allow for such monitoring and inspection upon reasonable notice by the animal services department, which notice need not be more than twenty-four hours, and may be less, depending on the circumstances. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.130 Prohibition of animal ownership by vicious animal owner.
The owner of an animal determined to be a vicious animal may be prohibited by the city from owning, possessing, controlling, or having custody of an animal for a period of up to three years, when it is found, after proceedings conducted pursuant to this chapter, that ownership or possession of an animal by that person would create a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

7.12.140 Fines for violations.
Any violation of this title involving a potentially dangerous animal shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars. Any violation of this title involving a vicious animal shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars. (Ord. 1120  2 (part), 2009)

Title 8
HEALTH, SANITATION AND WELFARE
Chapters:

8.04    Food Handling EstablishmentsDefinitions

8.08    Food Handling EstablishmentsPermits

8.12    Food Handling EstablishmentsGeneral Regulations

8.16    Food Handling EstablishmentsSpecific Regulations

8.17    Smoking Regulations

8.20    Concessions, Vending Machines, Itinerant Eating Places

8.24    Enforcement and Inspection

8.30    Collection, Recycling, and Disposal of Waste Generated from Construction, Demolition, and Renovation Projects

8.32    Garbage Collection

8.34    Litter Control

8.36    Folsom Fire Code

8.37    Abatement of Weeds, Refuse and Abandoned Materials

8.38    Maintenance of Privately Owned Properties Visible from Public Property

8.40    Sacramento Environmental Commission

8.42    Noise Control

8.50    Library Commission

8.60    Abandoned Carts

8.70    Stormwater Management and Discharge Control

8.80    Regulation of Unattended Donation Boxes

Chapter 8.04
FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTSDEFINITIONS
Sections:

8.04.010    Advisory board defined.

8.04.020    Food handling establishment defined.

8.04.030    Food or beverage defined.

8.04.040    Health officer defined.

8.04.050    Operator defined.

8.04.060    Person defined.

8.04.070    Public eating place defined.

8.04.080    Utensils defined.

8.04.090    Mobile food dispensing unit requirements.

8.04.100    Outdoor concession requirements.

8.04.110    Vending machine requirements.

8.04.120    Building permit requirements.

8.04.010 Advisory board defined.
Advisory board means the advisory board appointed pursuant to this title. (Prior code  9406)

8.04.020 Food handling establishment defined.
Food handling establishment as referred to in this title means and includes every bakery, confectionery, cannery, packing house, slaughterhouse, grocery, meat market, vegetable or fruit stand, public eating place and every other place in the city used for the production, preparation for sale, manufacture, packing, storage, sale or distribution of any food or beverage. (Prior code  9400)

8.04.030 Food or beverage defined.
Food or beverage includes all articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple or compound, and all substances and ingredients used in the preparation thereof for human consumption. (Prior code  9402)

8.04.040 Health officer defined.
Health officer means the health officer of the county, and his duly authorized agent, or such other person as from time to time is so designated by the city council. (Prior code  9405)

8.04.050 Operator defined.
An operator and/or employee as used in this title means any person or owner engaged in the dispensing of, or assisting in the preparation of food or beverages, or any person otherwise employed in a food handling establishment. The term owner or owners as used herein means those persons, partnerships or corporations who are financially interested in the operation of a food handling establishment. (Prior code  9403)

8.04.060 Person defined.
Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association or corporation and the plural as well as the singular. (Prior code  9407)

8.04.070 Public eating place defined.
Public eating place means and includes every restaurant, public school and private school lunch room, soda fountain, buffet, grill room, lunch counter, sandwich stand, dining room, coffee shop, public boarding house, hotel, club, tavern, cocktail lounge, veterans club, cafeteria operated by any political subdivision, and every other place where food or beverage is prepared or sold, to be consumed on the premises, and all kitchens, commissaries, and other rooms appurtenant thereto or connected therewith. (Prior code  9401)

8.04.080 Utensils defined.
Utensils includes kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers, machinery, implements, receptacles, or other equipment used for the storage, preparation, distribution, or serving of food or drink. (Prior code  9404)

8.04.090 Mobile food dispensing unit requirements.
Mobile food dispensing units, catering trucks, food peddling vehicles of all types, and other similar type movable units in which food or beverage is sold, offered for sale, or dispensed to the general public from a parked vehicle within the city shall conform with this title. (Prior code  9408)

8.04.100 Outdoor concession requirements.
All outdoor concessions and itinerant public eating places established on fair grounds, carnivals, fiestas, and other celebrations within the city shall conform with this title. (Prior code  9409)

8.04.110 Vending machine requirements.
Food and beverage vending machines and their operation shall be regulated in accordance with this title. (Prior code  9410)

8.04.120 Building permit requirements.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of a building intended for a food handling establishment until the plans have been reviewed and approved by the health officer, or his duly authorized agent charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this title. (Prior code  9411)

Chapter 8.08
FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTSPERMITS*
Sections:

8.08.010    ApplicationInspection.

8.08.020    Certificate of approval.

8.08.030    SuspensionRevocationHearing.

8.08.040    AppealHearing.

8.08.050    Required.

*    See also Title 5, Business Licensing and Regulations.

8.08.010 ApplicationInspection.
Any person now operating a food handling establishment without a permit or any person intending to operate any food handling establishment, shall make an application to the health officer upon a form provided by the health officer, giving the names of the owner or owners, manager or managers, thereof, and such other information as the health officer may require for the administration of this title and the laws of the state.

Following receipt of such application by the health officer, he shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises, and if the provisions of this chapter, Health Laws of the state, and the rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health have been complied with, he shall so certify that fact to the applicant and within ten days issue a permit to operate. If the food handling establishment does not conform to the provisions of this title or the laws of the state, or the rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health, the health officer shall not issue a permit. (Prior code  9415)

8.08.020 Certificate of approval.
The certificate of approval issued by the health officer is considered the permit to operate under the provisions of this title. No permit to operate such place of business shall be issued to any person until all of the provisions of this title, the Health Laws of the state, and the rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health as well as all other ordinances of the city in relation to proper location, construction, and equipment of food handling establishments shall have been complied with. Any permit issued under these provisions shall not be transferable to any other person or any other location. No permit shall be valid for a longer period than 10 days following date of its issue unless the operator, owner or manager procures a license from the license collector to operate such place of business. The license collector shall issue no license to operate a food handling establishment, as defined herein, until a permit or certificate of approval has been issued by the health officer. The application for a permit to operate a food handling establishment when countersigned by the health officer, recommending a permit be issued to the applicant, shall be the certificate of approval. (Prior code  9416)

8.08.030 SuspensionRevocationHearing.
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this title may be suspended or revoked by the health officer for a violation of the provisions of this title, or any health law of the state; provided, however, that a permit shall not be suspended or revoked until a hearing upon written notice of said hearing shall have been held by the health officer. Written notice to the permittee shall be served upon the permittee either by personal delivery to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the records of the health department of the county. The notice shall state:

1.    The grounds for complaint or reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension in clear and concise language;

2.    The time when and the place where said hearing is to be held.

Such notice shall be served or given to the permittee at least ten and not more than fifteen days prior to the date set for the hearing.

After conducting the hearing and a finding of cause for revocation or suspension of the permit the health officer may suspend or revoke the permit upon such terms and conditions as, in the exercise of a reasonable and sound discretion, he determines, or may dismiss the proceedings. (Prior code  9417)

8.08.040 AppealHearing.
Any person whose permit is revoked or suspended pursuant to the provisions of this title may appeal to the city council by filing a request for a hearing of such appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the decision of the health officer that such permit be suspended or revoked. The city council shall, at the next regular meeting after the filing of the request for hearing on such appeal with the clerk, set the matter for hearing not less than five and not more than ten days. The city council may at such hearing sustain, reverse, or modify the decision of the health officer representing the suspension or revocation of such permit. (Prior code  9418)

8.08.050 Required.
No person shall control, lease, act as agent for, conduct, operate or manage any food handling establishment in the city conduct or operate, or cause or permit to be conducted or operated, such food handling establishment without a permit to operate the same, or during the time of suspension of such permit or after the revocation of such permit, notwithstanding the fact that such person holds a valid license from the city to conduct such business. (Prior code  9419)

Chapter 8.12
FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTSGENERAL REGULATIONS
Sections:

8.12.010    Floors and buildings.

8.12.020    Walls and ceilings.

8.12.030    Fly control.

8.12.040    Lighting.

8.12.050    Ventilation.

8.12.060    Water supply.

8.12.070    Toilet facilities.

8.12.080    Handwashing facilities.

8.12.090    Multi-use utensils, sinks, equipment.

8.12.100    Dishwashing.

8.12.110    Utensil storage.

8.12.120    Pure foods.

8.12.130    Garbage and waste disposal.

8.12.140    Refrigeration.

8.12.150    Protection from contamination.

8.12.160    Animals.

8.12.170    Rodents.

8.12.180    Living quarters.

8.12.190    Beds.

8.12.200    Storage of clothing.

8.12.210    Cleanliness of employees.

8.12.220    Communicable disease.

8.12.230    Investigation of infection.

8.12.010 Floors and buildings.
A.    The floors of all rooms in which food or beverage is stored, prepared, or handled, or in which utensils are washed, shall be kept clean and in good repair. The floors of all rooms in which food or beverage is prepared or utensils washed shall have a smooth, washable surface.

B.    Buildings for housing any food handling establishment shall be of sufficient size and floor space to allow for the maintenance of proper sanitation after all equipment is installed. (Prior code  9420)

8.12.020 Walls and ceilings.
The walls and ceilings of all rooms in which food or beverage is stored, prepared or handled shall be kept clean and in good repair. The walls and ceilings of all rooms in which food or beverage is prepared or utensils washed shall have a smooth washable surface. (Prior code  9421)

8.12.030 Fly control.
All openings into the outer air from food handling establishments shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective means approved by the advisory board are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. (Prior code  9422)

8.12.040 Lighting.
All rooms in which food or beverage is stored, prepared, or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well lighted. (Prior code  9423)

8.12.050 Ventilation.
All rooms in which food or beverage is stored, prepared or served or in which utensils are washed shall be well ventilated. (Prior code  9424)

8.12.060 Water supply.
Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be accessible to all rooms in which food or beverage is prepared or utensils are washed. The water supply shall be adequate and a safe, sanitary quality. (Prior code  9425)

8.12.070 Toilet facilities.
Separate toilet facilities for each sex shall be provided convenient to the employees or operators on the premises of food handling establishments. In public eating places the toilet facilities shall also be provided convenient to the public:

1.    Toilet rooms shall not be less than eighteen square feet and not less than three feet in width. Anterooms shall not be less than three feet in width;

2.    Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food or beverage, or utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms and anterooms shall be self-closing;

3.    Toilet rooms shall be ventilated to the outside air and effectively screened against insects and free from rodents;

4.    Toilet room floors shall be of cement, tile, laid on cement, vitrified brick, or other nonabsorbent material approved by the advisory board. (Prior code  9426)

8.12.080 Handwashing facilities.
Adequate and convenient handwashing facilities shall be provided within or adjacent to toilet rooms, including running hot and cold water, soap, and approved sanitary towels or any other method approved by the advisory board in all food handling establishments. The use of a common towel is prohibited.

No employee or owner shall resume work in a food handling establishment after visiting the toilet without first washing his hands and legible signs shall be posted in each toilet room directing attention to this requirement. (Prior code  9427)

8.12.090 Multi-use utensils, sinks, equipment.
All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, stoves, hoods, refrigerating equipment, utensils, or other equipment shall be kept clean and in good repair. All multi-use dishes and utensils, shall be kept free of breaks, corrosion, open seams, cracks, and chipped places. All public eating places after the effective date of this chapter shall be provided with at least a three compartment metal sink with metal drainboards, or an adequate dishwashing machine except where single service eating and drinking utensils are used exclusively. All other food handling establishments shall be provided with metal sink or sinks with metal drainboards and shall be adequate and suitable for each such establishment. All stoves or ranges installed in public eating places after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein shall be at least twelve inches distance from the wall except where the hood and stoves or ranges are of one integral part or where the hood and back wall metal flashing are tightly soldered or sealed to the stove or range to prevent grease and dirt from accumulating behind them. The temperature of all foods retained in the steam table or food warmer shall be maintained at a minimum of one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit. All steam tables shall be properly drained. (Prior code  9428)

8.12.100 Dishwashing.
All except service eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and then effectively subjected to one of the following approved bactericidal processes after each usage:

1.    Immersion for at least one-half minute in clean, hot water at a temperature at least one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit;

2.    Immersion for at least two minutes in a chlorine bath containing at least one hundred p.p.m. at all times of available chlorine if hypochlorites are used, or a concentration of equal bactericidal efficiency if chloramines are used;

3.    All chemicals and methods to be used in the sanitizing process for dishes, glasses, and eating utensils shall be of a type and of a use or method approved by the health officer;

4.    Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose. No article, polish, or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleaning or polishing of utensils. (Prior code  9429)

8.12.110 Utensil storage.
After washing and bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be handled in such manner as to prevent contamination. They shall be stored in a clean place protected from flies, dust, and other contamination. Single service utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored therein in a clean dry place until used, shall be handled in a sanitary manner, and shall be used only once. (Prior code  9430)

8.12.120 Pure foods.
All food and beverage shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, and be so prepared as to be safe for human consumption and shall comply with the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state relating to pure foods, adulteration and all portions pertaining thereto. (Prior code  9432)

8.12.130 Garbage and waste disposal.
All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable, leakproof, nonabsorbent receptacles covered with close fitting lids. Garbage disposal units may be used for wet garbage. Receptacles into which waste products are emptied at frequent intervals shall not be required to have lids during such use. Such receptacles shall be thoroughly cleansed after emptying and before reuse. (Prior code  9431)

8.12.140 Refrigeration.
Refrigeration for all perishable food in a food handling establishment shall be constantly maintained at fifty degrees Fahrenheit or lower except when being prepared or served and refrigeration shall be of a capacity so as to eliminate congestion of food and to provide for rapid cooling of all goods stored. All refrigerators shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair at all times and drains in all walk-in refrigerators and/or refrigerated display cases installed after the effective date of this chapter shall be connected by air gap separation with the sewer; same to comply with the plumbing laws of the city. There shall be an accurate thermometer in each separate refrigeration unit. (Prior code  9433)

8.12.150 Protection from contamination.
All food or beverage shall be so stored, displayed, dispensed, or served as to be reasonably protected from dust, dirt, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage, or other contamination. (Prior code  9434)

8.12.160 Animals.
No live animal, fowl, or aviary pets shall be kept or allowed in any room where food or beverage is prepared, stored, or served in any food handling establishment in any manner not approved by the health officer except that this section shall not apply to premises exclusively devoted to the slaughter of animals or fowl for food nor shall this section apply to dogs being used by the blind. (Prior code  9435)

8.12.170 Rodents.
The premises of all food handling establishments shall be clean and free by all reasonable means of litter, rubbish, rodents, roaches, ants, flies, or other insects. (Prior code  9436)

8.12.180 Living quarters.
No operation connected with the storage, sale, serving, or preparation of food or beverage in any food handling establishment shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. (Prior code  9437)

8.12.190 Beds.
No couch, cot, bed, or other accessory which may be used for sleeping purposes shall be maintained or kept in any room in which food or beverage is stored, prepared, or handled. (Prior code  9438)

8.12.200 Storage of clothing.
No owner or employee shall dress or undress in any room where food or beverage is prepared, sold, or served. He shall not leave or store his clothing therein. A suitable room or space shall be provided where employees may change and store their outer garments. Soiled linens, coats, and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose. (Prior code  9439)

8.12.210 Cleanliness of employees.
All employees and owners while engaged in the preparation, sale or serving of food or beverage in any food handling establishment shall wear clean outer garments, shall keep their hands clean, and shall not expectorate or use tobacco in any form while so engaged. Female employees in a public eating place shall wear hair nets, caps, or other suitable covering which confine the hair. (Prior code  9440)

8.12.220 Communicable disease.
No person shall be employed in any food handling establishment who, in the opinion of the health officer having jurisdiction, is affected with, or a carrier of, any disease in a stage which is likely to be communicable to persons exposed as a result of the affected employees normal duties of a food or beverage handler. (Prior code  9441)

8.12.230 Investigation of infection.
When a complaint or information as to the possibility of a transmission of infection from any employee or owner is presented to the health officer, he shall investigate, and may, after investigation, require, in writing, any or all of the following measures:

1.    The immediate exclusion of such employee or owner from the food handling establishment by the health officer;

2.    The immediate closing of the food handling establishment until no further danger of disease outbreak exists in the opinion of the health officer;

3.    Adequate medical examination of the owner, employee, and his co-employees, with such laboratory examination as may be indicated; or should such examination or examinations be refused, then the immediate exclusion of the refusing owner, employee, or co-employee from that or any other food handling establishment until an adequate medical or laboratory examination shows that he is not affected with or a carrier of any disease in a communicable form. (Prior code  9442)

Chapter 8.16
FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTSSPECIFIC REGULATIONS
Sections:

8.16.010    Buildings.

8.16.020    Floors.

8.16.030    Walls and ceilings.

8.16.040    Food retail sales areas.

8.16.050    Screens and fly control.

8.16.060    Lighting.

8.16.070    Ventilation.

8.16.080    Water supply.

8.16.090    Toilet facilities.

8.16.100    Handwashing facilities.

8.16.110    Multi-use utensilsSink equipment.

8.16.120    Sinks.

8.16.130    Dishwashing.

8.16.140    Utensil storage.

8.16.150    Garbage and waste disposal.

8.16.160    Pure foods.

8.16.170    Refrigeration.

8.16.180    Protection from contamination.

8.16.190    Animals.

8.16.200    Rodents.

8.16.210    Living quarters.

8.16.220    Beds.

8.16.230    Storage of clothing.

8.16.240    Soiled laundry.

8.16.250    Cleanliness of employees.

8.16.260    Communicable disease.

8.16.270    Permits to operate.

8.16.010 Buildings.
All buildings shall be designed so that there shall be adequate working area exclusive of equipment to: properly do the dishwashing, prepare and serve food, store supplies, and conduct other operations in the carrying on of the business. All supplies shall be stored inside a building in an adequate storage area which is well lighted and ventilated. (Prior code  9443)

8.16.020 Floors.
Food preparation and machine dishwashing floor areas shall be of smooth, sound concrete, terrazo, ceramic tile, quarry tile, magnesite, or other approved material and should have a baseboard of similar material at least six inches in height. The floors in every food preparation room or area, should be sloped to floor drains so the entire floor can be flushed with hot water or steam.

Other floor areas shall be of smooth, sound, easily cleanable material.

All floor surfaces under this section shall further comply with approved list of materials as shown on Plan Check List of Materials for Food Handling Establishments under Appendix A, Sections I, II, III, IV, V, VI, and VII. (Prior code  9444)

8.16.030 Walls and ceilings.
A.    Food preparation and machine dishwashing areas. The walls and ceilings shall be of sound, smooth material fitted tight with smooth sealed joints and be painted with light colored, washable enamel paint. Glazed or ceramic tile may be substituted. No wall paper or other absorbent material is allowed including acoustic tile unless approved by the restaurant advisory board.

B.    The walls in the proximity of sinks, mixers, stoves, ranges or other equipment where water, grease, or other matter is likely to be splashed on the walls shall be flashed with metal, tile, or at the discretion of the health officer, other approved impervious material of sufficient height to thoroughly protect the walls. (Prior code  9445)

8.16.040 Food retail sales areas.
Food retail sales areas of groceries, markets, bakeries and other such food handling establishments shall be of sound, smooth material and painted with easily cleanable paint, oil, varnish or other like sealer:

1.    Studs, joists or rafters shall not be exposed in food preparation, bakery, meat, grocery, utensil washing, or toilet areas. Studs, joists or rafters may be exposed in other areas if they are suitably finished and kept clean and in good repair;

2.    All walls and ceiling surfaces under this section shall further comply with approved list of materials as shown on Plan Check List of Materials for Food Handling Establishments under Appendix A-I, III, IV, V, VI, and VII. (Prior code  9446)

8.16.050 Screens and fly control.
A.    All openings into outer air of rooms in which food is prepared, served, sold or stored shall be effectively screened with wire screen of not coarser than sixteen inch mesh; screen doors to the outer air shall open outward only and shall be self-closing. Other methods of fly control approved by the advisory board may be substituted;

B.    Fly fans or air blowers of sufficient size and air power to prevent the entrance of flies, and which are approved by the advisory board, may be substituted at window and door openings in lieu of screen;

C.    Where doors are fitted with heavy duty door closers or operated by self-closing electrical devices approved by the advisory board, they are acceptable at door entrances in lieu of screen doors. (Prior code  9447)

8.16.060 Lighting.
Provide not less than ten foot candle intensity around all working surfaces and in all food preparation rooms or areas in which dishes and utensils are washed and sanitized. All other areas shall have sufficient light to facilitate effective cleaning. If natural light is utilized, window areas shall be at least ten percent of floor area. (Prior code  9448)

8.16.070 Ventilation.
A.    Ventilation shall be sufficient to keep establishment free from odors, fumes, smoke or condensation. Stoves, grills, soup kettles, ovens, donut and potato friers, etc., shall be hooded and vented to the outside, with forced draft ventilation. (See Section 5110 of the 1961 issue of the Uniform Building Code for proper interpretation of this section.)

B.    Hoods used for ventilation over ranges, grills, and other frying equipment should extend at least six inches over ends and front sides of equipment. (Prior code  9449)

8.16.080 Water supply.
A.    Every place of business handling foods or beverage for human consumption shall have hot and cold running water to every sink, slopsink, dishwasher and any fixture used for cleaning purposes installed after the effective date of this chapter;

B.    Hot water heaters hereafter installed in public eating places shall be not less than thirty gallon capacity. In all food handling establishments, the hot water supply shall be sufficient to thoroughly clean all food equipment. (Prior code  9450)

8.16.090 Toilet facilities.
A.    Separate toilet facilities for each sex shall be provided convenient to the employees on the premises. Toilet rooms shall be separated from other portions of the restaurant by tight-fitting, self-closing doors. Handwashing facilities installed after effective date of this chapter shall be provided within or adjacent to toilet rooms, including a handwashing basin and an adequate supply of running hot and cold water, soap, single service towels or other method approved by the advisory board. They shall be well lighted and ventilated to the outside. All inside toilet rooms shall have at least one hundred forty-four square inch vent opening or equivalent vent pipe to the outer air or an approved, mechanically operated fan working off the toilet room light switch, exhausting air from through at least an eight inch pipe or its equivalent in area, to the outer air.

B.    Toilet rooms shall not be less than eighteen square feet nor less than three feet in clear width. Vestibule rooms shall not be less than three feet in width. In the interpretation of this section, all urinals shall be considered the same as a toilet.

C.    No food products, clothing or any other articles shall be stored in a toilet room. No food products shall be stored in a vestibule.

D.    All floors, walls and ceiling surfaces shall comply to approved list of materials as shown on Plan Check List of Material Food Handling Establishments under Appendix A-II. (Prior code  9451)

8.16.100 Handwashing facilities.
Adequate and convenient handwashing facilities shall be provided within or adjacent to toilet rooms, including running hot and cold water, soap, and approved sanitary towels, in all food handling establishments. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee or owner shall resume work in a food handling establishment after visiting the toilet without first washing his hands, and legible signs shall be posted in each toilet room directing attention to this requirement. (Prior code  9452)

8.16.110 Multi-use utensilsSink equipment.
A.    All surfaces with which food or drink comes in contact shall consist of a smooth, impervious, easily cleanable material, and shall be in good repair, free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chipped places and corrosion. All counters or tables other than hardwood on which food preparation equipment or cooking equipment is used shall be covered with an impervious surface such as stainless steel or other approved metals, masonite, formica and other approved material which shall be tight fitting and properly sealed to the table or counter with tight, smooth, cleanable edge.

B.    All display cases, counters, shelves, tables, refrigeration equipment, stoves, hoods, mixers, meat grinders and other equipment shall be constructed as to be easily cleaned and in good repair.

C.    No utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead may be used; however, solder containing lead may be used for jointing.

D.    All knife racks and cutlery holders shall be of hardwood, plastic, metal, or other approved material, and shall be so constructed that they may be easily dismantled and cleaned.

E.    All cutting boards used on food preparation units shall be of hardwood and shall be removable, if necessary, for cleaning and shall be free of cracks and crevices and shall have smooth finished surfaces on both sides.

F.    No tin can or other like container shall be used for the purpose of cooking, preparing or storage of any food or foodstuffs, with the exception of any food stored in its original container.

G.    Space behind equipment units: Equipment other than readily movable equipment shall be installed flush to the wall with the space closed and sealed; or sufficiently unobstructed space from the rear wall to the back of such equipment shall be provided to permit cleaning of the area behind the equipment. The space between adjoining units or between the side of a unit and the adjacent wall shall be sealed, unless there is sufficient space in such instances to allow ready and thorough cleaning between, behind, and beside all such equipment.

H.    Equipment used for the purpose of holding or keeping food or utensils warm shall be of a design, and so constructed so as to minimize shelter for vermin and dirt and must be kept clean of food particles, debris, or accumulated spillage of food material. This type of equipment should keep food stored therein at a temperature of one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit or higher at all times. Installed units requiring a warm water bath should be equipped with an overflow at the required water level to an approved sewer connection which conforms to the city building code.

I.    All stoves or ranges installed in public eating places after the effective date of this chapter shall be at least twelve inches distance from the wall except where the hood and stoves or ranges are one integral part, or where the hood and back wall metal flashing are tightly soldered or sealed to the stove or range to prevent grease and dirt from accumulating behind them. (Prior code  9453)

8.16.120 Sinks.
A.    In public eating places except where single service eating and drinking utensils are used exclusively, a general purpose sink for hand dishwashing operations shall be of at least three compartments, each not less than sixteen inches by fourteen inches deep. All such sinks shall be of metal construction with metal drainboards on each end at least eighteen inches in length with splash backs against any wall in contact, of sufficient height to protect wall. Drainboards shall be corrugated metal (not less than three and thirty-two hundredths corrugation). Metal or plastic drain racks may be provided to expedite dish drying and to prevent slippage of glasses and other utensils. In larger operations, where one sink is not adequate or where dishwashing machines are in use, a pot sink of sufficient size to cleanse and sanitize cooking utensils shall be installed. These sinks shall conform to the requirements for general purpose sinks except that at the discretion of the health officer, one drainboard may be deleted and need not be corrugated. Where single service eating and drinking utensils are used exclusively, an approved sink shall be provided for cleaning up purposes.

B.    Sliding drainboards, if installed over a food compartment, shall be so constructed as to prevent seepage or overflow of water or other foreign material into the food compartment it is designed to protect.

C.    Splash backs on all sinks shall be formed as an integral part of the sink and drainboards, and top of splash back shall have a turned backflange if not flush with wall of forty-five degree angle extending to the wall.

D.    Bar sinks shall be of at least three compartments all heavy metal welded construction, with at least one drainboard on each and not less than eighteen inches in length, one of which shall be corrugated (corrugations of drainboards shall not be less than three and thirty-two hundredths inches deep). One drainboard may, at the discretion of the health officer, be deleted if the sink is a replacement. Sink compartments to be at least ten inches by fifteen inches by nine inches deep with overflow pipes for each compartment. All corners of sinks shall be rounded, and a separate container should be provided for wastes from bar drinks which could drain directly into overflow pipe of the sink. Hot and cold running water shall be provided to all sinks.

E.    All other food handling establishments shall be provided with metal sink or sinks, with metal drainboards, and shall be adequate and suitable for each such establishment.

F.    No towels, rubber mats, sacking, or other absorbent material may be used on drainboards at any time. (Prior code  9454)

8.16.130 Dishwashing.
A.    The installation of all restaurant dishwashing equipment shall include facilities for proper scraping or precleaning of dishes and should include an effective prerinse or preflush device which will remove all gross soil.

B.    Hand dishwashing performed in a three compartment sink where chlorine or other approved bactericidals are used as sanitizers shall be set up as follows: after thorough scraping and prerinsing, dishes, glasses, and other eating utensils shall be washed in the first compartment of sink with water temperature maintained at one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit and containing soap or detergent. The second compartment of the sink shall contain the clear hot water rinse. The chlorine and bactericidal solution shall be maintained in the third compartment of the sink.

C.    Chemical sanitizing processes. All chemicals and methods to be used in the sanitizing process for dishes, glasses, and eating utensils shall be of a type and of a use or method approved by the health officer. The following chemical treatment, method or use, and test procedure of strength of solution have been approved by the health officer for sanitizing purposes:

1.    Chlorine compounds: Immersion in lukewarm or cold chlorine bath containing at least one hundred p.p.m. of available chlorine if hypochlorites are used or a concentration of two hundred p.p.m. if chlorine T are used, for a period of two minutes at pH of greater than seven and eight tenths. The test for chlorinate strength of solution shall be outlined in Appendix B;

2.    Quaternary ammonium compounds used in sanitizing process shall consist of alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium chloride (Group R) and all other types (Group H) including methyldodecyl, benzyl, trimelhyl, ammonium chloride, Hyamine 2744, Hyamine 1622 (Santi tabs);

Immersion in lukewarm or cold quaternary bath at least two hundred p.p.m. of available chemical for a period of at least two minutes. Test procedure for testing quarternary ammonium solutions shall be by the use of test tabs with five m.l. of solution for Group R and seven m.l. of solution for Group H to test for two hundred p.p.m. (See color comparison chart for p.p.m.) Appendix B.

D.    Each public eating place shall be equipped with test procedure and equipment to test whatever chemical sanitizing agent is being used for sanitizing purposes within the establishment. The operator shall be familiar with the type of chemical in use and its method of application.

E.    Hand dishwashing, as performed in a two compartment sink where hot water immersion is used as a sanitizer, the sink shall be equipped with proper thermometers and an adjustable or automatic gas burner or other device approved by the advisory board so the wash water temperature can be maintained at one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit and the rinse water at one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit, so above temperatures can be maintained. Provide hardwood or metal baskets with long handles for immersing dishes in the sanitizing rinse water for not less than one-half minute. Water in both compartments of sink must be changed during operation as often as is found necessary to keep reasonably clean.

F.    Dishwashing machines shall be installed so that the facilities include heating equipment to supply an adequate amount of hot water of at least one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit at all times during washing, and hot water of at least one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit in amounts sufficient to satisfy the maximum demands of the machine for the final rinse. Where it is impossible to maintain one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit final rinse water, a booster heater shall be installed between the general hot water system and the one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit final rinse section of the machine. All dishwashing machines shall have thermometers installed on the washing compartment and rinseline. The thermometers shall be accurate and kept in good working order.

G.    Dishwashing machines must be kept clean and in good working order. Periodic inspection and cleaning of wash and rinse sprays are essential to continue satisfactory operation, and these parts of the machines should, therefor, be readily accessible for inspection and cleaning. The wash tank water should be changed during operation as often as is found necessary to keep reasonably clean.

H.    Detergents and soaps. Detergents and soaps, whether liquid or powder, shall be added in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer.

I.    Detergents and soapsLabeling. All vendors supplying any food handling establishment with detergents or soaps shall certify to the health officer that all labels pertaining to said merchandise are true and correct. All containers shall be labeled and shall contain the following:

1.    For liquid detergents and soaps;

Percent of active ingredients,

Percent of inert or filler material,

Percent of vehicle as liquid. If water is the vehicle, it shall be so designated;

2.    For powder detergents and soaps;

Percent of active ingredients,

Percent of inert ingredients, pacific crystals, salt cake and soda ash, etc.

3.    The recommended dosage of detergent or soap per unit of water. The ingredients shall be shown on the label in letters at least three-eighths inches in height. If the use of smaller letters is requested, the advisory board shall then review the label. (Prior code  9455)

8.16.140 Utensil storage.
A.    Pots and pans. Shall be stored at least twelve inches above floor, either on shelves or hung from hooks on wall or from overhead racks.

B.    Dishes. Shall be stored at least eighteen inches above floor. If stored in closed cupboards or other approved container, they may at the discretion of the health officer be stored at a lower elevation.

C.    Glasses and cups should be stored, inverted, on racks, counters, or shelves that can be easily cleaned, the construction of which should be either of metal, glass, formica, or other impervious material. No towels, cloths, oilcloth, paper, etc. may be used on top of such racks, counters or shelves to be used for this purpose.

D.    Silverware. Shall be stored in trays constructed of metal or other approved materials. Knives, forks, and spoons shall be separated and so placed that handles may be readily grasped. Where upright containers are used, they shall be stored so the cutting surfaces of knives and eating surfaces of forks and spoons are placed downward. (Prior code  9456)

8.16.150 Garbage and waste disposal.
A.    All garbage shall be kept in suitable, leakproof, approved metal or plastic receptacles covered with closefitting lids. Receptacles shall be kept covered with lids at all times with the exception of when in immediate use in kitchen or food preparation rooms. Garbage receptacles shall be washed with hot water or cleaned with steam after each time they are emptied. A garbage receptacle washing room with concrete floor or a concrete platform, equipped with floor drain and hot and cold water hose connections, is recommended for all public eating places and food handling establishments having a considerable quantity of garbage. A ratproof, flyproof and well lighted garbage receptacle storage room with a concrete floor and a floor drain is recommended.

B.    All garbage, trash, and other waste material shall be removed from the premises as frequently as may be necessary to prevent nuisance, unsightliness, drawing of flies and disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. (Prior code  9457)

8.16.160 Pure foods.
A.    All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, and be so prepared as to be safe for human consumption and shall comply with the provisions of the State Health and Safety Code relating to pure foods, adulteration, etc.

B.    All milk fluid, milk products, ice cream, frozen custard, sherbet, ices, and similar frozen desserts served shall be from sources approved by the health officer. All milk shall be served in the original container or from an approved milk dispensing device.

C.    All foods shall be from an approved source. (Prior code  9458)

8.16.170 Refrigeration.
A.    All readily perishable food and beverage shall be kept at or below fifty degrees Fahrenheit except when being prepared or served. This shall include all custard-filled and cream-filled pastries, milk and milk products, egg products, meat, fish, shellfish, gravy, poultry stuffing, and sauces, dressing and salads containing meat, fish, eggs, or milk or milk products.

B.    All cooked food products, when not held for immediate service, shall be cooled as rapidly as possible to a temperature not exceeding fifty degrees Fahrenheit and held at that temperature. They may be cooled by running cold water or be refrigerated after reaching a temperature of one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit. Hot foods, when cooled in a refrigerator, should be stored so that the bulk is such as to readily permit the transfer of heat from the entire mass. They should be placed first in shallow containers until cooled. Large containers such as three to ten gallon pots should not be used to cool foods in refrigerators.

C.    Cooked foods of animal origin and food mixtures containing protein which are not held at one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit shall be cooled as rapidly as possible to a temperature not exceeding fifty degrees Fahrenheit and held at that temperature. Leafy vegetables and foods of a very low protein content may be held for short periods (up to two hours) at room temperature of sixty degrees Fahrenheit to ninety degrees Fahrenheit. In addition, all cooked protein sandwich fillings such as minced foods, sliced meats, poultry, meats, seafoods, egg salad mixtures, and other highly perishable foods that are prepared to be served and are not kept hot while being served, shall be refrigerated at fifty degrees Fahrenheit or less during the storage period prior to being served. This includes all sandwiches containing such foods or food mixtures.

D.    Waste water from refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of according to all local plumbing ordinances, enforced by the building department.

E.    Accurate Fahrenheit thermometers shall be provided in all refrigerators and refrigerated display cases. All produce and fish market refrigerator floors should be of cement and sloped to a drain in floor. Where iced foods, such as poultry, fish, etc., are stored in meat or other refrigerators where sawdust is kept on floors, a suitable container for such foods of either metal or concrete, with a proper drain should be installed. (Prior code  9459)

8.16.180 Protection from contamination.
A.    All food, beverage, and food ingredients shall be stored or displayed in such manner as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and condensation, sewage backflow and other contamination. Evidence of the presence of rodents, roaches, ants, and other vermin shall be considered as a violation of this section. Food, beverage, or food ingredients shall not be prepared beneath exposed overhead sewer, water, gas, or drain pipes. All prepared foods shall not be stored on floors. Milk or other beverages in cartons or nonleakproof containers shall not be submerged in water for cooling. No milk or beverages in any type of container, including mixes in drinking establishments, shall be stored in any receptacle containing cubed or cracked ice used for cooling water or in the preparation of any other beverage.

B.    All food and beverage shall be handled and served in such manner as to minimize the opportunities for contamination. Serving of sliced butter and cracked ice shall not be by direct contact with fingers, or hands, and manual contact with all food or beverage should be avoided insofar as is possible. Sugar shall be served only in covered dispensers or in containers or wrapped packages for individual service.

C.    All unwrapped or unenclosed food and beverage on display shall be protected by glass or otherwise from public handling or other contamination, except that approved hand openings for selfservice may be permitted on counter fronts.

D.    No sodium fluoride, poisons, insect or rodent exterminators containing poisons shall be stored in a room or area of any food handling establishment where food is prepared, served, or sold.

E.    All open pans stored on open shelves in walk-in refrigerators or other refrigeration equipment shall have a suitable cover to prevent scrapings or foreign material from falling into stored food from above. (Prior code  9460)

8.16.190 Animals.
No live animal, fowl or avian pets shall be kept or allowed in any room where food or beverage is stored, prepared, or served in any food handling establishment in any manner not approved by the health officer except when the premises are exclusively devoted to the slaughter of fowl for food or where dogs are being used by the blind for guidance. (Prior code  9461)

8.16.200 Rodents.
A.    The premises of all food handling establishments shall be clean and free by all reasonable means, of litter, rubbish, rodents, roaches, ants, flies or other insects.

B.    All buildings shall be made rodent and vermin proof by the sealing of building openings and cracks and by the use of chemicals in a protected area. (Prior code  9462)

8.16.210 Living quarters.
A.    No room of any food handling establishment where food or beverage is prepared, produced, manufactured, served, sold, or stored shall be used in any manner for sleeping or living purposes.

B.    No door from a room of any living or sleeping quarter shall open directly into a room or any part of any food handling establishment where food or beverage is prepared, produced, manufactured, served, sold, or stored. A door from living or sleeping quarters may open into a hallway or anteroom adjacent to a food handling establishment, but no such hallway or anteroom shall be used in any manner for the handling or storage of foods. (Prior code  9463)

8.16.220 Beds.
No room in any food handling establishment where food or beverages are prepared, produced, manufactured, served, or sold shall be used in any manner for sleeping purposes, and no couches, beds, cots, or other accessories which may be used for sleeping purposes shall be maintained or kept in any room of such food handling establishment where food is prepared, manufactured, served, or sold. (Prior code  9464)

8.16.230 Storage of clothing.
A.    Separate dressing rooms should be provided where there are five or more of either sex employed. They should be well-lighted and ventilated and provided with lockers, receptacles for soiled garments and with hand basin unless wash rooms are easily accessible. No foodstuffs shall be stored in any dressing room.

B.    No owner or employee shall dress or undress in any room where food or beverages are prepared or served, nor shall street clothing be stored in any such room unless kept in enclosed lockers. (Prior code  9465)

8.16.240 Soiled laundry.
Soiled linens, coats, and aprons shall be kept in containers or lockers provided for this purpose. (Prior code  9466)

8.16.250 Cleanliness of employees.
A.    All employees and owners coming in contact with food, food products, or equipment shall wear clean outer garments. Operators shall keep their hands and fingernails clean at all times while thus engaged.

B.    Shaving, hairbrushing and combing shall not be permitted except in a toilet room, washroom, or dressing room.

C.    There shall be a warning sign in all toilet rooms and/or lavatories warning food handlers to wash hands with soap and water following each visit to the toilet.

D.    Operators or other persons shall not discharge any substance from the nose, mouth, or any other part of the body upon the floor and walls of any food handling establishment.

E.    The use of tobacco by operators in any room or compartment where food is prepared, cooked, or stored is expressly prohibited. (Prior code  9467)

8.16.260 Communicable disease.
No person shall be employed in any food handling establishment who, in the opinion of the health officer having jurisdiction, is affected with, or a carrier of any disease in a stage which is likely to be communicable to persons exposed as a result of the affected employees normal duties as a food handler. (Prior code  9468)

8.16.270 Permits to operate.
A.    Sanitarians shall see that permits are displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment at all times.

B.    If permit is soiled or has been lost or misplaced, a duplicate permit should be issued if or when establishment meets sanitary requirements. Recommend that permit be kept under glass for protection against grease and dirt.

C.    Check to see if permit is a valid one; that is, if in the name of present owner or owners. If not, a new application shall be filled out and a new permit issued if or when establishment meets sanitary requirements. Always pick up old permit when new one is issued and turn into office.

D.    When a partner retires from establishment ownership, a new permit is not required; however, if a new partner is added to the firm, an application must be filled out and a new permit issued if or when establishment meets sanitary requirements.

E.    The application for a permit to operate a food handling establishment shall be considered to be the certificate of approval when countersigned by a sanitarian or other authorized health officer. Applications for permits are to be made out in duplicate, the original copy to be attached to inspection form to be turned into office with carbon copy going to applicant and can be used by him to obtain license at license office. (Prior code  9469)

Chapter 8.17
SMOKING REGULATIONS
Sections:

8.17.005    Findings.

8.17.010    Purpose.

8.17.020    Definitions.

8.17.030    Application of chapter to city-owned or leased facilities.

8.17.040    Prohibition of smoking.

8.17.050    Regulation of smoking in hotels and motels.

8.17.055    Multifamily rental smoking regulations.

8.17.060    Regulation of smoking in places of employment.

8.17.070    Smoking in recreation areas prohibited.

8.17.080    Where smoking not regulated.

8.17.090    Posting requirements.

8.17.100    Enforcement.

8.17.110    Violations and penalties.

8.17.120    Private claim/action.

8.17.130    Other applicable laws.

8.17.005 Findings.
The city council hereby finds as follows:

A.    Smoking is one of the largest single preventable causes of death and disability for persons in the United States. On average, compared to people who have never smoked, smokers suffer more health problems and disability due to their smoking and ultimately lose more than a decade of life.

B.    Exposure to secondhand smoke is a leading cause of preventable death, after smoking and alcohol. It has been found by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to be a Class A Carcinogen, known to cause cancer in humans, and one out of three cancer deaths are reportedly caused by smoking. There is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke.

C.    Tobacco smoke is a major source of indoor air pollution, and exposure to it places healthy nonsmokers at significantly increased risk for developing lung and bladder cancer, heart disease, stroke, respiratory infection, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm. Secondhand tobacco smoke also constitutes a special health hazard for children, the elderly and people with cardiovascular or lung disorders.

D.    Secondhand smoke causes numerous health problems in infants and children, including more frequent and severe asthma attacks, respiratory infections, ear infections, and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).

E.    Smoking is one of the largest single preventable causes of death and disability for persons in the United States.

F.    Employees subject to prolonged exposure to secondhand smoke in the workplace experience a loss of job productivity and may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of reactions to secondhand smoke. Higher costs to the employer are associated with smoke in the workplace due to increase in absenteeism, accidents, and the cost of medical care, insurance, loss of productivity, and cleaning and maintenance requirements. Smoke-free workplaces are associated with an increase in the success rate of smokers who are attempting to quit.

G.    Smoking in public places and workplaces is a major cause of fires and damage to merchandise and equipment as well as costly maintenance and repairs to furniture and fixtures.

H.    The health care costs produced by smoking-related ailments and diseases constitute a heavy and avoidable financial drain on the economy of Folsom.

I.    Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and significant physical discomfort of nonsmokers and constitutes a public nuisance in public places and workplace.

J.    That the regulations within the California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976, as amended (Health & Safety Code  25940 et seq.) are inadequate to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and that said act does not preempt local regulation of smoking.

K.    Labor Code Section 6404.5 regulates and prohibits smoking in the workplace and preempts the field with respect to local ordinances in conflict with its provisions. Labor Code Section 6404.5 permits local regulation not in conflict with its provisions.

L.    The city council finds that smoke-free outdoor recreation areas, bike paths, and outdoor assembly areas reduce unwanted exposure to secondhand smoke and reduce fire hazards and exposure to smoking in certain areas. (Ord. 1213  2, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of restricting and regulating smoking in public places, and recreation areas as defined in this chapter and in places of employment in order to reduce the hazards and nuisance which smoking causes to those who are involuntarily exposed. (Ord. 1213  3, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, those terms identified in this section shall, unless the context indicates otherwise, be ascribed the meaning contained in this section:

Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other entity formed for either charitable, profit-making/nonprofit purposes, including without limitation by reason of enumeration, manufacturing concerns, retail establishments where goods or services are sold, and professional corporations or other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architecture, financial or other professional/nonprofessional services are delivered.

Common area (for purposes of this chapter) means any area that is accessible to all persons lawfully occupying the complex or business. A common area does not include parking lots, private interior streets, sidewalks adjacent to parking lots, or public or private streets.

Employee means any person who is employed by any business and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.

Employer means any business, governmental agency, municipal corporation, nonprofit entity or person having one or more employee.

Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls, windows, screens, shades or other materials (exclusive of doors or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, office landscaping or similar structures. Enclosed area also includes any outdoor areas enclosed on all sides by solid walls, windows, screens, shades or other materials (exclusive of doors or passageways).

Multifamily rental project means any property offered for rent or lease with more than two rental units on the property regardless of the zoning designation of the parcel. A multifamily rental project does not include other multifamily-zoned projects where the entire project is not a rental project, including condominiums or other developments with multiple private owners.

Outdoor pavilions means any publicly owned space designed for people to congregate, enjoy outdoor activities, farmers markets, music or other activities (for example, the Historic District Plaza).

Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of an employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, auditoria, private offices, employee lounges and restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, stairs and hallways. A private residence is a place of employment only during the hours that clients or employees are present.

Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted or invited, including, but not limited to, any building or property operated by the city of Folsom, retail establishments (including restaurants and retail food markets) where goods or services are sold, professional buildings where professional services are delivered, manufacturing, educational facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restrooms, service lines, elevators, stairways, theaters, sports arena, lobbies and waiting rooms. A private residence is a public place only during the hours that clients or employees are present.

Recreation area means any area in the city that is publicly or privately owned and operated for recreational purposes, whether enclosed or unenclosed and open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirements. Recreation area includes parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, open space, walking or hiking paths or trails, bike trails, outdoor pavilions, city zoo sanctuary, outdoor art spaces, outdoor space for the public to congregate, benches and similar shelters for bus stops or outdoor seating areas and similar areas designed and/or used for outdoor recreational activities. Recreation area does not include private golf courses, where smoking is permitted by the owners.

Restaurant means any enclosed area of a coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeteria and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities.

Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco or e-cigarette/vapor products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. For additional requirements, see Section 8.17.080(B).

Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah pipe, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form and use of electronic devices with electrical ignition or vaporization (e-cigarettes/cigars or similar devices).

Special event means an event or activity requiring a special event permit issued by the city of Folsom.

Sports arena means public or privately owned or operated sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. (Ord. 1225  4, 2015: Ord. 1213  4, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.030 Application of chapter to city-owned or leased facilities.
This chapter shall apply to all facilities owned or leased by the city and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1213  5, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.040 Prohibition of smoking.
Smoking is prohibited in the following places:

A.    All public places, except as expressly provided in this chapter;

B.    Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city;

C.    Licensed day care and health care facilities;

D.    Enclosed areas of restaurants and businesses;

E.    Common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, retirement facilities, nursing homes, mobile home parks and hospitals, except in cases of medical necessity as defined in the laws of the state of California or in specifically designated smoking areas that comply with subsection F of this section.

F.    The owner or entity in control of a public place may designate certain specified area where smoking is permitted if all the following criteria are met:

1.    The designated area must be clearly designated and marked with smoking permitted signs.

2.    The area must be at least fifty feet from any picnic areas, sports fields or improvements used for recreational activity, food vendors, lines for recreational activities in the recreational area.

3.    The area must be completely unenclosed.

4.    In the case of a common area as described in subsection E of this section, the area must be no less than fifty feet from any residential unit and any return vents or air conditioning intakes that serve or discharge into residential units or enclosed common areas.

G.    As Provided in State Law. Nothing herein is intended to limit the application of state law. (Ord. 1213  6, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994. Formerly 8.17.050)

8.17.050 Regulation of smoking in hotels and motels.
A.    In addition to any other requirements of this chapter, all hotels and motels having ten or more guest rooms shall designate at least fifty percent of such rooms as nonsmoking, and shall post signs in such rooms informing guests of the regulation. No ashtrays or matches shall be supplied in such rooms.

B.    It is unlawful to charge more for a nonsmoking room than for a similar room in which smoking is permitted. (Ord. 1213  7, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994. Formerly 8.17.060)

8.17.055 Multifamily rental smoking regulations.
In addition to other provisions in this chapter that apply to smoking in multifamily rental projects, the following provisions are applicable to multifamily rental projects in the city of Folsom:

A.    Smoking is prohibited in all areas, interior units and common areas of multifamily rental projects where the city provides any financial assistance to the project after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. If a multifamily rental project permits smoking at the time an application for financial assistance is received, it shall prepare a plan to prohibit smoking throughout the project as a condition of receipt of any city funds. A project owner may designate a smoking area on the premises that complies with Section 8.17.040(F). In accordance with this section, the project owner of the multifamily rental project receiving financial assistance from the city shall include in its leases language that prohibits smoking in accordance with Civil Code Section 1947.5 and this chapter.

B.    Any multifamily rental project shall provide prospective tenants with the projects smoking policy, in writing, at the time any application is received and at the time the lease or rental agreement is entered into by the parties.

C.    Smoking is prohibited on unit balconies or unit patio areas attached to or controlled by the multifamily rental tenant. (Ord. 1225  8, 2015)

8.17.060 Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
A.    Employers shall provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees as provided in Labor Code Section 6404.5 and other provisions of state law.

B.    Employers may provide a separate area where employees are permitted to smoke as provided in state law. In order to be eligible for this exemption, the smoking area must be fully enclosed and separated from the employee work environment and shall have a ventilation system separate from that of any public place in which smoking is regulated by this chapter so that there is no venting or circulation of smoke from the smoking area into any other public place. (Ord. 1213  8, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994. Formerly 8.17.070)

8.17.070 Smoking in recreation areas prohibited.
A.    Smoking is prohibited in all recreational areas in the city, except the city or the private entity owning or controlling the recreational area may designate certain specified area where smoking is permitted if all the following criteria are met:

1.    The designated area must be clearly designated and marked with smoking permitted signs.

2.    The area must be at least fifty feet from any picnic areas, sports fields or improvements used for recreational activity, food vendors, lines for recreational activities in the recreational area.

3.    The area must be completely unenclosed.

4.    The parks and recreation director (director) may designate locations where smoking is permitted in this chapter. The director may, but is not required to designate smoking area and may consider the uses in the recreation area, fire hazards, proximity to fields and other factors in her/her discretion.

B.    Smoking is prohibited on city property used for special events, except in designated smoking areas meeting the requirements set forth above. Special events shall be conditioned consistent with this section. (Ord. 1213  9, 2014)

8.17.080 Where smoking not regulated.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following enclosed areas shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Private residences, except during the hours clients or employees are present pursuant to use permit or when the residences are utilized as a day-care center;

B.    Retail tobacco stores, receiving a certificate of occupancy shall have a ventilation system separate from that of any public place in which smoking is regulated so that there is no venting or circulation of smoke from the tobacco store into any public place;

C.    Public streets and public sidewalks. (Ord. 1213  10, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.090 Posting requirements.
A.    Each owner, operator, manager or other person having control of a public place or place of employment within which smoking is regulated by this chapter shall conspicuously post no smoking signs that can be easily read and understood.

B.    An owner, operator or manager of a building in which pursuant to these regulations smoking is prohibited in any space in the building, may limit the no smoking postings to first-floor entrances and exits and to the elevator lobby areas of all other floors.

C.    Hotels and motels which maintain nonsmoking rooms shall prominently post in the lobby a sign notifying patrons of the availability of nonsmoking accommodations, in addition to posting the individual rooms. (Ord. 1213  11, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.100 Enforcement.
A.    Notice of these regulations shall be given to all applicants for a business license.

B.    The fire department shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, certification from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this chapter have been complied with.

C.    The fire department, on its regular inspections, shall check for compliance with sign posting requirements. Owners, operators, managers or other persons having control of a public place or place of employment shall be notified in writing of any violations on the standard inspection report.

D.    The code enforcement officer is authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1213  12, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.110 Violations and penalties.
A.    It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions.

B.    It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:

1.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

2.    A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year;

3.    A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of this chapter within one year.

D.    Violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated by appropriate civil action.

E.    Violations of this chapter are subject to the administrative penalty provisions of this code and shall be considered a Level B violation.

F.    The remedies provided by this section are cumulative, and are in addition to any other remedy existing at law or in equity. (Ord. 1213  13, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.120 Private claim/action.
Any aggrieved person may bring a civil action to compel compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1213  14, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

8.17.130 Other applicable laws.
A.    This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws or permit conditions, including but not limited to the fire code, OSHA regulations, the California Code of Regulations. (Ord. 1213  15, 2014: Ord. 799  1 (part), 1994)

Chapter 8.20
CONCESSIONS, VENDING MACHINES, ITINERANT EATING PLACES
Sections:

8.20.010    ConcessionsItinerant eating placesRegulations.

8.20.020    Mobile food dispensing unitRegulations.

8.20.010 ConcessionsItinerant eating placesRegulations.
A.    All concessions shall be covered with some type of roof. The minimum shall be at least a covering of canvas over the entire food preparation and dispensing area of the concession.

B.    All areas within the concession used for open cooking and frying shall be properly protected from dust and other contamination by enclosing this area with suitable protection on at least three sides by solid material (may be transparent) fourth side screened. Other acceptable means may be used if approved by the health officer.

C.    The floor area within any food preparation and dispensing area shall be covered with a suitable floor which is cleanable and which can be kept in a sanitary condition. Rice hull, shavings, or sawdust are not allowed.

D.    All foods shall be stored at a minimum of twelve inches above the floor level. In a storeroom, a 6-inch food storage level may be maintained with the approval of the health officer.

E.    All prepared food displayed for sale within the concession shall be properly protected with sneeze boards or covered with portable covers.

F.    All areas within the food concession that are used for the storage, display, and cooking of food must be kept free of flies by proper screening or other approved methods.

G.    All ice for snow cones and like drinks shall be clean and kept in approved containers.

H.    All foods offered for sale that are prepared elsewhere must be prepared in an approved kitchen on the grounds or from an approved premise under health department supervision.

I.    All transportation of any prepared food from place of origin to place of selling must be in a closed dustproof container.

J.    The mixing containers used for the preparation of spun candy must be free of cracks and such candy shall be made in adequately enclosed machine.

K.    All eating and drinking utensils used for service by the concession shall be single service type. The exception to this rule is when there are properly equipped and established restaurants, unless sanitization procedures and methods within the concession have been approved by the health department.

L.    Refrigeration for all perishable food in a food handling establishment shall be constantly maintained at fifty degrees Fahrenheit or lower except when being prepared or served, and refrigeration shall be of a capacity so as to eliminate congestion of food and to provide for rapid cooling of all goods stored. All refrigerators shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair at all times and drains in all walk-in refrigerators and/or refrigerated display cases installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be connected by air gap separation with the sewer; same to comply with the plumbing laws of the city. There shall be an accurate thermometer in each separate refrigeration unit. Refrigeration facilities shall be provided within the concessionaires stand for foods of immediate use.

M.    All cream filled products such as cream puffs, cream pies and the like shall be prohibited from being received, handled or sold at concessions unless kept under fifty degrees Fahrenheit until time of sale.

N.    Water used in concessions shall be from an approved public supply.

O.    Adequate and convenient toilet and handwashing facilities shall be available on the grounds.

P.    All garbage and refuse shall be kept in tightly enclosed containers except when in use, and shall be removed at least daily. (Prior code  9480)

8.20.020 Mobile food dispensing unitRegulations.
A.    All vehicles shall be so constructed so that food or beverage is reasonably protected from dust and other contamination.

B.    The food dispensing unit where food is stored shall be constructed of metal or other material which is impervious to moisture and shall be of a smooth, washable surface and shall be kept in good repair.

C.    The food compartment of the vehicle shall be sealed off from the driver compartment. All outside doors shall be tight fitting during transit by use of rubber gaskets or like material.

D.    Shelving used in all mobile units shall be of metal or other impervious material. Shelves shall be so constructed so they can be removed or be easily cleaned.

E.    All readily perishable food or beverage, capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of micro-organisms which can cause food infections or food intoxications, shall be maintained at or below a temperature of fifty degrees Fahrenheit, unless being maintained hot for serving.

F.    All readily perishable food or beverages, capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of micro-organisms which can cause food infections or food intoxications, when being maintained hot for serving, shall be maintained at or above one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit. An accurate thermometer suitable for measuring temperature of the units shall be kept readily available.

G.    All coffee and food heating units shall be constructed of metal or other nonabsorbent material with all interior surfaces and component parts of the containers or units so designed and constructed as to permit easy cleaning and shall be kept clean. All product contact surfaces of the unit shall be of smooth, nontoxic, corrosion resistant, nonabsorbent material and shall be capable of withstanding repeated cleaning and bactericidal treatment by normal procedures. Such surfaces shall be protected against contamination. No coffee or coffee product derivative, or substitute shall be prepared in or upon any industrial catering truck or industrial mobile food dispensing unit or any other place except where hot and cold running water under pressure shall be provided and where the water supply shall be of a safe and sanitary quality.

H.    All merchandise dispensed, except in liquid form, shall be maintained for sale in individual containers or wrappers unless specific approval shall be granted by the health department to the contrary. Only single service utensils shall be used for serving food or drink and shall be dispensed from approved dispenser properly located inside of food compartment or otherwise protected from dust, insects, or contamination.

I.    All vehicles shall have a base of operation which conforms with the provision of the city food sanitation ordinance and each vehicle shall pass inspection and be covered with a permit to operate from the health officer.

J.    Each vehicle shall have lettered signs on each side as follows:

1.    Company name used in letters of not less than four inches in height;

2.    Sacramento County permit number assigned operator of vehicle or mobile equipment in letters of not less than two inches in height. (Prior code  9485)

Chapter 8.24
ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION
Sections:

8.24.010    Authority.

8.24.020    Advisory board created.

8.24.030    ViolationPenalty.

8.24.040    Nuisance declared.

8.24.050    Exemptions.

8.24.010 Authority.
The health officer, and his duly authorized agents, is charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this title.

The health officer, and his duly authorized agents, may at all reasonable times enter any food handling establishment or any place suspected of being a food handling establishment to inspect the premises and utensils, implements, machinery, receptacles, fixtures, furniture, and other equipment, supplies, articles of food, operatives, and employees therein as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Prior code  9490)

8.24.020 Advisory board created.
In order to determine the suitability of any equipment or devices, new materials, and revisions or amendments to this chapter, there is created an advisory board.

The advisory board shall consist of thirteen members appointed by the chairman of the board of supervisors pursuant to Section 28 of Sacramento County Ordinance No. 735. (Prior code  9491)

8.24.030 ViolationPenalty.
Any person violating any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.030 of this code. (Prior code  9492)

8.24.040 Nuisance declared.
In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter any violation of the provisions of this title is declared a public nuisance. (Prior code  9493)

8.24.050 Exemptions.
There is exempted from this operation of this title, churches, church societies, private clubs and other nonprofit associations of a religious, philanthropic, civic, improvement, social, political, or educational nature which purchase or receive donations of food for service without charge to members or for service or sale at a reasonable charge to members or the general public at occasional fund raising event for consumption on or off serving or selling premises if service or sale of such food does not constitute a primary purpose or function of club or association and if no employee or member is assigned full time to care for or operate equipment used. (Prior code  9494)

Chapter 8.30
COLLECTION, RECYCLING, AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE GENERATED FROM CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION, AND RENOVATION PROJECTS
Sections:

8.30.020    Definitions.

8.30.025    C&D program guidelines and program oversight.

8.30.030    Threshold for covered projects.

8.30.040    Exempt collection or transportation.

8.30.050    Review of waste management plan.

8.30.060    Compliance with waste management plan.

8.30.070    Infeasibility exemption.

8.30.080    Applicant fee.

8.30.090    C&D hauler permit requirement.

8.30.100    Authority to grant C&D hauler permit.

8.30.110    Application for C&D hauler permit.

8.30.120    Appeal upon denial of award of a C&D hauler permit.

8.30.130    Awarding C&D hauler permit.

8.30.140    C&D hauler fee.

8.30.150    Termination or suspension of C&D hauler permit.

8.30.160    C&D hauler permit transfer or assignment.

8.30.170    C&D hauler reporting requirements.

8.30.180    C&D hauler diversion plans.

8.30.190    Diversion requirement.

8.30.200    Diversion compliance fee.

8.30.210    Materials recovery facility certification.

8.30.220    Inspection authority.

8.30.230    Enforcement.

8.30.240    Violation as a nuisance.

8.30.250    Public hearings and notices.

8.30.260    Signage.

8.30.270    Office required.

8.30.280    Disposal restrictions.

8.30.290    Use of containers.

8.30.300    C&D debris ownership.

8.30.310    Covered load requirement.

8.30.320    Civil penalties for violations.

8.30.020 Definitions.
A.    AB 939 means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq., as amended.

B.    Applicant means any natural person, business, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city.

C.    C&D debris means used or discarded materials resulting from construction, renovation, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure and such other materials as may be removed during the normal cleanup process of such construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations.

D.    C&D hauler means the current list of permitted C&D haulers that have been issued a C&D hauler permit by the city authorizing the hauler to provide C&D debris services in the city.

E.    C&D hauler permit means a construction and demolition hauler permit issued under the provisions of this chapter authorizing the applicant to engage in the business of collecting, removing and transporting C&D debris generated within the city.

F.    C&D program guidelines means the program guidelines developed, maintained, and managed by the city utilities director pursuant to this chapter.

G.     City means the city of Folsom, California.

H.    Construction means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

I.    Covered project means any project that exceeds the established valuation threshold subjecting the project to this chapter. The threshold for a covered project shall be established by the city utilities director and specified in the C&D program guidelines.

J.    Deconstruction means the process of carefully dismantling a building or structure in order to salvage components for reuse and recycling.

K.    Demolition means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

L.    Director means the city of Folsom utilities department director or his/her designees.

M.    Divert means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

N.    Diversion plan means the plan submitted by applicants for a C&D hauler permit that identifies the diversion facility(s), strategy(s), and/or program(s) that will be used to divert C&D debris collected in the city in compliance with the diversion requirement.

O.    Diversion requirement means the diversion of a minimum proportion by weight of the C&D debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasibility exemption pursuant to this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the director for the project. The diversion requirement shall be specified in the C&D program guidelines.

P.    Person means any natural person, business, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever.

Q.    Project means any activity which requires a building permit or demolition permit from the city.

R.    Recycler means a materials recovery facility (MRF) processing C&D debris that is operating under current and active permits from the county of Sacramento and/or other applicable regulatory authorities, and that is achieving verifiable diversion rates equal to or in excess of the diversion requirement as specified in the C&D program guidelines.

S.    Recycle means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become C&D debris and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

T.    Reuse means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris.

U.    Renovation means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.

V.    Total cost means the total construction value of the project as calculated by the city using the citys standard commercial and residential valuation procedures for a building or demolition permit.

W.    Waste management plan means a completed waste management plan form, approved by the director for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered or noncovered project. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.025 C&D program guidelines and program oversight.
A.    The director is authorized to develop C&D program guidelines consistent with this chapter, to administer the C&D program pursuant to this chapter and the C&D guidelines, and to modify C&D program guidelines.

B.    The director shall oversee the C&D program, and each C&D hauler shall provide to the director such information as the director determines is reasonably necessary to facilitate effective administration of the C&D hauler permit under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.030 Threshold for covered projects.
All construction, renovation and deconstruction projects within the city with a total cost equal to or in excess of the established threshold are subject to this chapter. The threshold for covered projects shall be established by the director and specified in the C&D program guidelines. In addition, all demolition projects that require a demolition permit from the city are subject to this chapter. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.040 Exempt collection or transportation.
The persons listed in subsections A through C of this section shall be authorized to organize, direct or sponsor the collection, removal or transportation of C&D debris within the city, or collect, remove or transport such C&D debris, without a C&D hauler permit, and shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

A.    The United States, state of California, the city, any county, any special district, or any employee or member thereof when collecting or transporting C&D debris produced by operation of the public agency or entity;

B.    The owner, operator, occupant or employee of a farm or ranch consisting of five acres or more, when transporting for off-site disposal C&D debris accumulated as a result of the operation of the farm or ranch;

C.    A commercial gardener when collecting or transporting material consisting of the by-products of routine landscape maintenance services provided within the city limits. Landscape construction and installation activities and services shall not be exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.050 Review of waste management plan.
A.    Each applicant for a covered or noncovered project shall receive a waste management plan template from the city and select one of the following options for compliance with this chapter:

1.    Option 1. C&D hauler responsibility, or

2.    Option 2. Applicant responsibility.

B.    The compliance options are summarized as follows:

1.    Option 1 (C&D hauler responsibility) requires the applicant to provide proof of an agreement with one permitted C&D hauler to collect, haul, dispose and recycle all C&D debris generated by the covered project. The selected C&D hauler has the sole responsibility for compliance with the diversion requirement as specified in the C&D program guidelines. If the applicant complies with the terms of the agreement between the applicant and the C&D hauler, the applicant shall have no further obligations under this chapter.

Under Option 1, the applicant shall designate a C&D hauler in the waste management plan from a list provided by the city. The applicant shall also submit proof of an executed agreement with the selected C&D hauler to the city. The waste management plan shall indicate the applicant name, the address of the covered project, and the permit number of the covered project. The director shall review and approve the waste management plan and the executed agreement prior to the issuance of a building or demolition permit.

2.    Option 2 (applicant responsibility) places the entire responsibility for compliance with this chapter on the applicant. The applicant may use any combination of C&D haulers or other means to collect, transport, dispose and recycle C&D debris generated from the covered project. The applicant must maintain and submit detailed weight and/or volume records to the director to demonstrate compliance with the diversion requirement as specified in the C&D program guidelines.

Under Option 2, the applicant shall submit a waste management plan on a template provided by the city as part of the application packet for a building or demolition permit within the city. The completed waste management plan shall include the following information:

a.    The estimated volume or weight of C&D debris, by material type, to be generated by the covered project;

b.    The estimated volume or weight of such C&D debris that can feasibly be diverted via reuse by the covered project;

c.    The estimated volume or weight of such C&D debris that can feasibly be diverted via recycling by the covered project;

d.    The recycler and/or facility(s) that the applicant proposes to use to receive said C&D debris; and

e.    The estimated volume or weight of C&D debris that will be landfilled.

3.    Option 2 Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when an applicant elects Option 2, no application for a building or demolition permit shall be approved by the city for any covered project unless and until the director has approved the waste management plan. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required by the city to protect public health or safety, as determined by the director. The director shall only approve a waste management plan if he or she first determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

a.    The waste management plan provides all of the information set forth in this chapter; and

b.    The waste management plan satisfactorily demonstrates the methods by which the diversion requirement will be met.

If the director determines that all of the conditions set forth in this section have been met, he or she shall approve the waste management plan, return one copy of the approved waste management plan to the applicant and return one copy to the city.

4.    Option 2 Disapproval. For any applicant that elects Option 2, if the director determines that the waste management plan is incomplete or fails to satisfy the conditions for approval, the director shall either:

a.    Deny the waste management plan, specifying the reasons for denial, and promptly notify the neighborhood services department of the denial, which shall then immediately discontinue processing the plan check; or

b.    Return the waste management plan to the applicant with a request for further information and promptly notify the neighborhood services department of the request for further information which may, in its discretion, suspend or discontinue processing the plan check, depending on the circumstances and the request for further information. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.060 Compliance with waste management plan.
A.    Option 1 Compliance  C&D Hauler Responsibility. Upon successful completion of the waste management plan and the agreement between the applicant and the C&D hauler, the applicant shall be deemed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If for any reason the applicant prevents the C&D hauler from complying with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant may be responsible for the diversion compliance fee as specified in this chapter.

B.    Option 2 Compliance  Applicant Responsibility.

1.    Within thirty days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or at the time of issuing the last certificate of occupancy for units within a residential phased project, of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the director the following documentation:

a.    Receipts or weight tickets from the vendor(s) or facility(s) which collected or received each material generated from the covered project, showing the actual weight or volume of that material;

b.    A copy of the previously approved waste management plan for the covered project adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and landfilled; and

c.    Any additional information requested by the director and/or submitted by the applicant that is relevant to compliance with this chapter.

2.    Option 2 Weighing of C&D Debris. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris diverted or landfilled is measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on certified scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use conversion rates approved by the director for this purpose.

3.    Option 2 Determination of Compliance. The director shall review the information submitted as required in this section and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows:

a.    Full Compliance. If the director determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the covered project, the director shall submit a letter in writing to the applicant stating the determination of full compliance.

b.    Good Faith Effort to Comply. If the director determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter. In making this determination, the director shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D debris landfilled, the size of the covered project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. If the director determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, the director shall submit a letter in writing to the applicant stating the determination of a good faith effort to comply, in which case the applicant shall be released from further obligation under this chapter.

c.    Noncompliance. If the director determines that the applicant has not complied with this chapter, has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by this section, the director will levy a diversion compliance fee in accordance with this chapter. All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the citys solid waste fund. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.070 Infeasibility exemption.
If the director determines upon review of the waste management plan that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unusual and/or unique circumstances, he/she shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and may approve a modified version of the waste management plan. Upon completion of the covered project, the applicant shall submit documentation, as requested by the director in his/her sole discretion, to demonstrate compliance with the approved waste management plan. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.080 Applicant fee.
A.    Option 1  C&D Hauler Responsibility. The applicant shall not be responsible for an applicant fee under Option 1.

B.    Option 2  Applicant Responsibility. The applicant for a covered project shall be levied an applicant fee. The applicant fee shall be a proportion of the project valuation as stated in the application for a building permit, and shall be set by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.090 C&D hauler permit requirement.
A.    Option 1  C&D Hauler Responsibility. It is unlawful for any person designated by the applicant under Option 1 to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of C&D debris kept, accumulated or generated in the city unless a C&D hauler permit has first been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and such C&D hauler permit is in full force and effect.

B.    Option 2  Applicant Responsibility. The applicant who elects Option 2 may use any combination of C&D haulers or other means to collect, haul, dispose and recycle C&D debris generated from the covered project. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.100 Authority to grant C&D hauler permit.
A.    The director is authorized to grant a C&D hauler permit to a qualified applicant authorizing the applicant to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of C&D debris kept, accumulated or generated in the city. Any grant of a C&D hauler permit by the director may be subject to such terms, conditions, rules, regulations, restrictions, and limitations as the director or his/her designee deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare and consistent with this chapter. The director may deny an application for a C&D hauler permit if the director finds that the application fails to meet the requirements of this chapter and/or the director finds that the issuance of the C&D hauler permit would impose an unreasonable risk to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.

B.    All C&D hauler permits shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified in this chapter, and any other applicable federal, state, or local laws and regulations.

C.    Each C&D hauler shall provide C&D debris collection, removal, recycling, transportation and disposal services consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the C&D program guidelines, and any applicable federal, state, or local statute, municipal code, rule or regulation.

D.    The director may, at his/her sole discretion, direct the city solid waste division to remove any debris box or container within the city that is owned by a C&D hauler if the director determines that the removal of the debris box or container is in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.110 Application for C&D hauler permit.
A.    All applications for C&D hauler permits pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing and submitted by the applicant in a form specified by the director. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:

1.    Applicant identification;

2.    Facilities and equipment of the applicant;

3.    Diversion plans;

4.    Notice that the application is subject to Folsom police departments review; and

5.    Additional requirements as reasonably requested by the director.

B.    The application shall be signed by the person applying for the C&D hauler permit or, in the case of a partnership, corporation, or other business entity, by a person authorized to bind the partnership, corporation, or other business entity. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.120 Appeal upon denial of award of a C&D hauler permit.
A.    Any person aggrieved by or dissatisfied with any decision or determination of the director made pursuant to this chapter shall have a right of appeal from that decision to the city manager and thereafter to the city council pursuant to Section 2.08.060; provided, that any appeal from the city managers decision to the city council pursuant to Section 2.08.060 must be filed with the city clerk within fifteen days of the decision of the city manager.

B.    The failure to file and prosecute all appeals available pursuant to the provisions provided herein shall be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and shall act as a complete bar to any legal proceeding challenging the subject decision or determination. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.130 Awarding C&D hauler permit.
A.    A C&D hauler permit shall become effective upon issuance by the director.

B.    If the C&D haulers description of vehicles and/or equipment has changed between the application date and the effective date of the C&D hauler permit, the C&D hauler shall submit to the director an amended description, including all identification elements required in this chapter, prior to commencing services authorized in the C&D hauler permit. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.140 C&D hauler fee.
All C&D haulers shall comply with the following C&D hauler fee requirements:

A.    Option 1  C&D Hauler Responsibility.

1.    Each person engaging in the business of collecting, transporting, recycling or disposing of C&D debris kept, accumulated or generated in the city under Option 1 shall pay a C&D hauler fee to the city. The C&D hauler fee shall be set by a resolution of the city council.

2.    C&D hauler fees shall be payable on a quarterly basis, or more frequently as determined by the director, and shall be due and payable on the first day of the second month immediately following the month in which collection services were provided. Each payment shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the C&D fee resolution of the city council.

3.    The C&D hauler fee shall be submitted to the director. Each payment shall be accompanied by a written statement, verified by the C&D hauler or its authorized agent, showing the calculation of the C&D hauler fee payable in such form and detail as the director may require and such other information as the director may determine is material to a determination of the amount due.

4.    No statement filed under this section shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth in such statement, nor shall the filing of such statement preclude the city from collecting, by appropriate action, the sum that is actually due and payable.

5.    The payment of C&D hauler fees to the city pursuant to this part shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or any other applicable fee or charge prescribed by any jurisdiction.

6.    If C&D hauler fees are not paid by the C&D hauler at the times required by this section, then, in addition to the C&D hauler fees, the C&D hauler shall pay a late payment charge in an amount equal to two percent of the C&D hauler fee that is due, plus interest equal to one and one-half percent per month, accrued daily, from the time that the C&D hauler fee was due.

7.    C&D hauler fees shall be payable on all gross collection revenues collected by a C&D hauler from its C&D debris collection services provided within the city. The C&D hauler fee shall be calculated based on gross collection revenues prior to the C&D hauler imposing the C&D hauler fee on its customers. C&D haulers shall also pay C&D hauler fees on revenues received from federal and state governments for services provided within the city.

B.    Option 2  Applicant Responsibility. C&D haulers shall not be responsible for C&D hauler fees for services provided under Option 2. The applicant shall be responsible for an applicant fee in accordance with this chapter and the C&D fee resolution of the city council.

C.    If any person provides C&D debris services within the city in violation of this chapter, the person shall be liable for the C&D hauler fees in addition to any other applicable fee, charge, or penalty. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.150 Termination or suspension of C&D hauler permit.
A.    All C&D hauler permits granted pursuant to this chapter shall terminate on December 31, 2011. A C&D hauler permit may be terminated by the director for cause prior to that date as provided in this chapter.

B.     The director shall have the right to terminate any C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this chapter if the director finds that the C&D hauler has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Any C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be automatically suspended whenever the C&D hauler fails to keep in full force and effect any applicable licenses or permits required by federal, state or local law. The suspension shall remain in effect until the C&D hauler provides documentation satisfactory to the director verifying that the reason for the suspension no longer exists.

D.    The director may suspend any C&D hauler permit granted under this chapter if the C&D hauler fails to submit timely reports as described in this chapter within fifteen days after written notice from the director that a report is delinquent. The suspension shall remain in effect until the proper reports have been submitted to the satisfaction of the director, or upon reversal or modification of the suspension following a successful appeal by the C&D hauler pursuant to this chapter.

E.    In the event the C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this part is terminated, the C&D hauler shall have no right or authority to engage in C&D debris collection, transportation or disposal operations in the city unless and until a subsequent C&D hauler permit is granted to the C&D hauler.

F.    In the event the C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this part is suspended, the C&D hauler shall have no right or authority to engage in C&D debris collection, transportation, recycling or disposal operations in the city during the period of suspension.

G.    In the event any C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this part is terminated for cause, then within the time period specified by the director, the C&D hauler shall:

1.    Remove all of the C&D haulers C&D debris containers from all service locations where services have been provided pursuant to such C&D hauler permit; and

2.    Properly dispose of any and all C&D debris in the containers at the time of removal.

H.    If the C&D hauler fails to remove any C&D debris container or to properly dispose of any C&D debris in any container within the time specified in this chapter, the city may remove the container and/or dispose of the C&D debris therein and may charge the C&D hauler for the citys costs. The C&D hauler shall pay to the city all of the costs incurred by the city in such removal and/or disposal within ten days of the date of the citys invoice for such costs. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.160 C&D hauler permit transfer or assignment.
Any C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this chapter is a privilege to be held in trust by the original C&D hauler. A C&D hauler shall not sell, lease, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of, either in whole or in part, whether by forced sale, merger, consolidation, reorganization or otherwise, a C&D hauler permit issued pursuant to this chapter without the prior consent of the director. Any such consent of the director shall be subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the director. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership of the C&D hauler permit, or a majority of the ownership or control of the C&D hauler, or the conveyance of a majority of the C&D haulers stock to a new controlling interest. C&D hauler permits shall become void upon the abandonment of the business as determined by the director. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.170 C&D hauler reporting requirements.
A.    The C&D hauler shall file with the director quarterly reports of the quantities of C&D debris collected, transported, diverted, and/or disposed. Such reports shall be in such form and detail as required by the director and specified below:

1.    The C&D debris tonnage collected and removed within the city during the previous quarter;

2.    The C&D debris tonnage collected and removed during the previous quarter within the city that was diverted and the identification of the facility(s) where such C&D debris was diverted;

3.    The C&D debris tonnage collected and removed within the city that was disposed of during the previous quarter and the location(s) of the disposal facility(s) where the disposal of such waste occurred; and

4.    The C&D haulers progress in implementing its diversion plan and achieving the diversion requirements set forth in the C&D program guidelines.

B.    C&D haulers may use information supplied by MRFs certified by the director to meet the requirements of this section.

C.    All C&D haulers shall maintain quarterly records, on forms prescribed by the director, containing such information as the number and types of customers served by the C&D hauler. This information shall be provided to the director upon request. If upon review of this information the director determines that the C&D hauler has claimed credit for the diversion of C&D debris that is already being diverted by another person for purposes of satisfying the diversion requirements set forth in the C&D program guidelines, such action by the C&D hauler shall constitute cause for termination or suspension of the C&D permit pursuant to this chapter.

D.    A C&D haulers failure to file the reports required by this section shall constitute cause for termination or suspension of its C&D permit.

E.    If the required quarterly report, as outlined above, is not filed by the due date, the report shall be deemed delinquent, and the C&D hauler shall pay to the city a delinquent report charge in the amount of fifty dollars. If the report remains delinquent for more than fifteen days, the C&D hauler shall pay to the city a delinquent report charge in an additional amount of one hundred dollars. Such delinquent report charge shall be in addition to any C&D hauler permit fees or other charges payable by the C&D hauler for the same period of time. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.180 C&D hauler diversion plans.
A.    Each C&D hauler holding a C&D hauler permit shall submit a diversion plan to the director on an annual basis, no later than January 1st of each year. The diversion plan shall include a detailed description of how the C&D hauler intends to comply with the diversion requirements set forth in the C&D program guidelines. The diversion plan must include a description of the methods that the C&D hauler intends to use to satisfy its diversion requirements.

B.    Within ninety days from the date of receipt of a diversion plan, the director shall determine whether the diversion plan complies with the requirements of this chapter, and based on that determination shall approve or disapprove the diversion plan.

C.    If the director disapproves a diversion plan, the director shall issue a notice of deficiency to the C&D hauler which identifies the specific reasons for the deficiency and specific recommendations on how to correct the identified deficiencies. Within thirty days of receipt of the notice of deficiency, the C&D hauler shall correct the deficiencies and submit a revised diversion plan.

D.    The failure to file a diversion plan shall constitute cause for termination or suspension of a C&D hauler permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.190 Diversion requirement.
Diversion requirement means the diversion of a minimum proportion, by weight, of the total C&D debris generated by a covered project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasibility exemption pursuant to this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the director for the project. The diversion requirement shall be specified in the C&D program guidelines. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.200 Diversion compliance fee.
A.    Option 1  C&D Hauler Responsibility.

1.    Any C&D hauler found not to be in compliance with the diversion requirement shall pay a diversion compliance fee based upon the tonnage shortfall that would be needed for the C&D hauler to be diverting waste in compliance with the C&D program guidelines. The tonnage shortfall shall be based on quarterly reports and documented diversion reported by the C&D hauler, as determined by the director.

2.    The payment of the diversion compliance fee does not relieve a C&D hauler from the obligation of complying with the diversion requirement as specified in the C&D program guidelines.

3.    A C&D hauler not in compliance with the diversion requirement in the prior quarter is required to increase diversion in subsequent quarters until it makes up the tonnage shortfall. C&D haulers shall not be in compliance with this chapter, and, as such, subject to termination or suspension of their C&D hauler permit, until such time as the C&D hauler makes up all diversion tonnage shortfalls. Failure to pay any diversion compliance fee as specified in this section shall constitute grounds for the immediate suspension of the C&D hauler permit, pending reinstatement by the director following payment of the fee.

4.    C&D haulers shall be responsible for reimbursement of audit costs for city staff, and any other city or consultant services, to perform follow-up audits where staff determines that documentation of diversion, as reported by C&D haulers, is inadequate. Where necessary, city staff will retain the services of an independent consultant to verify performance and conduct any necessary diversion audits.

5.    Any funds collected pursuant to this section shall be directed to the citys solid waste enterprise fund.

6.    The amount of the diversion compliance fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

B.    Option 2  Applicant Responsibility. Any applicant for a covered project that fails to submit documentation to the director to verify compliance with the diversion requirement specified in the C&D program guidelines shall pay a diversion compliance fee based upon the tonnage shortfall. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.210 Materials recovery facility certification.
A.    C&D haulers may deliver C&D debris collected in the city to an MRF certified by the director in order to comply with the diversion requirements specified in the C&D program guidelines.

B.    MRF certifications made by the city shall be subject to quarterly review by the director.

C.     For compliance with the C&D hauler reporting requirements of this chapter, certified MRFs may aggregate tonnage of wastes handled, diverted, and disposed for client C&D haulers. The certified diversion level shall apply to the facility and all tonnage handled at the facility, and need not be based upon individual loads taken to the facility by individual client C&D haulers. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.220 Inspection authority.
A.    Each C&D hauler shall at all times maintain accurate and complete accounts of all revenues and income arising out of its operations under the C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this chapter; all C&D debris collected, transported and/or disposed of; the source of such C&D debris; and the final destination of such C&D debris. C&D haulers books, accounts and records reasonably necessary for the enforcement of this chapter shall be made available for inspection, examination and audit during normal business hours by authorized officers, employees and agents of the city. The city shall give written notice at least three days prior to any inspection, audit or examination of these records

B.    Where the director determines that an audit is necessary, C&D haulers shall be responsible for reimbursement of citys audit costs, including any city staff or consultant services, to perform audits of accounts of all C&D hauler revenues and income arising out of operations under the C&D hauler permit granted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.230 Enforcement.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced within the city by the director or other staff, and enforcement officials designated by the director. The remedies set forth herein are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Nothing contained herein shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy under this code or any other applicable law. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.240 Violation as a nuisance.
Any operation or activity in violation of the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.250 Public hearings and notices.
A.    Whenever a provision of this chapter authorizes or requires a public hearing to be conducted by the city council, notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published at least once not later than ten calendar days in advance of the date of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation which is published within the city, and shall be served upon each C&D hauler who is affected by such hearing.

B.    Any written notice or other communication to a C&D hauler which is authorized or required by this chapter shall be deemed served and effective for all purposes when deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the latest address of the C&D hauler shown in the city records pertaining to the C&D hauler permit. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.260 Signage.
Each C&D hauler shall have permanently displayed in a prominent place on the exterior of each truck, drop box, bin or container utilized in the collection, removal or transportation of C&D debris, under its C&D hauler permit, a sign which contains the company name, company telephone number, and individual identification number. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.270 Office required.
Every C&D hauler shall at all times maintain a central office within the city, or within the Sacramento metropolitan region, where the agent or representative of the C&D hauler can be reached by telephone from 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, legal holidays excepted. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.280 Disposal restrictions.
A C&D hauler shall dispose of or process C&D debris collected or transported by the C&D hauler only by taking such C&D debris to a landfill, transfer station, recycling facility or materials recovery facility of the C&D haulers choice, which is lawfully authorized to accept such C&D debris. A C&D hauler shall not dispose of such C&D debris by depositing it on any land, whether public or private, or in any river, stream or other waterway, or in any sanitary sewer or storm drainage system. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.290 Use of containers.
No person other than a customer who has contracted for service with a C&D hauler, or a person with such customers consent, shall deposit C&D debris into a C&D debris bin, drop box or compactor placed in the city by a C&D hauler for the purpose of receiving C&D debris. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.300 C&D debris ownership.
C&D debris lawfully deposited in bins, drop boxes or other containers used by a C&D hauler for collection for either disposal or recycling shall become the property of the C&D hauler upon its deposit in any such container. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.310 Covered load requirement.
A.    All C&D hauler vehicles and all privately owned or operated vehicles operating within the city shall have their vehicle loads covered, with a tarp or equivalent cover, to ensure protection from littering during transportation.

B.    All vehicles hauling materials with the load originating in the city to a waste disposal facility located outside of the city shall have their loads covered while in transit within the city. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

8.30.320 Civil penalties for violations.
In addition to any other remedy available to the city, this chapter may be enforced pursuant to the administrative enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.09. Unless otherwise specified, violations of this chapter shall be Level E violations, as defined in Section 1.09.012. (Ord. 1056  2 (part), 2006)

Chapter 8.32
GARBAGE COLLECTION
Sections:

8.32.005    Definitions.

8.32.010    City responsibility.

8.32.020    Permission required.

8.32.030    Burning, burying, on-site private disposal prohibitedCompost exception.

8.32.040    Private removal requirements.

8.32.050    Placing in containersGenerally.

8.32.070    DepartmentRemoval intervals.

8.32.080    Residential containerization.

8.32.090    Residential/commercial prohibited materials.

8.32.100    Residential container location and holiday requirements.

8.32.101    Service to below-ground containers prohibited.

8.32.110    Location requirements.

8.32.111    Automated solid waste containers.

8.32.120    Container/dumpster enclosureBusiness location.

8.32.130    Special solid waste service.

8.32.135    Collection chargesEstablished by city council.

8.32.140    Charges for collection.

8.32.150    Fees and chargesDue date.

8.32.160    ChargesCollection authority.

8.32.170    ChargesNonpaymentViolation.

8.32.180    ChargesNonpaymentDiscontinuance.

8.32.190    Accumulation prohibited.

8.32.191    Sufficient service required.

8.32.192    Exclusive use of containers.

8.32.210    Scavenging of recyclable materials.

8.32.220    Exemption from participation in residential curbside recycling.

8.32.230    Contamination of containerized recyclables and yard waste.

8.32.240    Replacement fee for damaged containers.

8.32.250    Neighborhood cleanup requirements.

8.32.260    Frequency of residential service change requests.

8.32.270    Enforcement.

8.32.280    Penalties.

8.32.290    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

8.32.300    Remedies cumulative.

8.32.005 Definitions.
A.    Alleyways shall mean a recorded easement for public access near a residential property or between residential properties.

B.    Biohazardous waste shall mean laboratory waste including human or animal specimen cultures from medical and pathology laboratories; cultures and stock of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories; waste from the production of bacteria, viruses, spores, discarded live and attenuated vaccines used in human health care or research, and discarded animal vaccines; human or animal surgery specimens or tissues, which may contain infectious agents known to be contagious to humans; waste containing discarded materials contaminated with excretion exudates or secretions from humans that are required to be isolated by infection control staff, the attending physician or local health officer to protect others from highly communicable diseases.

C.    Container shall mean commercially manufactured plastic or steel solid waste containers owned by the city designed to be lifted, dumped and returned by city solid waste packers. Containers may be described as: automated carts, bins, commercial containers, drop box, roll-off or compactor containers.

D.    Curbside recycling shall mean the placement of recyclables in a city-supplied cart for collection by the city.

E.    Department shall mean the city of Folsom utilities department.

F.    Director shall mean the city of Folsom director of utilities or his/her designee unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.

G.    Division shall mean the utilities department, solid waste division.

H.    Garbage shall mean all putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from packaging, storing, handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food and all other materials not defined as recyclables or yard waste. Garbage to be removed from places of business shall consist of garbage as above defined and packing boxes, crates and packing materials.

I.    Hazardous waste shall mean those wastes resulting from products purchased by the general public for use which, because of the quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may pose a substantial known or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, disposed or otherwise managed. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit for collection in any receptacle(s) provided pursuant to this chapter any item of hazardous waste as defined by an applicable federal, state or local law.

J.    Household hazardous waste shall mean those hazardous waste materials discarded, typically in small quantities, by households (as opposed to large quantities disposed by businesses). Typical household hazardous waste includes used motor oil and oil filters, antifreeze and other vehicle fluids, paints and varnish, pesticides, electronic waste and cleaning supplies.

K.    Illegal dumping shall mean to throw or place, or direct another person to throw or place, other than in receptacles provided therefor, upon the private land or waters of another person without the permission of the owner, or upon public lands or waters, or upon any public place, any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, or recyclable material.

L.    Inerts shall mean waste materials that do not react in the environment.

M.    Medical waste shall mean waste which is generated or produced as a result of any of the following actions: diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of humans or animals; research pertaining to the above; the production or testing of biologicals and sharps waste.

N.    Neighborhood cleanup shall mean a city program designed to provide cleanup of bulky items that will not fit into a residential container. This may include appliances, lumber and toys. An appointment is required.

O.    Person shall mean an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, business concern, partnership, association, limited liability company, and corporation, including, but not limited to, a government corporation.

P.    Private driveways shall mean a private roadway owned by a private person or business.

Q.    Premises shall mean a specific lot or area of real property served by the city or any such lot or area in general. Premises includes permanent and transient human dwellings and places of accommodation, commerce or recreation.

R.    Premises with multi-unit dwellings shall mean an area of one or more premises operating in whole or part under unified management or ownership, with housing facilities for more than a single-family residence. Such facilities include duplex or multiplex dwellings, apartments, condominiums, and trailer parks. Distinguished from this definition for purposes of requirements affecting premises with multi-unit dwellings are hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes or other congregate-care or institutional facilities, which are generally served as a commercial-service account.

S.    Putrescible shall mean to rot; subject to decomposition by microorganisms.

T.    Recyclables shall mean recyclable material including, but not limited to: newspaper, magazines, mixed paper, plastic bottles, cardboard, glass bottles, aluminum and steel cans and other materials not defined as garbage.

U.    Sharps shall mean any device having acute rigid corners, edges, or protuberances capable of cutting or piercing, including, but not limited to, all of the following:

1.    Hypodermic needles, hypodermic needles with syringes, blades, needles with attached tubing, syringes contained with biohazardous waste, acupuncture needles, and root canal files.

2.    Broken glass items, such as Pasteur pipettes and blood vials contaminated with biohazardous waste.

3.    Any item capable of cutting or piercing that is contaminated with trauma scene waste.

V.    Solid waste shall mean nonhazardous, noninfectious waste materials including garbage, yard waste, and recyclable material.

W.    Utilities director shall mean the city of Folsom director of utilities or his/her designee.

X.    Yard waste or green waste shall mean materials consist of trimmings from lawns, shrubs, plants, and foliage from trees and gardens. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.010 City responsibility.
The city, its duly authorized agents, servants, or employees, shall have the exclusive right to gather, collect, recycle or dispose of solid waste within the city. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.020 Permission required.
No person may collect, gather, recycle or dispose of solid waste within the city without permission of the city council. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.030 Burning, burying, on-site private disposal prohibitedCompost exception.
No person shall burn, bury, or otherwise dispose of or process solid waste on any premises in the city except for composting of garden wastes in a compost process, approved by the utilities director. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.040 Private removal requirements.
This chapter shall not be construed as prohibiting the owner or tenant of any premises in the city from carrying away any such solid waste, on an infrequent or occasional basis in order to reduce the amount to be taken away by the city or its duly authorized agents, but no person shall be authorized by this section to carry away such solid waste if such person receives the benefits of the use of any such solid waste for feed for poultry, hogs, or other livestock unless such person receives permission from the utilities director. This section shall not be construed as relieving any person from paying the regular solid waste fees. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.050 Placing in containersGenerally.
The person in charge of any premises in the city shall gather the solid waste together and put it into a receptacle provided by the utilities department for that premises. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.070 DepartmentRemoval intervals.
All solid waste accumulated at or on any premises within the city shall be removed by the utilities department, solid waste division, at regular intervals, as determined by the utilities director. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.080 Residential containerization.
All garbage, recyclables and yard waste shall be containerized as follows:

A.    Garbage/putrescible waste must be placed in the standard plastic garbage containers provided by the city not exceeding ninety-six gallons with a total weight limit of two hundred pounds per container.

B.    Yard waste shall be placed in standard plastic containers provided by the city. Tree limbs shall not exceed four inches in diameter and shall not protrude above the lid of the container. Loose branches, cuttings, trimmings, etc., which are not containerized shall not be collected except through the neighborhood cleanup as defined under Section 8.32.250.

C.    Recyclables shall be placed in the standard plastic container provided by the city.

D.    Municipal solid waste which does not fall into the above categories (subsections A, B and C of this section) is garbage and must be placed in the appropriate container. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.090 Residential/commercial prohibited materials.
A.    Materials which will not be collected in sixty to sixty-five gallon and ninety to ninety-five gallon containers include:

1.     Dirt, rocks, sod, concrete, large metal objects, furniture;

2.    Construction and remodeling debris;

B.    Materials which will not be collected in any city container include:

1.    Flammables;

2.    Live ammunition;

3.    Household hazardous waste;

4.    Hazardous waste;

C.    No person shall place any wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed; or place any explosive substance, poison, hazardous chemical, offal, or fecal matter;

D.    Hazardous medical waste, including, but not limited to, sharps, shall be handled by a licensed medical waste hauler and shall not be disposed of in materials offered for collection by the city. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.100 Residential container location and holiday requirements.
A.    Residences Having Street Frontage Only. Residential containers for solid waste, recycling and yard waste shall be placed for collection at the street curb or edge of road right-of-way by 6:00 a.m. on scheduled collection day, holidays included, and be removed from the street and screened from public view by 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The wheels of the containers will be placed in the gutter with the handle facing the residence. Containers will be at least three feet from any obstruction such as automobiles, trailers, motor homes, fences, lampposts, portable basketball hoops, mailboxes, or other automated containers. Containers are not to block pedestrian access.

B.    Residences with Alleyway Access. Residential containers for solid waste, recycling and yard waste shall be placed for collection adjacent to the alley property line, with direct access from the alleyway by 6:00 a.m. on scheduled collection day, holidays included. The base of the container will be placed on a stable, level surface with the handle facing the residence. Containers will be at least three feet from any obstructions such as automobiles, trailers, motor homes, fences, portable basketball hoops, lampposts, mailboxes, or other automated containers.

C.    Residences with Private Driveways. All solid waste, recycling and yard waste must be placed at the nearest road right-of-way by 6:00 a.m. on scheduled collection days, holidays included, and removed from the right-of-way and screened from public view by 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The container must be placed on a level surface with the handle facing the shoulder of the road. Containers will be at least three feet from any obstructions such as automobiles, trailers, motor homes, fences, portable basketball hoops, lampposts, mailboxes, or other automated containers.

D.    Collection trucks will come back for solid waste, recycling, and yard waste put out after the truck has passed a residence upon payment of an extra pickup service charge.

E.    For purposes of this section, screen means blocked from public view from the street or public right-of-way with a permanent fence, enclosure, landscaping, or other comparable facility as approved by the director. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.101 Service to below-ground containers prohibited.
Utilities department personnel shall not service containers stored below the surface of the ground. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.110 Location requirements.
The utilities department shall not collect garbage from above the first floor of any premises, nor from the basement of any premises. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.111 Automated solid waste containers.
A.    Fee Established. Each dwelling unit to be serviced by city-owned sixty-five and ninety-five gallon automated container collection shall pay a fee upon issuance of a building permit equal to the then cost of providing the containers. The fee shall be adjusted on July 1st of each fiscal year by the utilities director to reflect the most recent cost per container actually purchased by the city, plus the cost of labor and equipment necessary to deliver the containers to the new dwelling. Containers shall be delivered upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the residence by the chief building inspector.

B.    Ownership. The city shall retain ownership of the sixty-five and ninety-five gallon automated solid waste containers. Persons owning or renting property served by such containers are responsible for the security of the containers. In the event of fire, theft, or other disappearance of a container from the property a replacement container shall be obtained from the city upon payment of the fee established in subsection A of this section. Persons owning or renting property served by such containers shall, upon vacating the premises, leave the primary containers for the next occupant in a secure location upon the premises. Persons who have ordered an extra container shall, upon vacating the premises, contact the city to have the extra container removed. Persons owning or renting property served by such containers are responsible for the appearance and cleanliness of the container.

C.     Replacement Containers. A replacement container may be obtained upon payment of the fee established in subsection A of this section. Replacement of a container no longer usable due to normal wear shall not be subject to a replacement fee. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.120 Container/dumpster enclosureBusiness location.
Solid waste containers/dumpster enclosures at places of business shall be located in such place as shall be convenient to the solid waste division and must be approved by the utilities director. City-approved solid waste enclosures are to be used for solid waste removal equipment only. Storage of other equipment or material will not be allowed. The property owner shall be liable for damage to or spills from any other equipment stored in the solid waste enclosure. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.130 Special solid waste service.
A.    Container Service. The tenant, occupant, owner or lessee of any premises in the city may obtain a city commercial container for the purpose of disposing of brush and tree cuttings, trash and inorganic solid waste, excluding the following materials: (1) dirt, rocks, sod, concrete, large metal objects, furniture; (2) flammables and liquids; (3) live ammunition; (4) paints, oils, and acids. The person requesting special trash service is responsible to pay for the service in accordance with a fee set by the city council. The city shall be responsible for delivery and pickup of the commercial bin to and from the premises of the persons requesting service.

B.    Container/Roll-Off Service. The tenant, occupant, owner or lessee of any premises in the city may obtain a city commercial ten-yard, twenty-yard, thirty-yard or forty-yard roll-off container for the purpose of disposing of recyclables, brush and tree cuttings, trash and inorganic solid waste, excluding the following materials: (a) dirt, sod, large metal objects, furniture; (b) flammables and liquids; (c) live ammunition; (d) paints, oils and acids. The person requesting special trash service is responsible to pay for the service in accordance with a fee set by the city council. The city shall be responsible for delivery and pickup of the commercial container to and from the premises of the persons requesting service.

C.    Collection of Household Hazardous Waste (HHW). The tenant, occupant, owner or lessee of any residential premises in the city may request special collection of the following materials through appointment with the citys utilities department HHW division: flammables and liquids, pesticides, paints, oils and oil filters, batteries, antifreeze, pool chemicals, propane tanks, TVs and computer monitors.

D.    Disposal of Medical and Biohazardous Waste. The tenant, occupant, owner or lessee of any premises in the city shall not dispose of any medical or biohazardous waste in a city-owned collection container. Disposal of medical or biohazardous waste shall be performed through a licensed collection and disposal company, which complies with all applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, California Health and Safety Code Sections 117600 through 118360. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.135 Collection chargesEstablished by city council.
All charges for solid waste collection shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council. The schedule of fees shall remain on file and be available in the office of the finance director. The utilities director shall, with the approval of the city manager, recommend changes in the above fees when the cost of solid waste collection makes it appropriate. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.140 Charges for collection.
A.    Residential.

1.    Each and every householder or tenant occupying any dwelling, house, or residence shall pay to the city, or its authorized agent, a fixed minimum solid waste fee based upon current established solid waste rates which shall be set by the city council. Such fee is based upon service of one call per week for garbage and one call every other week for recyclables and yard waste without consideration of whether there is any garbage, recyclables or yard waste to remove from the premises.

2.    Solid waste service may be discontinued upon written request for a period of no less than two months when a dwelling, house, or residence will be unoccupied. The minimum time of discontinuing service will be two months. A service charge equal to two months solid waste charge will be charged to the utility user for the removal and redelivery of the assigned automated containers when service has been temporarily discontinued. This service charge will be paid at the time service is discontinued. Upon occupancy of a dwelling, house or residence the utility user must contact the city finance department to restart service. If the occupant of a dwelling, house, or residence does not contact the city to restart service, the city may bill back to the discontinuance of service all monthly charges.

3.    For collection of additional containers beyond those covered by the fixed minimum charges established in this chapter, the collection charge shall be set by resolution of the city council for each additional solid waste container.

4.    An additional or special pickup may be requested beyond the minimum service required by this chapter. Each such additional or special pickup shall be subject to a fixed fee. The fixed fee for additional or special pickups shall be set by resolution of the city council.

B.    Commercial.

1.    A landlord, property owner, or property manager or management company of each and every store, shop, apartment, house, rooming house, or factory that has a commercial container shall pay to the city, or its authorized agent, a fixed minimum charge as set forth by the city council as a solid waste fee. Such fixed minimum charge is based upon service of one call per week, without consideration of whether there is any solid waste to remove from the premises.

A landlord, property owner, or property manager or management company with multiple tenants who must share a commercial container shall be responsible for the solid waste utility bill of the tenants. Responsibility to pay the solid waste utility bill of the landlord, property owner, or property manager or management company will become mandatory effective six months from the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter to allow time to renew rental or lease contracts with tenants.

2.    Commercial Container, Roll-Off, and Additional Services. The utilities director may approve the placing of solid waste in containers other than ninety-five-gallon automated cans such as roll-off containers. The fixed fee and additional service charges will be set by resolution of the city council. Such charge shall include all costs to the city, including, but not limited to, labor, equipment operation, maintenance and depreciation, administrative overhead, recycling, landfill closure and landfill operation costs. Standard commercial charges for commercial containers and roll-off containers may be established by the utilities director subject to the approval of the city council.

3.    An additional or special pickup may be requested beyond the minimum service required by this chapter. Each such additional or special pickup shall be subject to a fixed fee. The fixed fee for additional or special pickups shall be set by resolution of the city council.

C.    Adjustment of Bills for Billing Error.

1.    Where the city overcharges or undercharges a customers solid waste bill as the result of a billing error, the city may render an adjusted bill for the amount of the undercharge, without interest, and shall issue a refund or credit to the customer for the amount of the overcharge, without interest, for the same periods as for the billing error. Adjusted billing shall be computed back to the date that the city determines the billing error commenced, except that the period of adjustment shall not exceed one year for a refund and six months for an undercharge. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.150 Fees and chargesDue date.
Solid waste service fees and charges shall be paid on the first of each and every month and are delinquent on the tenth day of each month and shall be paid in advance. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.160 ChargesCollection authority.
The city finance department shall collect all charges and fees with the assistance of the city attorney as necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.170 ChargesNonpaymentViolation.
The nonpayment by any person of the solid waste fee after notice given by the city finance department by bill rendered to such person, or left on the premises, is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.180 ChargesNonpaymentDiscontinuance.
The city shall have the right in addition to any other remedies to discontinue solid waste service for nonpayment of solid waste fees or charges. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.190 Accumulation prohibited.
No person shall permit solid waste to accumulate upon the premises owned or occupied by such person. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.191 Sufficient service required.
Customers must accept solid waste collection service sufficient to remove solid waste generated by or accumulating weekly from the premises. The utilities director may order additional service on behalf of the customer where the department determines necessary. If additional service is needed, a customer may use additional containers or select a larger-capacity container from the container choices available from the department. Commercial-route customers may also request more frequent container collection or dumps more than once a week. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.192 Exclusive use of containers.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to dump or place any material into or to utilize any solid waste container, bin or dumpster without consent of the property owner or tenant in charge of the property.

B.    It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the property owner or tenant in charge of the property, to enter into a solid waste container, whether or not a notice has been placed on such container, for the purpose of salvaging solid waste therein or for the purpose of utilizing the receptacle to rest or sleep therein. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.210 Scavenging of recyclable materials.
No person shall remove recyclable materials from residential containers or commercial dumpsters that are designated for city collection. Such material includes, but is not limited to: newspapers, magazines, yard trimmings, wood waste, books, glass bottles, cardboard, plastic bottles, aluminum and steel cans. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.220 Exemption from participation in residential curbside recycling.
At the discretion of the utilities director, an exemption may be granted to individual(s) from participating in residential curbside recycling upon approval from the utilities director, in his/her sole discretion. Exemptions may be granted based on the following criteria:

A.    Individual(s) who perform back yard composting at their household.

B.    Individual(s) who perform grass recycling at their household.

C.    Individual(s) or homeowners associations whose gardener takes green waste to a recycler.

D.    A lack of yard waste or recyclables being generated at the household.

E.    Health-related reasons which prevent individual(s) from wheeling carts to the curb.

F.    Severe space constraints which prevents the placement of additional containers at the household.

Individuals must request an exemption in writing and such request must provide a detailed explanation of the basis for the request, include supporting documentation and any other information or documentation reasonably requested by the utilities director. Exemptions may be revoked by the utilities director at any time at the discretion of the utilities director. Exemptions are conditioned upon and subject to: (1) the requesting party continuing to reside at the location specified in the request; and (2) the circumstances justifying the exemption remaining unchanged. Individuals or associations who are granted an exemption must notify the utilities director, in writing, of any change in the circumstances supporting the grant of exemption within thirty days of such change in circumstances. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.230 Contamination of containerized recyclables and yard waste.
No person shall place nonrecyclable materials into city-provided containers, roll-off containers or dumpsters that are designated for the city collection of recyclables or yard waste. Commercial or residential recycling or yard waste containers may be removed from service if excessive and frequent contamination is found in the container. Excessive and frequent contamination is defined as three violations within a one-year period. If a residential container is removed from service, no rate reduction will be provided. If a commercial container is removed from service, for contamination, the existing charge will be discontinued concurrently with the removal of the bin. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.240 Replacement fee for damaged containers.
The utilities director shall have the authority to assess the cost for the replacement of containers, roll-offs or dumpsters that have been damaged or destroyed due to the customers negligence or misuse. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.250 Neighborhood cleanup requirements.
Any and all materials deposited curbside for the purposes of participating in the neighborhood cleanup program must meet the following criteria:

A.    All pickups must be secured by an appointment.

B.    All piles must be no more than five cubic yards in size (seven feet by six feet by three feet).

C.    All materials must be placed curbside by 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection date.

D.    Material must be placed at the edge of the street and not on a sidewalk.

E.    All materials must only consist of:

1.    Yard waste (leaves and grass must be bagged);

2.    Lumber/wood;

3.    Furniture/mattresses;

4.    Lawn mowers (remove gas and oil);

5.    Barbeques (remove propane tanks);

6.    Metals;

7.    Large appliances;

8.    Tires (no more than three).

Any materials placed curbside that do not meet the above requirements shall be considered illegal dumping and any person who commits such act(s) shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Folsom Municipal Code Section 8.34.040. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.260 Frequency of residential service change requests.
Residents will be allowed three service change requests after receiving the residential solid waste, recycling and yard waste carts at no charge for one year of the citys recycling program applicable to all categories of service. Additional service change requests will be charged an administrative fee of twenty dollars or as otherwise set by the city council by resolution.

The categories of service change include:

A.    Changing the size and number of garbage containers.

B.    Changing the size and number of recycling containers.

C.    Changing the size and number of yard waste containers. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.270 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code and any other enforcement mechanism available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code and/or applicable law.

B.    Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the utilities director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.280 Penalties.
A.    Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, a violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020 of this code. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, except as provided in this section, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction and shall be punishable by:

1.    A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation;

2.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation within one year;

3.    A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year.

B.    Each and every day during which a stationary violation continues, except in cases in which a given time has been allowed for corrective action to be taken, shall be a separate and distinct offense.

C.    Violations of Section 8.32.090(B), (C), and (D); 8.32.190, and 8.32.210 shall be a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

D.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Chapter 1.09 of this code shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(5) and may be imposed on a per day basis for each violation. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.290 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty, or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority may pursue the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09 of this code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of this code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of this code. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A) of this code, a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027 of this code. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

8.32.300 Remedies cumulative.
The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude any other remedy, and nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy available to the city under the citys code or any other applicable law. (Ord. 1049  2 (part), 2006)

Chapter 8.34
LITTER CONTROL
Sections:

8.34.010    Definitions.

8.34.020    Regulations.

8.34.021    Pedestrians and motorists.

8.34.022    Vehicles transporting loose materials.

8.34.023    Loading and unloading operations.

8.34.024    Construction/demolition projects.

8.34.025    Household solid waste containerization and removal.

8.34.026    Commercial solid waste containerization and removal.

8.34.027    Provision for solid waste disposal and storage facilities at new buildings.

8.34.028    Keeping property clean.

8.34.030    Enforcement authorizations.

8.34.040    Penalty.

8.34.050    Severability.

8.34.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:

A.    Containers means city-provided metal or plastic receptacles used for the disposal and storage of solid waste.

B.    Litter means any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass or miscellaneous solid waste which may be classed as trash, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage or junk.

C.    Neighborhood clean-up is a city program designed to provide clean-up of bulky items that will not fit into a residential container. This may include appliances, lumber and toys. An appointment is required.

D.    Private property includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations owned by private individuals, firms, corporations, institutions or organizations: yards, grounds, driveways, entranceways, passageways, parking areas, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots and recreation facilities.

E.    Public property includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations: streets, street medians, roads, road medians, catchbasins, sidewalks, strips between streets and sidewalks, lanes, alleys, public rights-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds, municipal housing project grounds, municipal vacant lots, parks, beaches, playgrounds, other publicly owned recreation facilities, and municipal waterways and bodies of water.

F.    Solid waste means nonhazardous, noninfectious waste materials including garbage, yard waste and recyclable material.

G.    Utilities director means the city of Folsom director of utilities or his/her designee.

H.    Waste/litter receptacles means privately owned and maintained receptacles. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.020 Regulations.
Reserved. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.021 Pedestrians and motorists.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any manner or amount on any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city, except in containers, waste/litter receptacles or areas lawfully provided therefor.

B.    It shall be the duty of every person distributing commercial handbills, leaflets, flyers or any other advertising and information material to take whatever measures that may be necessary to keep such materials from littering public or private property.

C.    To facilitate proper disposal of litter by pedestrians and motorists, such publicly patronized or used establishments and institutions as may be designated by the utilities department shall provide, regularly empty and maintain in good condition adequate waste/litter receptacles to serve their customers. This requirement shall be applicable, but not limited to, fast-food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, service stations, commercial parking lots, mobile canteens, motels, hospitals, schools and colleges. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.022 Vehicles transporting loose materials.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, institution or organization to transport any loose cargo by truck or other motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city unless such cargo is covered and secured in such manner as to prevent depositing of litter on public and private property. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.023 Loading and unloading operations.
A.    Any owner or occupant of an establishment or institution at which litter is attendant to the packing and unpacking and loading and unloading of materials at exterior locations shall have suitable containers there for the disposal and storage of such litter and shall make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof.

B.    It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to remove at the end of each working day any litter that has not been containerized at these locations. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.024 Construction/demolition projects.
A.    It is unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of any construction or demolition site to cause, maintain, permit or allow to be caused, maintained or permitted the accumulation of any litter on the site before, during or after completion of the construction or demolition project.

B.    It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor to have on the site adequate containers for the disposal of litter and to make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof or for transport by himself to an authorized facility for final disposition in a manner consistent with other provisions of this code.

C.    The owner, agent or contractor may be required at any time to show proof of appropriate collection, or if transported by himself, of final disposition at an authorized facility. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.025 Household solid waste containerization and removal.
A.    All residences located in any area in which collection is by the city shall have sufficient container capacity to accommodate their normal volume of solid waste between collections. The type, size and number of containers shall be as prescribed by Chapter 8.32 of this code.

B.    All items too large to fit into containers, such as, but not limited to, appliances, furniture and mattresses, shall be disposed of through the citys neighborhood clean-up program or by self-transport of such items to end-disposal facilities.

C.     Containers shall be kept covered at all times.

D.    Property owners shall report to the utilities department any container which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting the contents thereof or the public.

E.    In placing containers for collection and removing them after collection, all residents shall follow those practices prescribed in Chapter 8.32 of this code.

F.    It is unlawful for any resident to deposit household solid waste in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.026 Commercial solid waste containerization and removal.
A.    All establishments and institutions which generate solid waste for collection by the city or approved contractors shall abide by the container requirements prescribed in Chapter 8.32 of this code.

B.    Containers shall be kept covered at all times.

C.    Business owners shall report any container which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting the contents thereof or the public.

D.    It is unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of a commercial establishment or institution to deposit solid waste from that establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.027 Provision for solid waste disposal and storage facilities at new buildings.
A.    Before building permits shall be issued for construction of commercial buildings and multiple-dwelling units, plans for the adequacy, location and accessibility of solid waste containerization and storage facilities must be approved and signed by the utilities director.

B.    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for such premises until the departments approval of these facilities has been obtained. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.028 Keeping property clean.
A.    It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant or lessee to keep exterior private property free of litter. This requirement applies not only to removal of loose litter, but to materials that already are, or become, trapped at such locations as fence and wall bases, grassy and planted areas, borders, embankments and other lodging points.

B.    Owners, agents, occupants or lessees whose properties face on municipal sidewalks and strips between streets and sidewalks shall be responsible for keeping those sidewalks and strips free of litter.

C.    It is unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks and strips into streets. Sidewalk and strip sweepings must be picked up and put into household or commercial solid waste containers.

D.    It shall be the duty of every nonresident owner of a vacant lot or other vacant property to appoint a resident agent who shall have responsibility for keeping that lot or other property free of litter.

E.    If, after reasonable warning, an owner, agent, occupant or lessee fails to remove litter from any private property, the city code enforcement department is authorized to serve written notice to the owner or his appointed agent that if the condition is not corrected within ten days, the property will be cleaned by the city and the owner or his appointed agent billed for the cost thereof. If the bill is not paid within thirty days the city may pursue any remedy available under applicable law. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.030 Enforcement authorizations.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police department, code enforcement, or any other city employee so designated by the city manager. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.040 Penalty.
A.    Unless otherwise specified, the violation of this chapter is an infraction and shall be punishable by:

1.    A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation;

2.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation within one year;

3.    A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year.

B.    Each and every day during which a stationary violation continues, except in cases in which a given time has been allowed for corrective action to be taken, shall be a separate and distinct offense.

C.    The city may pursue any and all remedies of Chapter 1.09 of this code. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

8.34.050 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter, or any section thereof, in any circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the chapter and of the application of any of the other provisions or sections shall not be affected. (Ord. 1048  2 (part), 2006)

Chapter 8.36
FOLSOM FIRE CODE
Sections:

8.36.010    Short title.

8.36.020    International Fire CodeAdopted by reference.

8.36.030    Enforcement.

8.36.040    Definitions.

8.36.060    Penalties.

8.36.070    Repeal of conflicting ordinances.

8.36.080    Amendments, additions, deletions.

8.36.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Fire Code. (Ord. 1269  3 (part), 2017)

8.36.020 International Fire CodeAdopted by reference.
There is hereby adopted by the city council of the city of Folsom for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises, that certain code known as the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code with amendments adopted by the California Building Standards Commission and published as the 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code, together with Appendices B, C, H, I, and K; and all other chapters, supplements and errata save and except such portions as hereunder deleted, modified, or amended, are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 1269  3 (part), 2017)

8.36.030 Enforcement.
The fire chief of the city is designated as the chief fire official of the city. The fire chief and his/her designated representatives shall have all the powers of peace officers in enforcing this chapter and may issue orders, notices, citations and make arrests for violations within the incorporated area of the city of Folsom. (Ord. 1269  3 (part), 2017)

8.36.040 Definitions.
A.    Whenever the words fire code are used in this chapter, it shall mean the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code with those amendments adopted by the California Building Standards Commission and published as the 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code.

B.    Wherever the word municipality is used in the fire code, it shall mean the incorporated areas in the city of Folsom.

C.    Wherever the words fire code official or chief are used in the fire code, they shall mean the fire chief of the city of Folsom, or their designated representatives.

D.    Wherever the words deputy fire code official are used in the fire code, they shall mean the fire marshal who shall be an officer of the fire department, appointed by the fire chief of the city of Folsom.

E.    Wherever the words department of fire prevention are used, they shall mean the fire prevention division of the city of Folsom fire department. (Ord. 1269  3 (part), 2017)

8.36.060 Penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of the code adopted by Section 8.36.020, or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made hereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the required time, is severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively guilty of a misdemeanor, unless that provision has been identified as an infraction, and punishable as provided in Section 8.36.080. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 1269  3 (part), 2017)

8.36.070 Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All former fire prevention ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or of the code adopted by this chapter are repealed. (Ord. 1269  3 (part), 2017)

8.36.080 Amendments, additions, deletions.
Chapter 1, being adopted in its entirety, is amended as follows:

Section 101, General, is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Folsom Fire Code, hereinafter referred to as this code.

Section 102, Applicability, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

102.7.3 International codes. All references in this code to International codes such as Building, Residential, Mechanical, Plumbing, and Electrical Codes shall mean the appropriate code adopted by the City of Folsom and/or State of California.

Section 104, General Authority and Responsibilities, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

104.7.2.1 Contract Inspector. The fire code official or his/her designated representatives may require the owner or the person in possession or control of the building or premise to provide, without charge to the fire department, a special inspector (Contract Inspector), when the department has no technical expertise available to conduct the required inspections.

The Contract Inspector shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate his/her competence to the satisfaction of the fire code official, for inspection of a particular type of construction, operations, fire extinguishing or detection system, or process.

Duties and responsibilities of the Contract Inspector shall include but not be limited to the following:

(a)    The Contract Inspector shall observe the work assigned for conformance with the approved design drawings and specifications.

(b)    The Contract Inspector shall furnish inspection reports to the fire code official, building code official, and other designated persons as required by the fire code official. All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor for correction, then if uncorrected, to the proper design authority, fire code official, and to the building code official.

(c)    The Contract Inspector shall submit a final signed report stating whether the work requiring inspection was, to the best of his/her knowledge, in conformance with the approved plans and specifications and the applicable workmanship provision of this code.

Section 104, General Authority and Responsibilities, is hereby amended to read:

104.8 Modifications. The fire code official may modify any of the provisions of the Fire Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or their duly authorized agent, when the fire code official determines there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire code official thereof shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished by the applicant.

For the purposes of this section, the cost of compliance with the provisions of the Fire Code shall not constitute a practical difficulty.

104.10 Fire investigations. The Fire Chief or his/her designated representative shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire, explosion, or other hazardous condition.

Section 105, Permits, is hereby amended to read:

105.6.27 LP-gas. An operational permit is required for the storage and use of LP-gas.

EXCEPTIONS:

1.    A permit is not required for outdoor containers with a total aggregate water capacity of 500-gallons (1893 L) water capacity or less serving a Group R-3 occupancy.

2.    A permit is not required to install or maintain outdoor portable containers of less than 125-gallon (473.2 L) aggregate water capacity.

Section 105, Permits, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

105.6.50 Activities in hazardous fire areas. An operational permit is required to conduct activities in hazardous fire areas when, in the opinion of the fire code official, it is necessary to preserve the public health, safety, or welfare. Hazardous fire area shall mean land covered with grass, grain, brush, or forest, whether privately or publicly owned which is so situated or is of such inaccessible location that a fire originating upon such land would present an abnormally difficult job of suppression or would result in great and unusual damage through fire or resulting erosion.

105.6.51 Motion picture and other filming. An operational permit is required to conduct activities related to the production of motion pictures, televisions, commercials, and similar productions.

105.7.19 Fire apparatus access roads. A construction permit is required to construct, alter or remove a private fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle access road required by Section 503.1 or Folsom Municipal Code Section 17.57.080. For purposes of this requirement, altering shall include the installation of traffic calming systems such as stop signs, speed bumps, humps, pillows, roundabouts, traffic circles, diverters and other traffic delaying measures.

105.7.20 Roof top obstructions. A construction permit is required for the installation of a roof garden or a landscaped roof when constructed on a buildings roof.

Section 106, Inspections, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

106.2.3 Administrative costs. When a test or inspection is scheduled and the contractor fails to perform to the satisfaction of the fire code official or their designee, the contractor will be liable for all costs incurred by the Fire Department for that test or inspection and the fire code official may submit a bill for said costs.

Section 107, Maintenance, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

107.7 Occupant Count. The supervisor of each place of assembly shall have an effective system to keep count of the number of occupants present in the assembly area. If at any time, the fire code official determines that an accurate count of occupants is not being maintained, the occupancy shall be cleared until an accurate count can be made.

107.8 Fire Safety Officers. When in the opinion of the fire code official it is necessary for the preservation of life or property, due to the hazardous nature of an event, production, operation or function, the fire code official shall require the owner or lessee to employ or cause the employment of one or more approved fire safety officers to be on duty at such place during the hazardous activity.

Section 108, Board of Appeals, is hereby amended to read:

SECTION 108APPEALS

108.1 Appeals. Whenever the fire code official, or their designee, disapproves an application, refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Chapter or the Fire Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the affected party shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

Section 109, Violations, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

109.3.3.1 Citations. The Fire Chief, and his or her duly authorized representative, may issue citations for infractions or misdemeanor violations of the Fire Code pursuant to Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California.

Section 109, Violations, is hereby amended to read:

109.4 Violation penalties. Any persons who violates a provision of the Fire Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or erects, installs, alters, repairs, or does work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or license used under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1000 or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, unless such violation is declared to be an infraction by Chapter 48 of the Fire Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.

Section 111, Stop Work Order, is hereby amended to read:

111.1 Order. Whenever the fire code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the fire code official is authorized to issue a stop work order. The fire code official is authorized to order an operation or use stopped or the evacuation of any premises, building, or vehicle or portion thereof which has or is a condition hazardous to life or property regulated by this code.

111.4 Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to remove a violation or unsafe condition, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine of not less than 500 dollars or more than 1000 dollars.

Chapter 2, Section 202, General Definitions, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

ELECTRONIC MONITORING SYSTEM shall mean an approved method to electronically detect and transmit to an approved alarm service provider's Type A (listed) Central Station, information indicating that the automatic fire sprinkler system or electronic fire detection system has been activated and shall have the ability to relay the alarm to the Sacramento Regional Fire/EMS Communications Center in an approved manner.

QUALIFIED ATTENDANT shall mean an individual that has been trained in the proper methods of the handling, storage and dispensing of any material, product or substance regulated by the code. These shall include, but not be limited to ammonia, chlorine, cryogenic fluids, flammable and combustible liquids and gases. Said attendant must be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the fire code official that he or she possesses adequate knowledge in the subject area.

SINGLE-PREMISES is a contiguous property under one ownership.

TRAINED CROWD MANAGER. Standby personnel, usually security or usher personnel, who are trained in the proper procedure to exit people from a tent or other place of public assemblage in an orderly and calm fashion in the event of an emergency.

WASTE OIL is a Class III-B waste liquid resulting from the use of Class III-B combustible liquids such as waste motor oil, hydraulic oil, lubricating oil, brake fluids and transmission fluids. It does not include the products classified as Class I, II or III-A liquids or corrosives, toxic or highly toxic materials as defined in Article 80.

Chapter 2, Section 202, General Definitions, is hereby amended to read:

FALSE ALARM shall mean the giving, signaling or transmission to any public fire station or company or to any officer or employee thereof, whether by telephone, spoken word or otherwise, information to the effect that there is a fire, medical emergency, rescue request, or other need for emergency service at or near the place indicated by the person giving, signaling, or transmitting such information, and there is found to be no need for emergency services.

Chapter 3, Section 302, Definitions, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

FUEL MODIFICATION PLAN. A fuel modification plan shall consist of a set of scaled plans that includes a plot plan showing fuel modification zones indicated with applicable assessment notes, a detailed landscape plan, and an irrigation plan. A fuel modification plan submitted for approval shall be prepared by a state licensed landscape architect, state licensed landscape contractor, a landscape designer or an individual with expertise acceptable to the fire code official.

Chapter 3, Section 304, Combustible Waste Material, is hereby amended to read:

304.1.1.1 Waste material near ground mounted photovoltaic array. Accumulation of waste material shall not be permitted underneath nor within 10 feet from a ground mounted photovoltaic array.

304.1.2 Vegetation. Weeds, grass, vines, brush or other growth that is capable of being ignited shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the property. Vegetation clearance requirements shall be in accordance with Section 318 of this code and Folsom Municipal Code Chapter 8.37.

Chapter 3, Section 311, Vacant Premises, is hereby amended by deleting Exceptions 1 and 2 to Section 311.2.2 to read:

311.2.2 Fire protection. Fire alarm, sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times.

Chapter 3, Section 315, General Storage, is hereby amended to read:

315.4 Outside storage. Outside storage of combustible materials shall not be located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or lot line.

Chapter 3, Section 315, General Storage, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

315.4.3 Maximum pile size. The maximum single pile dimension for outside storage of combustible materials, including pallets, shall be 25 feet X 100 feet or 2,500 square feet.

Chapter 3, Section 317, Rooftop Gardens and Landscaped Roofs, is hereby amended to read:

317.1 General. Rooftop gardens and landscaped roofs shall be installed and maintained in accordance with Sections 317.2 through 317.6 of the California Fire Code and Sections 1505.0 and 1507.16 of the California Building Code.

Chapter 3, Section 317, Rooftop Gardens and Landscaped Roofs, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

317.6 Access pathways and emergency ventilation. Access and spacing requirements shall be provided in order to ensure firefighter access to the roof, provide access pathways to specific areas of the roof, provide for venting cut out areas, and to provide emergency egress from the roof. For the purpose of access pathways and emergency ventilation, designation of ridge, hip, and valley does not apply to roofs with 2-in-12 or less pitch. All roof dimensions are measured to centerlines.

317.6.1 Alternative materials and methods. Alternative materials and methods per Section 104.9 for access pathways or venting cut outs may be requested for approval by the fire code official due to:

1.    Unique site specific limitations.

2.    Alternative access opportunities (as from adjoining roofs).

3.    Ground level access to the roof area in question.

4.    Other adequate venting cut out opportunities when approved by the fire code official.

5.    Adequate venting cut out areas afforded by panel set back from other roof top equipment (for example: shading or structural constraints may leave significant areas open for ventilation near HVAC equipment).

6.    Automatic ventilation device.

7.    New technology, methods, or other innovations that ensure adequate fire department access pathways and ventilation opportunities.

317.6.2 Single and two dwelling unit residential buildings. Installation of roof gardens and landscaped roofs on single and two dwelling unit residential buildings shall be in accordance with Section 317.6.2.1 through 317.6.2.3.

317.6.2.1 Hip roof design: Planted sections shall be located in a manner that provides a three (3') foot wide clear access pathway from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where the planted sections are located. The access pathway shall be located at a structurally strong location on the building such as a bearing wall.

317.6.2.2 Single ridge roof design: Planted sections shall be located in a manner that provides two three (3') foot wide access pathways from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where the planted sections are located.

317.6.2.3 Hips and valleys: Planted sections shall be located no closer than one and one half (1.5') feet to a hip or a valley if planted sections are to be placed on both sides of a hip or valley. If the planted sections are to be located on only one side of a hip or valley that is of equal length then the planted sections may be placed directly adjacent to the hip or valley. Planted sections shall not be located closer than three feet (3') below the ridge.

317.6.3 Commercial and industrial buildings and multi-residential buildings containing three or more dwelling units required access pathways and venting cut outs. Access pathways and venting cut outs for commercial and industrial buildings and multi-residential buildings containing three or more dwelling units. Access pathways shall be provided in accordance with Section 317.6.3.1 through 317.6.3.6.

Exception: If the fire code official determines that the roof configuration is similar to that found in single and two dwelling unit residential buildings, the design requirements found in section 317.6.2 may be utilized.

317.6.3.1 Planted dimension. Planted sections shall be no greater than 150 feet by 150 feet in distance in either axis.

317.6.3.2 Access pathways: Access pathways shall be established in the design of the roof garden or landscaped roof installation. Access pathways shall meet the requirements of this section.

317.6.3.2.1 Access pathways perimeter of the roof. There shall be a minimum six (6') foot wide clear perimeter around the edges of the roof.

Exception: If either axis of the building is 250 feet or less, there shall be a minimum four (4') feet wide clear perimeter around the edges of the roof.

317.6.3.2.2 Access pathway location. The center line axis of access pathways shall run on structural members or over the next closest structural member nearest to the center lines of the roof.

317.6.3.2.3 Access pathway center line. The center line axis of the access pathways shall be provided in both axis of the roof.

317.6.3.2.4 Access pathway alignment. Access pathways shall be in a straight line and provide not less than four (4') feet clear to skylights, ventilation hatches or roof standpipes.

317.6.3.5 Access pathway around roof access hatches. Access pathways shall provide not less than four (4') feet of clearance around roof access hatch with at least one not less than four feet (4') clear pathway to parapet or roof edge.

317.6.3.6 Venting cut out areas. Venting cut outs between planted sections shall be either:

1.    An access pathway eight (8') feet or greater in width.

2.    An access pathway that is four (4') feet or greater in width and bordering on existing roof skylights or ventilation hatches.

3.    An access pathway that is four (4') feet or greater in width and bordering four (4') feet by eight (8') feet venting cut outs every twenty (20') feet on alternating sides of the access pathway.

317.6.4 Roof garden or landscaped roof maintenance plan. The fire code official is authorized to require an approved maintenance plan for vegetation placed on roofs due to the size of the garden or landscaping area, or if materials and plants used may create a fire hazard to the building or exposures.

Chapter 3, Section 320, Clearance of Weeds, Brush and Vegetative Growth, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

SECTION 320CLEARANCE OF WEEDS, BRUSH AND VEGETATIVE GROWTH

320.1 Defensible space around structures. Any person owning, leasing, controlling, operating, or maintaining any building or structure upon or adjoining any grass- or brush-covered land or land covered with flammable growth, and any person owning, leasing, or controlling any land adjacent to such structures, shall at all times:

1.    Maintain around and adjacent to such building, structure, or apiary an effective fire protection or firebreak made by removing and clearing away, for a distance of not less than 30 feet on each side thereof, all flammable vegetation or other combustible growth. This includes ornamental plants and trees known to be flammable, including but not limited to: Acacia, Cedar, Cypress, Eucalyptus, Juniper, Pine, and Pampas Grass.

EXCEPTIONS:

A.    Ornamental plants and trees that are individually planted, spaced, and maintained in such a manner that they do not form a means of transmitting fire from native growth to the structure.

B.    Cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents, or similar plants provided that they are maintained in a condition that does not form a means of transmitting fire from native growth to the structure.

2.    Maintain any tree adjacent to or overhanging any building or structure free of dead wood.

3.    Maintain the roof of any building or structure free of leaves, needles, or other dead vegetative growth.

320.2 Extra hazard. When the fire code official finds that because of extra hazardous conditions, a firebreak of only 30 feet around such building or structure is not sufficient to provide reasonable fire safety, the person owning, leasing, controlling, operating, or maintaining the building or structure shall maintain around or adjacent to any building or structure an additional fire protection or firebreak made by removing all brush, flammable vegetation, or combustible growth located from 30 to 100 feet from such building or structure, as may be required by the fire code official. Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet from such building or structure, and less than 18 inches in height above the ground, may be maintained where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion.

320.3 Roadway clearance. The fire code official may require removal and clearance of all flammable vegetation or other combustible growth for a minimum of 10 feet on each side of every roadway, whether public or private. The fire code official may enter upon private property to inspect, remove and clear vegetation and growth as required by this section and may charge the responsible party for the cost of such action. This section shall not apply to single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery, or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents, or similar plants used as ground cover, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire. As used in this section, roadway means that portion of a highway, private street, or paved trail improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. The minimum clearance of 10 feet may be increased if the fire code official determines additional distance is required to provide reasonable fire safety.

320.4 Fuel modification plan in fire hazard severity zones. A fuel modification plan package shall be submitted and have preliminary approval prior to any subdivision of land, and have final approval prior to the issuance of a permit for any new construction, remodeling, modification or reconstruction of any enclosed structure where the structure or subdivision is located within areas designated as a Very High or High Fire Hazard Severity Zone in the State Responsibility Areas or Very High Hazard Severity Zone in the Local Responsibility Areas as designated in the applicable Hazard Zone maps at the time of application.

320.5 Notice to Correct. All notices to clear flammable vegetation and other combustible growth for shall be in writing and shall be in accordance with Folsom Municipal Code Chapter 8.37.

320.6 Abatement and penalties. The procedures for the abatement of hazardous vegetation and penalties thereof shall be in accordance with Folsom Municipal Code Chapter 8.37.

Chapter 5, Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, is hereby amended to read:

503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus and emergency vehicle access roads required by this section and Folsom Municipal Code Section 17.57.080 shall have an unobstructed continuous width of not less than 27 feet (8230 mm) for all major / primary driveway aisles and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

EXCEPTIONS:

1.    Vertical clearance may be reduced, provided such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance when approved.

2.    Vertical clearances or widths shall be increased when, in the opinion of the chief, vertical clearances or widths are not adequate to provide fire apparatus access.

503.2.7 Grade. The gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 12%. Where said fire apparatus access road directly fronts the exterior of a building two or more stories in height, the gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 9%.

503.6 Security gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire code official. The design and operation of gates and barricades shall be in accordance with the Sacramento County Emergency Access Gates and Barriers Standard.

Chapter 5, Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

503.2.1.1 Group R-3 subdivisions. Fire apparatus and emergency vehicle access roads in subdivisions comprised solely of Group R-3 occupancies shall have an unobstructed continuous width of not less than 24 feet (7315 mm) and unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

503.2.1.2 Other fire and emergency access roads. All other fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

503.2.5.1 Length. The maximum length of any dead end shall not exceed 500 feet.

503.5.3 Obstruction of gates and barricades. Gates or barricades required by Section 503 shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. A FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS  DO NOT BLOCK sign shall be posted on the gate or barricade when required by the fire code official.

Chapter 5, Section 504, Access to Building Openings and Roofs, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

504.5 Building projections. Cornices, parapets, eave openings, and similar projections from a building shall be designed to support a 330 pound horizontal and vertical load to the leading edge of the projection. This represents a 250-pound firefighter carrying 80 pounds of equipment stepping off of a ladder placed against the projection onto the top of the projection.

504.6 Roof top access and safety. Roof top solar photovoltaic systems, roof gardens and landscaped roofs shall be in accordance with Appendix K.

Chapter 5, Section 505, Premises Identification, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

505.3 Numbers for one- and two- family dwellings. Numbers for one- and two-family dwellings shall be a minimum of 4 inches high. Numbers for all other buildings shall be no less than 6 inches high. The fire code official may require an increase in building address or number size when necessary due to building size or arrangement, or due to distance from the public way.

Chapter 5, Section 505, Premises Identification, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

505.3.1 Multiple tenant buildings. Multiple tenant spaces serviced by vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway, or parking lot shall have numbers or addresses placed prior to occupancy on all new and existing buildings as to be plainly visible and legible from the rear access way when deemed necessary by the fire code official. Multiple tenant spaces serviced by rear access through a corridor, exit court, or exit yard shall have approved numbers or addresses displayed on the rear of the tenant space, when deemed necessary by the fire code official.

Multiple tenant spaces that front on interior walkways or pedestrian malls shall have approved numbers or addresses placed over the entrance door in all new and existing buildings. An illuminated annunciator or directory board shall be required at every entrance where deemed necessary by the fire code official.

505.3.2 Illumination. Address numbers shall be illuminated at night in all new buildings. Signs shall be internally or externally illuminated. When the luminance or the face of a sign is from an external source, it shall have an intensity of not less than 5.0 foot-candles. Internally illuminated signs shall provide equivalent luminance.

Chapter 5, Section 507, Fire Protection Water Supplies, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

507.5.7 Fire hydrant markers. Fire hydrants and other firefighting water sources shall be identified by the installation of blue raised reflective pavement markers or identified by other approved means.

Chapter 5, Section 509, Fire Protection and Utility Equipment Identification and Access, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

509.3 Fire control room. Fire sprinkler risers and fire alarm control panels shall be located inside a room with minimum dimensions of five feet by seven feet. The room shall only be accessible from the exterior and provided with a door with a clear width of not less than 32 inches and height of not less than 80 inches. A durable sign shall be affixed to the exterior of the door with the words FIRE CONTROL ROOM in letters not less than 3 inches in height. A key box complying with Section 506 shall be installed adjacent to the door.

The room must be capable of maintaining a minimum temperature of 40 degrees Fahrenheit. A clearance of 12 inches shall be provided from the fire sprinkler risers to any adjacent walls. This room can be a shared with other building utilities or fire protection equipment that is not incompatible. An approved cabinet or container shall be provided to store record plans of the fire sprinkler system and other fire protection equipment. This room shall not be used for any other storage.

Chapter 6, Section 603, Fuel-Fired Appliances, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

603.6.6 Spark arrestors. Chimneys used with fireplaces or heating appliances in which solid or liquid fuel is used shall be maintained with a spark arrester as required for incinerators by the Mechanical Code.

Chapter 6, Section 605, Electrical Equipment, Wiring and Hazards, is hereby amended to read:

605.11 Solar photovoltaic power systems. Solar photovoltaic power systems shall be installed in accordance with Sections 605.11.1 through 605.11.5, the California Building Code or California Residential Code, and the California Electrical Code.

EXCEPTION:

Detached, nonhabitable Group U structures including, but not limited to, parking shade structures, carports, solar trellises and similar structures shall not be subject to the requirements of this section.

Chapter 6, Section 605, Electrical Equipment, Wiring and Hazards, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

605.11.3 Remote electrical disconnect. Photovoltaic circuits shall be equipped with a means for remote electrical disconnect located downstream from the photovoltaic array at the point where the photovoltaic circuit first enters the structure, or at another approved location. The manual control to operate the remote electrical disconnect shall be located within five feet of the buildings main electrical panel. The remote electrical disconnect shall be listed and meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.

EXCEPTIONS:

1.    Photovoltaic circuits contained in rigid or electrical metallic tubing running between the array combiner box and the main electrical panel which are entirely exterior to the building need not be equipped with a means of remote electrical disconnect other than the disconnects intrinsic to the system.

2.    Photovoltaic circuits contained in rigid or electrical metallic tubing running between the array combiner box and the main electrical panel that run through the interior of the building when installed a minimum of 18" below the roof assembly when measured parallel to the surface of the roof.

3.    The photovoltaic system inverter may be used for remote electrical disconnect when the inverter is located immediately upstream of the roof penetration where the circuit enters the structure.

Chapter 9, Section 901, General, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

901.6.3 Service contracts. A service contract shall be secured and maintained by the building owner to provide for maintenance, inspection and testing of all fire protection systems. A copy of the contract shall be provided to the fire code official prior to occupancy.

Chapter 9, Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

903.2.20 Required locations. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all buildings 3,600 square feet in floor area or larger.

a.    For the provisions of this section, two or more buildings, except one and two family dwellings, existing entirely within the property lines of one parcel shall be considered a single building when exterior wall protection is not provided and the aggregate floor area exceeds 3,599 square feet (334.48 m2) when applying California Building Code Section 503.1.2

b.    For the provisions of this section, fire barriers or fire walls shall not apply to eliminate the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system.

EXCEPTION:

Non-combustible, detached canopies open on four sides, not exceeding the basic allowable square footage in CBC Table 503, used exclusively for the parking or storage of private or pleasure vehicles and non-combustible storage (includes fuel islands).

903.2.20.1 Existing Buildings. In existing buildings, except one and two family dwelling buildings, where an automatic fire extinguishing system does not exist, and the floor area of the building or structure is increased by more than fifty percent (50%) or 1,800 square feet, whichever is less, or when alterations or repairs within any 12-month period exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of the existing building or structure, such building or structure shall be made to conform to Section 903.2.20.

Chapter 9, Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems, is hereby amended by deleting Section 903.3.1.2, NFPR 13R Sprinkler Systems, in its entirety.

Chapter 9, Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems, is hereby amended to read:

903.4 Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures, and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit.

903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible and visual alarm notification devices shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. An audible and visual alarm notification device shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location. An audible and visual alarm notification device shall be provided in the interior of the building within each dwelling unit or tenant space and on each level in approved locations.

Chapter 9, Section 907, Fire Alarm and Detection Systems, is hereby amended by adding the following to read:

907.2.30 All buildings. An approved monitored fire alarm and detection system shall be installed in all buildings not protected by an automatic sprinkler system with the exception of R-3 occupancies. Buildings with a floor area less than 500 square feet may be exempt, as determined by the fire code official, based on building construction material and features, location, occupancy type, and distance to exposures.

907.2.30.1 Fire alarm control panel location. The fire alarm control panel shall be located inside of a room or closet with an exterior access door with a clear opening width of no less than 32 inches. This room may be shared with other building utilities. Durable signage shall be provided on the exterior of the door stating FIRE ALARM PANEL in letters 3 inches in height and contrasting to the background.

907.9.1 All existing buildings. In existing buildings, other than one or two-family dwellings, where a monitored fire alarm and detection system does not exist and the floor area of the building or structure is increased by more than fifty percent (50%) or 1,800 square feet, whichever is less, or when alterations or repairs within any 12-month period exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of the existing building or structure, such building or structure shall be made to conform to Section 907.2.30.

907.8.5.1 Obstruction of fire alarm equipment. Fire alarm initiating devices, alarm notification appliances and annunciators shall not be concealed from view, obstructed, or impaired in any manner.

Chapter 33, Section 3310, Access for Firefighting, is hereby amended to read:

3310.1 Required access. Fire and emergency access roads shall be installed and maintained in accordance with Section 503 and Folsom Municipal Code Section 17.57.080.

EXCEPTION:

When approved, temporary fire and emergency vehicle access roads may be used until permanent roads are installed. Temporary access roads shall be provided with an all weather road surface of 2 inches of asphalt concrete over 6 inches of 95% compacted aggregate base from October 1st through April 30th each year. Temporary access roads may be provided with an all weather road surface of 6 inches of 95% compacted aggregate base from May 1st through September 30th each year.

3310.3 Premise identification. Prior to and during construction, an approved address sign shall be provided at each fire and emergency vehicle access road entry into the project.

Chapter 33, Section 3312, Water Supply for Fire Protection, is hereby amended to read:

3312.1 When required. Required fire hydrants shall be installed and accepted prior to combustible materials arriving on site or vertical construction commencing.

Chapter 80, Referenced StandardsNFPA 13D, is hereby amended to read:

10.3.1 The piping configuration shall be designed to circulate water throughout and between each floor level by looping the piping system and maintaining minimal dead-end arm-over branch lines with a maximum length of 3 feet.

10.3.2 The piping configuration shall provide a 1/2-inch outlet connected to a remotely-located water closet within the home to facilitate water circulation.

Chapter 80, Referenced StandardsNFPA 13D, is hereby amended by deleting Sections 103.3 and 103.4.

Chapter 81, Infractions, is hereby added to read as follows:

SECTION 8101SCOPE

In accordance with Section 109.4 of this code, violation of the following sections shall be infractions punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars:

Section

Offense

107.6

Occupant count

303.1

Asphalt kettlestransportation

303.2

Asphalt kettleslocation

303.3

Asphalt kettleslocation of fuel containers

303.4

Asphalt kettlesattendant

303.5

Asphalt kettlesfire extinguishers

307.1.1

Open burningoffensive or objectionable

307.5

Open burningattendance and fire extinguishing equipment

308.1.1

Throwing or placing sources of ignition

308.1.4

Open-flame cooking devices

308.1.8.5

Fire protectionflaming food

309.4

Fire extinguishersindustrial trucks and equipment

310.2

Prohibited areassmoking

310.4

Removal of signs prohibited

310.5

Compliance with No Smoking signs

503.4

Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads

503.5.1

Secured gates and barricades

505.1

Address identification

507.5.4

Obstructionfire protection equipment

604.4

Maintenanceemergency power systems

605.3

Obstructing electrical service equipment

605.4

Multiplug adapters

605.5

Extension cords

605.6

Unapproved conditionsoutlets and junction boxes

605.10.4

Prohibited areaselectric space heaters

606.7

Emergency signsmechanical refrigeration

609.3.3

Cleaning of grease removal devices, hoods, and ducts

703.1

Maintenance of fire resistant construction

703.2

Fire doorsobstructing or impairing operation

703.3

Decorative materials attached to fire-rated ceilings

901.4.5

Imitation fire protection device

901.7

Failure to notify fire department

905.7

Obstructing or obscuring fire appliance cabinets

906.6

Obstructing or obscuring fire extinguishers

906.7

Mounting of fire extinguishers

907.8.5

Maintaining fire alarm system

1004.3

Posting of occupant load sign

1011.7.4

Storage under exterior exit stairways

2403.2.6

No smokingflammable finishes

2403.2.7

No welding signsflammable finishes

2403.4.3

Combustible waste and residue

2404.4.1

Fire extinguishersspraying areas

2404.7.8.5

Disposal of used filters

2405.4.1

Dip-tank covers

2405.4.2

Fire extinguishersdipping operations

2406.4.2

Fire extinguisherpowder coating operations

2406.5

Dust accumulationpowder coating operations

2603.3

Failure to notify fire department

2304.4.1

Dispensing flammable liquid into unapproved container

2304.4.3

Location of portable container while dispensing

2311.3.2

No smokingrepair garage

3103.12

Posting of exit signstents

3103.12.6.1

Exit sign illumination

3304.1

No smokingconstruction and demolition areas

3304.2

Combustible waste disposal

3317.3

Fire extinguisherroofing operations

3504.2.6

Fire extinguisherhot work areas

5303.5.3

Securing compressed gas containers

5303.4

Marking of compressed gas containers

5704.2.3.1

Posting no smoking signsflammable and combustible liquids

5803.1.4.2

Posting no smoking signsflammable gases

6107.2

No smokingLPG containers

6107.3

Clearance from combustible materialLPG containers

Appendix B, Section B105, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings, is hereby amended to read:

B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1.

EXCEPTION:

A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5678 L/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1.

Appendix C, Table C105.1, Number and Distribution of Fire Hydrants, is amended to read:

TABLE C105.1

NUMBER AND DISTRIBUTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS

FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENT

MINIMUM NUMBER OF HYDRANTS

AVERAGE SPACING BETWEEN HYDRANTS a,b,c (feet)

MAXIMUM DISTANCE FROM ANY POINT ON STREET OR ROAD FRONTAGE TO HYDRANTd

1,750 or less

1

300

150

2,000-2,250

2

300

150

2,500

3

300

150

3,000

3

300

150

3,500-4,000

4

300

150

4,500-5,000

5

300

150

5,500

6

300

150

6,000

6

250

150

6,500-7,000

7

250

150

7,500 or more

8 or moree

200

120

(Ord. 1269  3 (part), 2017)

Chapter 8.37
ABATEMENT OF WEEDS, REFUSE AND ABANDONED MATERIALS
Sections:

8.37.010    Findings.

8.37.020    Definitions.

8.37.030    Declaration of nuisance.

8.37.040    Concurrent authority.

8.37.050    Administration and enforcement.

8.37.060    Penalties.

8.37.070    Right of entry and inspection.

8.37.080    Prohibited activity.

8.37.090    Abatement.

8.37.100    Enforcement procedures for abatement of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that create a fire hazard.

8.37.110    Abatement procedures for weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that do not create a fire hazard.

8.37.120    Administrative hearings.

8.37.130    Judicial review.

8.37.140    Abatement liensSpecial assessments.

8.37.010 Findings.
The city council finds and determines that the uncontrolled growth and/or accumulation of weeds, refuse and other discarded or abandoned materials on parking areas, streets, land or lots within the city creates a condition tending to reduce property values, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance to minors, creates a haven for rodents and insects, and generally creates a condition adverse to the health, safety and welfare of city residents. To eliminate these risks, the city council declares that weeds, refuse and abandoned materials in the city shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

Abandoned materials means any thing, item or product that has been discarded, abandoned, thrown aside, or left as worthless, regardless of the condition of the thing, item or product.

Fire chief means the administrative head of the city fire department or his/her designee.

Refuse means and includes any of the following:

1.    Garbage, waste or rubbish;

2.    Grass clippings, tree or shrub trimmings, or other organic materials; or

3.    Unused or discarded collections of materials, including but not limited to wood, bedding, crockery, tires or construction debris.

Responsible person shall have the meaning designated in Section 1.08.020 of the Folsom Municipal Code. In addition to the definition set forth therein, responsible person means and includes each property owner as identified on the last equalized assessment roll available on the date of the violation.

Streets means and includes alleys, parkways, park paths, bicycle trails, roads, driveways, sidewalks and areas between sidewalks and curbs.

Weeds means and includes any of the following:

1.    Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;

2.    Sagebrush, chaparral and any other brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.030 Declaration of nuisance.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to redress as provided for in this chapter and Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.040 Concurrent authority.
The provisions of this chapter do not provide the exclusive regulation for abatement of weeds, refuse and abandoned materials within the city. The rules set forth herein shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes and/or ordinances heretofore and hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction over abatement of weeds, refuse and abandoned materials. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.050 Administration and enforcement.
A.    The fire chief or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter that pertain to the removal of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that create a fire hazard. The code enforcement officer shall enforce all other provisions of this chapter.

B.    The procedures for the abatement of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that create a fire hazard shall be governed by the procedures set forth in Section 8.37.100 of this chapter.

C.    The procedures for abatement of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that do not constitute a fire hazard but do create conditions that constitute a nuisance as defined in this chapter shall be governed by the procedures set forth in Section 8.37.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.060 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 8.37.110, which pertain to the abatement of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that do not constitute a fire hazard, shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020, of Chapter 1.08.

1.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of Section 8.37.110 of this chapter.

2.    Based upon the standards for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of Section 8.37.110 of this chapter shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The actual monetary sanctions levied for a violation of Section 8.37.110 of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(B).

B.    Unless any penalties are expressly incorporated by reference herein, the sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.012 for administrative violations shall not apply to violations of this chapter pursuant to procedures set forth in Section 8.37.100, which pertain to the abatement of weeds, refuse or abandoned materials that constitute a fire hazard. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.070 Right of entry and inspection.
The fire chief or personnel acting under his or her direction or the code enforcement officer may enter upon private or public property to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the procedures established in Section 1.09.025. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.080 Prohibited activity.
No owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any building, structure, residence, property, grounds or lots within the city shall allow or cause the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, refuse or abandoned materials on private property or on any streets within the city. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.090 Abatement.
It shall be the responsibility of any owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any building, structure, residence, property, grounds or lots to abate and remove any accumulated weeds, refuse or abandoned materials located: (1) on private property; or (2) on any streets within the city if such person(s) placed the weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials on such private property or streets, or otherwise own, are occupying, or have custody or control over such private property or streets. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.100 Enforcement procedures for abatement of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that create a fire hazard.
The following procedures shall apply to the abatement of any weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that create a fire hazard:

A.    The fire chief or his/her designee shall conduct periodic inspections of property within the city to determine whether any accumulation of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials constitutes a fire hazard. The fire chief or his/her designee shall also respond to and investigate citizen complaints that an accumulation of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials constitutes a fire hazard.

B.    Upon a determination that any accumulation of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials constitutes a fire hazard, the fire chief or his/her designee shall send a written notice to all responsible persons advising such persons that the weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials shall be abated by the date set forth in the notice. The written notice shall advise all responsible persons that if accumulated weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials are not abated June 1st of the year in which the notice is sent out, the city will arrange for abatement at the expense of any and all responsible persons. The notice shall contain a section for a responsible person to return to the fire department to indicate whether the responsible person intends to perform the abatement, or whether the responsible person elects to have the fire department complete the abatement. The notice shall also contain a section for any person receiving the notice to advise the fire department that the property involved has been sold and the identity of the new owner(s).

C.    The notice sent to a responsible person pursuant to this section shall advise the responsible person that the action required by that notice can be appealed through the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Section 1.09.030, and that the notice must be appealed within 10 days of the date of the notice.

D.    If a responsible person does not either: (1) appeal the action requested by the notice, or (2) abate the weeds, refuse and/or other abandoned materials by the date set forth in the notice, the fire chief or his/her designee may enter upon the property identified in the notice to remove and abate such items. In the alternative, the fire chief, or his/her designee may contract with a private party or parties to cause the removal or abatement of such items, and such parties shall have the right of entry to the same extent as the fire chief. In the event the fire chief retains a private party or parties to effect removal or abatement, such party or parties shall operate under the control of the fire chief, and the fire chief shall impose such conditions and limitations upon the authority of the private party as he finds necessary to protect the property and any persons thereon.

E.    In addition to any costs incurred by the city for abatement activity taken under this section, an administrative fee will be charged to reimburse the city for administrative time devoted to abatement of the weeds, refuse and/or other abandoned materials. The administrative fee will be established by resolution of the city council.

F.    The fire chief or his/her designee shall serve the notice required under this section on each responsible person pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.027. Any notices which are posted shall bear a title which reads Notice to Remove Weeds, Noxious Vegetation, Refuse and Other Obstructions, in a typeface not less than 1 inch in height. Notices which are posted shall be conspicuously posted in front of the property, or if the property has no frontage upon a street, then upon a portion of the property nearest to a street most likely to give actual notice to the owner(s). Notices shall be posted not more than 100 feet in distance apart upon property with more than 200 feet of frontage, and at least 1 notice shall be posted on each parcel with 200 or less feet of frontage.

G.    If a responsible person refuses to allow the fire chief or his/her designee to abate the weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that create the fire hazard, the fire chief shall cause the service of a notice of administrative violation pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.024. The administrative sanction for such a violation shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The actual monetary sanctions levied for such a violation shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(B). (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.110 Abatement procedures for weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that do not create a fire hazard.
The following procedures shall apply to the abatement of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that do not create a fire hazard:

A.    Enforcement. The code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall implement a uniform procedure for the abatement of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials that constitute a nuisance in violation of this chapter. The code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall also respond to and investigate citizen complaints that concern the accumulation of weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials to determine whether such materials constitute a nuisance in violation of this chapter.

B.    Notice to Correct. If the code enforcement officer determines that a violation has occurred under this chapter, a notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.09. The time to correct a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be 30 days. A notice to correct shall not be required if any of the circumstances set forth in Section 1.09.024 exist. The code enforcement officer shall serve the notice to correct on each responsible person pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.027. As required under Section 1.09.023, the notice to correct shall contain the following information:

1.    A description of the property by reference to the assessors parcel number as used in the records of the county assessor, and by reference to the common name of a street upon which the property abuts, if the property abuts upon a street;

2.    A statement describing the weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials upon the property that violate this chapter;

3.    Citation to this chapter and any other applicable laws that have been violated;

4.    A request that such weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials be removed or abated by a date certain, which shall not be less than 30 calendar days following the mailing or posting of the notice;

5.    Notification of rights to appeal the notice to correct as provided for in Chapter 1.09.

C.    Notice of Administrative Violation. If the weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials are not abated and/or removed within the time set forth in the notice to correct, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice of administrative violation pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.024. All responsible persons shall have the right to request an administrative hearing as set forth in Section 1.09.030. If no hearing is requested within 10 days of the service of any notice of administrative violation, there shall be no further rights to appeal the notice of administrative violation unless there is a showing of good cause for the delay. In such a case, the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.032 shall apply.

D.    Notice to Abate. At the time of service of either the notice to correct or the notice of administrative violation, or at anytime thereafter, the code enforcement officer may also serve a notice to abate a nuisance pursuant to Section 1.10.020. The notice to abate shall constitute the notification that if the required corrective action is not taken by the date specified, the weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials described therein may be removed under authority of the city and that the costs of such removal and abatement shall be made a legal charge against the owner(s) of the property, a lien on the property, and subject to collection with property taxes as provided for in Chapter 1.10. The notice to abate is subject to appeal as set forth in Section 1.10.020 and the rights to appeal shall be specifically set forth in the notice. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.120 Administrative hearings.
Administrative hearings shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.030 through 1.09.048. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.130 Judicial review.
If a hearing is requested, the decision of the hearing officer shall be the final administrative decision and shall not be appealable to the city council or any committee or commission of the city. Appeal of the hearing officers decision shall be governed by the timelines and procedures established in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

8.37.140 Abatement liensSpecial assessments.
A.    The costs of abatement, administrative fees and any administrative penalties assessed or imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be declared a lien against the property pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.10.020. The abatement lien shall include those costs set forth in Section 1.10.020(D)(4). The abatement lien shall be recorded pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.10.020(D).

B.    In addition to recording an abatement lien, all costs and penalties may be declared a special assessment pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.10.020(D)(4). Such assessment may then be collected as provided for in that section.

C.    Any costs and administrative fees incurred to abate weeds, refuse and/or abandoned materials prior to the effective date of this ordinance may be declared a lien against the property pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.10.020. (Ord. 848  2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 8.38
MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATELY OWNED PROPERTIES VISIBLE FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections:

8.38.010    Scope and purpose.

8.38.020    Definitions.

8.38.030    Prohibited activityDeclaration of nuisance.

8.38.040    Evidence of harm to the public health, safety or general welfareEffect of recorded conditions, covenants or restrictions.

8.38.050    Enforcement.

8.38.060    Penalties.

8.38.070    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

8.38.080    Abatement liens.

8.38.010 Scope and purpose.
A.    The provisions of this chapter are intended to operate in conjunction with the provisions of Chapter 8.37 of he Folsom Municipal Code pertaining to the abatement of weeds, refuse and abandoned materials. The remedies contained in this chapter are not exclusive, and all remedies available for violations of the Folsom Municipal Code, including but not limited to the abatement remedies contained in Chapter 8.37, shall be available as remedies for violations of the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for maintenance of privately owned properties and buildings that are visible from public property, public streets and/or public rights-of-way. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

8.38.020 Definitions.
Building means any structure, and includes any house, garage, duplex, apartment, condominium, stock cooperative or other structure, whether partially or wholly constructed, whether intended for residential, recreational, retail, industrial, or commercial purposes, and whether intended for permanent or temporary use.

Enforcement authority means the code enforcement officer or his/her designee.

Property means all property located within the city.

Public property means any public street, roadway, place, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway, square, plaza, easement, right-of-way, or an other interest in land dedicated to public use.

Responsible person has the meaning set forth in Section 1.08.020(L) of the Folsom Municipal Code, and expressly includes any person having legal title to, or custody, possession or control of the building or property that violates the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

8.38.030 Prohibited activityDeclaration of nuisance.
A.    No responsible person shall create, cause, or allow any of the following conditions to exist on or adjacent to privately owned properties or buildings when such conditions are visible from public property;

1.    The accumulation of broken or discarded furniture; household fixtures, equipment or furnishings; garbage receptacles; or shopping or laundry carts;

2.    The overgrowth of vegetation in a manner that is likely to harbor rodents, vermin, insects, or other nuisances; or which obstructs the view of drivers on streets, public rights-of-way or private driveways; or which impedes, obstructs, or denies pedestrian or other lawful travel on sidewalks, walkways or other public rights-of-way;

3.    The presence of dead, decayed or diseased trees, weeds, or other vegetation that creates an unsightly appearance, or creates a danger to the public health, safety or general welfare;

4.    The accumulation of packing boxes, cardboard boxes, lumber, junk, trash, barrels, drums, salvage materials or other debris;

5.    The creation of attractive nuisances that create a danger to children and other persons, including but not limited to abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, appliances, refrigerators and freezers, construction materials and/or equipment, hazardous pools, ponds and excavations;

6.    The storage of personal property, including but not limited to vehicles, boats, trailers or vehicle parts which are abandoned or left in a state of partial repair;

7.    The presence of unpainted buildings and/or buildings having dry rot, warping, or termite infestation, which shall include, but is not limited to any building on which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation so as to render the building unsafe or unsightly, or in a state of disrepair;

8.    The presence of buildings with windows containing broken glass or no glass at all, where the window is of a type which normally contains glass, and which constitutes a hazard and/or invites trespassers and malicious mischief;

9.    The presence of building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, sidewalks or walkways which are maintained in such a condition as to become dangerous, defective or unsightly;

10.    The storage of construction equipment, farm machinery, or machinery of any type or description parked or stored in such a manner that it is visible from public property, the street and/or the public right of way, unless such equipment or machinery falls within one of the following exceptions:

a.    An active building permit has been issued and covers the excavation, construction or demolition operations that are in progress,

b.    Active farming operations are underway in an area properly zoned for agricultural use, or

c.    When such machinery is located within an area zoned agricultural or industrial and such equipment has been appropriately stored;

11.    The existence of property which lacks landscaping, turf, ground cover, plant material, rocks or other commonly used landscaping materials and which creates a condition of excessive dust, weeds or other conditions that affect the public health, safety or general welfare;

12.    The keeping, storing, depositing, or accumulating of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other landscaping materials in a manner that creates conditions that affect the public health, safety or general welfare; and

13.    The maintenance of property or buildings in a manner that violates (a) conditions of approval that have been imposed on the property during the process of approval of the development, or (b) conditions imposed on a building permit, use permit, or other entitlement issued by the city.

B.    Any violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to redress as provided for in this chapter and in Chapter 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

8.38.040 Evidence of harm to the public health, safety or general welfareEffect of recorded conditions, covenants or restrictions.
A.    In reviewing a condition on a property or building to determine whether there is a violation of this chapter, the code enforcement officer may consider any recorded conditions, covenants and restrictions that are applicable to the property or building. Any violation of a recorded condition, covenant or restriction shall constitute relevant evidence for the enforcement authority to consider in determining whether to commence enforcement action, but shall not serve as the sole basis for the decision to commence enforcement action.

B.    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the code enforcement officer to enforce the terms of recorded conditions, covenants, or restrictions unless the enforcement authority determines that:

1.    The condition is within view of public property;

2.    The condition creates a threat of harm to the public health, safety or general welfare;

3.    The criteria for enforcement established in Section 1.09.022 of the Folsom Municipal Code have been satisfied; and

4.    The enforcement authority has determined that the condition constitutes a violation of some provision of this chapter or other provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code.

C.    The absence of a recorded condition, covenant or restriction shall not be deemed evidence that a particular condition on property or on a building does not constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

8.38.050 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

8.38.060 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020 of Chapter 1.08, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level C violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012C. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

8.38.070 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty, or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 to 1.09.048, inclusive, of Chapter 1.09 of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 to 1.09.059, inclusive, of Chapter 1.09 of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply:

B.    A notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. Unless an emergency situation exists that creates an imminent threat of harm to person or property and requires immediate corrective action, the time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The notice to correct shall identify the nature of the violation, and shall set forth in specific detail the basis for the determination by the enforcement authority that the violation endangers the public health, safety or general welfare.

C.    At the time of service of either the notice to correct or the notice of administrative violation, or at anytime thereafter, the enforcement authority may also serve a notice to abate a nuisance pursuant to Section 1.10.020. The notice to abate shall constitute the notification that if the required corrective action is not taken by the date specified, the materials described therein may be removed under authority of the city and that the costs of such removal and abatement shall be made a legal charge against the owner(s) of the property, a lien on the property, and subject to collection with property taxes as provided for in Chapter 1.10. The notice to abate is subject to appeal as set forth in Section 1.10.020 and the rights to appeal shall be specifically set forth in the notice. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

8.38.080 Abatement liens.
The costs of abatement, administrative fees and any administrative penalties assessed or imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be declared a lien against the property pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.10.020 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The abatement lien shall include those costs set forth in Section 1.10.020(D)(4). The abatement liens shall be recorded pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.10.020D. (Ord. 906  2 (part), 1999)

Chapter 8.40
SACRAMENTO ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
Sections:

8.40.010    Establishment of Sacramento Environmental Commission.

8.40.020    Definitions.

8.40.030    Functions and responsibilities.

8.40.040    Appointment and removal of members.

8.40.050    Term of officeFirst appointmentEligibility for reappointment.

8.40.060    Organization.

8.40.070    Vacancies, absences from meetings.

8.40.080    Open meetings.

8.40.010 Establishment of Sacramento Environmental Commission.
There is established the Sacramento Environmental Commission (Commission). (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

8.40.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:

Appointing authority means the board of supervisors of Sacramento County and the city councils of Sacramento, Folsom, Isleton or Galt.

Commission means the Sacramento Environmental Commission.

Department means the environmental management department.

Member means a person appointed as a member of the commission. (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

8.40.030 Functions and responsibilities.
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    To provide information and analyses and to advise the Sacramento County board of supervisors and the city councils of Sacramento County for the purpose of implementing an effective comprehensive environmental protection and management program for Sacramento County.

B.    To assist and advise the department in the formulation and implementation of its programs, including, but not limited to air quality control, environmental quality control, and hazardous and toxic material issues.

C.    Upon request, to aid, advise and recommend to county departments and city departments within Sacramento County, information, programs and measures which will promote air quality, environmental health and hazardous materials control.

D.    To assess, analyze, and recommend for approval, appropriate local measures and other action in accordance with federal, state and local regulations including program elements administered by the department in accordance with city/county policies established by the board of supervisors and city councils.

E.    To review and recommend for approval ordinances, rules and regulations proposed by the department, including review and approval of the city/county air quality, environmental health, and the hazardous materials and air quality general plan element.

F.    As deemed necessary, to initiate investigations regarding matters within the commissions powers and duties including private and public activities for purposes of advising the department and the board of supervisors or city councils.

G.    As appropriate and in accordance with federal and state law including local ordinances, the commission may be empowered by such city or county ordinance to act as the reviewing body concerning decisions rendered by the department in its role as the environmental enforcement agency pursuant to such ordinance.

H.    To provide ongoing policy and program advice on such other environmental management program matters as the board and/or city councils may refer to the commission.

I.    The commission may as deemed necessary, call before it, qualified individuals so that they may provide their opinion and recommendation to the commission regarding particular environmental issues in the absence of such expertise within the membership of the commission. (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

8.40.040 Appointment and removal of members.
The commission shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed as follows:

A.    Five members to be appointed by the board of supervisors.

B.    Three members to be appointed by the Mayor of Sacramento with the approval of the Sacramento City Council.

C.    One member appointed jointly by the Cities of Folsom, Isleton and Galt.

D.    Members may be removed by the appointing authority at any time and shall serve at the pleasure of the respective appointing authority.

E.    In appointing members to the commission, the appointing authorities shall strive to provide for appointment of members from the following vocational disciplines or areas of interest or experience:

Health services profession, legal services profession, industry, engineering, transportation planning, environmental group, toxics/hazardous materials, environmental health, industrial hygiene, water quality, waste disposal, land use planning, vector control, chemical reuse/recycling and the general public, and such other disciplines or area of interest and experience as may be recommended by the commission.

F.    When vacancies occur, the commission shall recommend to the appointing body, the disciplines to be appointed, and shall provide, advise and comment with regards to qualifications of applicants for the vacant positions.

G.    Elected officials and full time salaried employees of the Sacramento County Board of Supervisors, city councils, special districts, or the regulatory agencies of Sacramento County shall not be eligible for membership on the commission.

H.    All appointees to the commission shall be required to file statements disclosing financial interests pursuant to a conflict of interest code adopted for the commission. (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

8.40.050 Term of officeFirst appointmentEligibility for reappointment.
A.    Each member shall serve for a term of three years.

B.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the members first appointed to the commission shall serve from the date on which the commission holds its first meeting for the following terms:

1.    The county board of supervisors shall appoint one member for a two year term, two members for a one year term and two members for a three year term.

2.    The City Council of Sacramento shall appoint one member for a one year term, and two members for a two year term.

3.    The cities of Folsom, Isleton and Galt shall mutually agree upon one appointment. This appointment shall be for 3 years.

C.    Members in good standing shall be eligible for consideration to be reappointed. (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

8.40.060 Organization.
A.    Within 15 days after the appointment of the members of the commission, they shall meet and organize by electing from their members a chairman and vice-chairman who shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission.

B.    The commission annually shall elect a chair and vice-chair. The chair, or in the chairs absence the vice-chair, shall preside at all meetings of the commission.

C.    The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once a month. The commission may, by resolution, adopt a schedule of regular meetings. The commission shall establish, by a vote of at least 5 members, a meeting location. Special meetings may be called by the chair or by a majority of the commission members.

D.    The commission shall establish procedures for the conduct of its meetings. Five members shall constitute a quorum. At least 5 affirmative votes shall be required to take any action except to adjourn. Voting by proxy or designee shall not be permitted.

E.    Members of the commission shall be paid $50 per meeting attended, not to exceed 2 meetings in any month. For purposes of this section, subcommittee meetings shall be considered meetings eligible for compensation. (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

8.40.070 Vacancies, absences from meetings.
A.    The respective appointing authorities shall have the sole authority to fill vacancies with respect to their appointed members.

B.    The position of any member who fails to attend 2 or more consecutive monthly meetings in 1 year, unless excused by the commission, shall automatically become vacant.

C.    Vacancies resulting from removal, death, incapacity or any other cause shall be immediately appointed by the respective appointing authority and said appointee shall serve the remainder of said term. (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

8.40.080 Open meetings.
All commission meetings shall be held in accordance with the open meeting requirements contained in the provisions of the Government Code commencing with Section 54950 and any subsequent amendments thereto. (Ord. 623  1, 1988)

Chapter 8.42
NOISE CONTROL
Sections:

8.42.010    Purpose.

8.42.020    Definitions.

8.42.030    Noise measurement criteria.

8.42.040    Exterior noise standards.

8.42.050    Interior noise standards.

8.42.060    Noise source exemptions.

8.42.070    Air conditioning and refrigeration.

8.42.080    Electrical substations.

8.42.090    Variances.

8.42.100    ViolationEnforcement.

8.42.010 Purpose.
The city council declares and finds that excessive noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to the public interest as follows:

A.    By interfering with sleep, communication, relaxation and the full use of ones property;

B.    By contributing to hearing impairment and a wide range of adverse physiological stress conditions; and

C.    By adversely affecting the value of real property.

It is the intent of this chapter to protect persons from excessive levels of noise within or near a residence, school, church, hospital or public library. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.020 Definitions.
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

Agricultural property means land used for or devoted to the production of crops and livestock.

Ambient noise level means the composite of noise from all sources excluding the alleged offensive noise. In this context it represents the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location for a specified time of the day or night.

A-weighted sound level means the sound level in decibels as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network (scale) at slow meter response. The unit measurement is referred to herein as dB(A) or dBA.

Construction means construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, conversion or movement of any building, structures or land together with any scientific surveys associated therewith.

Cumulative period means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

Decibel means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.

Emergency work means the use of any machinery, equipment, vehicle, manpower or other activity in a short-term effort to protect, or restore safe conditions in the community, or work by private or public utilities when restoring unplanned interruption of utility service.

Enforcement officer means the community development director or duly authorized deputy.

Fixed noise source means a device or machine which creates sounds while fixed or stationary, including but not limited to residential, agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment.

Hospital means any building or portion thereof used for the overnight accommodation and medical care of the sick, injured or infirm persons and includes rest homes and nursing homes.

Impulsive noise means a noise of short duration, usually less than 1 second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.

Intruding noise level means the sound level created, caused, maintained or originating from an alleged offensive source, measured in decibels, at a specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation.

Mobile noise source means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

Noise disturbance means any sound which violates the quantitative standards set forth in this chapter.

Noise level category means a division formed for the purposes of referring to a certain sound level standard measured by minutes in a 1-hour time period on the basis of daytime or nighttime hours.

Residential property means a parcel of real property which is developed and lawfully used either in whole or in part for residential purposes.

School means public or private institutions conducting regular academic instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or collegiate levels.

Simple tone noise means any noise which is distinctly audible as a single pitch (frequency) or set of pitches as determined by the enforcement officer.

Sound level meter means an instrument meeting American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.030 Noise measurement criteria.
Any noise measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network (scale) at slow meter response. Fast meter response shall be used for impulsive type sounds. Calibration of the measurement equipment utilizing an acoustical calibrator shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data.

The exterior noise levels shall be measured within 50 feet of the affected residence, school, church, hospital or public library. Where practical, the microphone shall be positioned 3 to 5 feet above the ground and away from reflective surfaces. The interior noise levels shall be measured within the affected dwelling unit, at points at least 4 feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with windows in the normal seasonal configuration. The reported interior noise level shall be determined by taking the arithmetic average of the readings taken at the various microphone locations. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.040 Exterior noise standards.
A.    It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise, on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the exterior noise level when measured at any affected single- or multiple-family residence, school, church, hospital or public library situated in either the incorporated or unincorporated area to exceed the noise level standards as set forth in the following table:

Table 8.42.040

EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS, dBA

Noise Level Category

Cumulative Number of minutes in any 1-hour time period

dBA Daytime
(7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)

dBA Nighttime
(10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)

1

30

50

45

2

15

55

50

3

5

60

55

4

1

65

60

5

0

70

65

B.    In the event the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable noise level standard in any category above, the applicable standard shall be adjusted so as to equal the ambient noise level.

C.    Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by 5 dB(A) for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring noises.

D.    If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level can be measured, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be the noise level standards as specified above. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.050 Interior noise standards.
A.    It is unlawful for any person, at any location within the city, to operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit, any source of sound or to allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured inside a receiving dwelling unit situated in the area either within the city or adjacent to the city to exceed the noise level standards as set forth in the following table:

Table 8.42.050

INTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS, dBA

Noise Level Category

Cumulative Number of minutes in any 1-hour time period

dBA Daytime (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)

dBA Nighttime (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)

1

5

45

35

2

1

50

40

3

0

55

45

B.    In the event the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable noise level standard in any category above, the applicable standard shall be adjusted so as to equal the ambient noise level.

C.    Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by 5 dB(A) for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises.

D.    If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level can be measured, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be the noise level standards as specified above. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.060 Noise source exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Activities conducted in unlighted public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, during the hours of 7 a.m. to dusk, and in lighted public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, during the hours of 7 a.m. to 11 p.m., including but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events;

B.    Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency activities or emergency work;

C.    Noise sources associated with construction, provided such activities do not take place before 7 a.m. or after 6 p.m. on any day except Saturday or Sunday, or before 8 a.m. or after 5 p.m. on Saturday or Sunday;

D.    Noise sources associated with the maintenance of residential property provided such activities take place between the hours of seven a.m. to dusk on any day except Saturday or Sunday, between the hours of 8 a.m. to dusk on Saturday or Sunday;

E.    Noise sources associated with agricultural activities on agricultural property;

F.    Noise sources associated with a lawful commercial or industrial activity caused by mechanical devices or equipment, including air conditioning or refrigeration systems, installed prior to the effective date of this chapter. This exemption shall expire 1 year after the effective date of this chapter;

G.    Noise sources associated with the collection of waste or garbage from property devoted to commercial or industrial uses;

H.    Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.070 Air conditioning and refrigeration.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.42.040 or 8.42.050, where the intruding noise source when measured as provided in Section 8.42.030 is an air-conditioning or refrigeration system or associated equipment installed prior to the effective date of this chapter, the exterior noise level shall not exceed 55 dBA, except where such equipment is otherwise exempt from the provisions of this chapter. The exterior noise level shall not exceed 50 dBA for such equipment installed or in use after 1 year after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.080 Electrical substations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 8.42.040 and 8.42.050, noise sources associated with the operation of electrical substations shall not exceed 50 dBA when measured as provided in Section 8.42.030. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.090 Variances.
A.    The owner or operator of a noise source which the enforcement officer has determined violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an application with the enforcement officer for variance from strict compliance with any particular provisions of this chapter where such variance will not result in a hazardous condition or a nuisance and strict compliance would be unreasonable in view of all circumstances. The owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with such provisions and the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership or fixed sources under common ownership on a single property may be combined into one application.

B.    Upon receipt of a complete application and fee, and within 30 days thereafter, the enforcement officer shall either (1) approve such request in whole or in part, (2) deny the request, or (3) refer the request directly to the city council for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the variance is approved, reasonable conditions may be imposed which may include restriction on noise level, noise duration and operating hours, an approved method of achieving compliance and a time schedule for its implementation. The decision of the enforcement officer is subject to appeal to the city council for a public hearing by filing a written appeal with the enforcement officer not later than 15 days following the date of the enforcement officers written decision to the applicant.

C.    Factors which the enforcement officer or the city council must consider shall include but not be limited to the following:

1.    Present and potential uses of property within the area affected by noise;

2.    Factors related to initiating and completing all remedial work;

3.    Age and useful life of the existing noise source; and

4.    The general public interest, health, safety and welfare.

D.    The applicant may appeal the decision of the enforcement officer to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the enforcement officer. Such decisions shall be final and shall be based upon the considerations set forth in this section. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

8.42.100 ViolationEnforcement.
A.    The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction as specified in Chapter 1.12 of this code. The provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by a court-ordered injunction brought by the city. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance.

B.    Except as otherwise provided herein, violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be as follows:

Violation

Penalty

First

Written notification

Second

$100 fine

Third

$200 fine

Fourth or subsequent violations

$500 fine

C.    The enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. Right of entry for inspection shall be as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 764  3 (part), 1993)

Chapter 8.50
LIBRARY COMMISSION
Sections:

8.50.010    Establishment.

8.50.020    Duties.

8.50.030    Eligibility for office.

8.50.040    Vacancies in office.

8.50.050    Removal from office.

8.50.060    Compensation and expenses.

8.50.070    Meetings.

8.50.010 Establishment.
There shall be a library commission for the city. The commission shall consist of 7 members. Each city council member shall appoint 1 commission member whose term shall run concurrently with that of the council member so appointing. Such appointments shall be announced at a meeting of the city council and entered into the minutes of that meeting. Two additional members shall be appointed at large by the city council for two-year terms by a majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 1017  2 (part), 2004)

8.50.020 Duties.
The library commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city manager and city council and shall review and make recommendations on all matters relating to library policies, programs, services, budgets, and the development of facilities to serve the needs of the community. (Ord. 1017  2 (part), 2004)

8.50.030 Eligibility for office.
A person is not eligible to hold office as a library commissioner unless he or she is, at the time of appointment, a resident and registered voter of the city. If, during his or her term of office, a member of the library commission moves his or her residence outside the city limits, or ceases to be a registered voter of the city, such members office shall immediately become vacant. (Ord. 1017  2 (part), 2004)

8.50.040 Vacancies in office.
If the office of a member of the library commission appointed by a council member becomes vacant, the appointing council member shall fill a vacancy by appointing a library commission member whose term shall run concurrent with that of the appointing city council member. If the office of an at large member of the library commission appointed by the city council becomes vacant, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointing a library commission member whose term shall run for the remainder of the unexpired at large term. This section shall apply to vacancies resulting from death, resignation, removal, disqualification or any other cause. (Ord. 1017  2 (part), 2004)

8.50.050 Removal from office.
The members of the library commission who are appointed by a council member and the at large members of the library commission who are appointed by the city council serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the members of the council. (Ord. 1017  2 (part), 2004)

8.50.060 Compensation and expenses.
Members of the library commission shall receive such compensation for attendance at meetings and reasonable travel expenses as the city council establishes by resolution. (Ord. 1017  2 (part), 2004)

8.50.070 Meetings.
Regular meetings of the library commission shall be held at least once each month on a day and time to be determined by the commission at the location posted on the agenda. (Ord. 1017  2 (part), 2004)

Chapter 8.60
ABANDONED CARTS
Sections:

8.60.010    Definitions.

8.60.015    Prohibited activityDeclaration of nuisance.

8.60.020    Identification of carts.

8.60.030    Abandoned carts.

8.60.040    Enforcement.

8.60.050    Penalties.

8.60.060    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

8.60.070    Notice of administrative violation.

8.60.080    Abatement proceduresImpoundment of carts.

8.60.090    Liens and special assessments.

8.60.100    Abandoned carts possibly impeding emergency services.

8.60.110    Designated agent.

8.60.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

Business day means any day that the commercial establishment is open for business to the public, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.

Cart means and includes shopping carts and laundry carts.

Identified cart means those carts that exhibit in a permanent and conspicuous place all of the information required by Section 8.60.020.

Non-identified cart means those carts that do not exhibit in a permanent and conspicuous place all of the information required by Section 8.60.020.

Parking area of a commercial establishment means the actual parking area associated with the commercial establishment. If the establishment is located in a shopping center, the parking area shall include the entire parking area associated with the center.

Responsible person means and includes the user of the cart and/or the owner, operator, franchisor, franchisee, lessee and/or lessor of any commercial establishment in the city that provides carts for use by its customers. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.015 Prohibited activityDeclaration of nuisance.
A.    No responsible person shall allow or cause the abandonment of carts on public or private property.

B.    Abandoned carts, or parts thereof, on public and private property are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned cart, or parts thereof, on public or private property within the city, the code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.020 Identification of carts.
Carts used in the city shall exhibit the following information in a permanent and conspicuous place: (1) the identity of the owner; (2) notice of the procedure for the authorized removal of the cart from the owners premises; (3) notice that removal of the cart or the unauthorized possession of the cart is a violation of state law; and (4) a phone number or address for returning the cart to the owner. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.030 Abandoned carts.
A.    Identified Carts. An identified cart is abandoned when:

1.    The cart is located outside the owners premises or the parking area of a commercial establishment and is not in the actual custody of the owner or his/her agent; and

2.    The cart owner, or his/her designated agent, is given notice of the discovery of the cart, the carts location, and that the failure to retrieve the cart will lead to the cart being impounded; and

3.    The cart is not retrieved within 3 business days from the date that the owner of the cart, or his or her designated agent, receives actual notice of the carts location.

B.    Non-Identified Carts. A non-identified cart is abandoned when:

1.    The cart is located outside the owners premises or parking area of the commercial establishment, and is not in the actual custody of the owner or his/her agent; and

2.    The cart owner or his/her designated agent is given notice of the discovery of the cart, the carts location, and that the failure to retrieve the cart will lead to the cart being impounded; and

3.    The cart is not retrieved within 12 hours from the time that the owner of the cart or his or her designated agent receives actual notice of the carts discovery and location.

C.    Carts with No Owner Identification. If the cart is not identified and the owner or designated agent cannot reasonably be determined, the cart shall immediately be considered to be abandoned. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.040 Enforcement.
A.    Except as modified herein, this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive.

B.    The code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. All departments within the city shall immediately report the sighting of abandoned carts on public or private property to the code enforcement officer for remedial action as provided for in this chapter.

C.    Individuals may report the sighting of abandoned carts on public or private property to the code enforcement officer for remedial action. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.050 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012.

1.    Where an identified cart is abandoned, the maximum available financial penalty shall be imposed pursuant to California Business and Professions Code section 22435.7(f). If this statute is repealed, or if a court determines that cities are not preempted with respect to the amount of available financial penalties that may be imposed on an identified, abandoned cart, the full range of penalties specified in Section 8.60.050(C)(2) of this chapter shall be available as a sanction.

2.    Where a non-identified cart is abandoned, the range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(1). Any other violation of this chapter not specifically enumerated in this section shall also be subject to the monetary sanctions set forth in this subparagraph. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.060 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the code enforcement officer shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, shall apply. Any notices required pursuant to these provisions shall be served first on the owner of the cart or his/her designated agent if this information can be determined. The code enforcement officer shall not be required to serve notices on any other person or entity defined in Section 8.60.010(F) as a responsible person unless prior efforts at enforcement with the owner of the cart have been unsuccessful or the city intends to impose a lien on the property as provided for in Section 8.60.090.

B.    A notice to correct may be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. As an alternative method of providing notice to a responsible person, the code enforcement officer may provide verbal notification of the notice to correct to the designated agent specified pursuant to Section 8.60.100. A written confirmation of the verbal notice may be sent to the responsible person by facsimile.

C.    The time allowed to retrieve an abandoned cart shall be as follows:

1.    If the cart is properly identified, 3 business days from the date the responsible person or his/her designated agent receives actual notice of an abandoned cart;

2.    If a cart is non-identified but the owner or other responsible person can be determined, the time to correct any violation of this chapter shall be no more than 12 hours;

3.    If a cart is non-identified and the responsible person has violated this chapter within the preceding year, no notice to correct shall be required and the cart may be immediately impounded. The code enforcement officer shall immediately serve a notice of administrative violation and notice of impoundment as provided for in Section 8.60.070; and

4.    If no owner or other responsible person can be determined, no notice to correct shall be required and the cart may immediately be impounded as provided for in Section 8.60.080.

D.    The time allowed to correct a violation of Section 8.60.110 pertaining to the identification of a designated agent shall be 10 business days. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.070 Notice of administrative violation.
A.    A notice of administrative violation shall be issued if the cart is not removed within the time period specified in the notice to correct. A notice of impoundment shall accompany the notice of administrative violation. The notice of administrative violation and notice of impoundment shall be served in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.027.

B.    The notice of administrative violation shall provide for those penalties allowed for in Section 8.60.050.

C.    The notice of administrative violation and notice of impoundment shall specify the rights to an administrative hearing as allowed for in Sections 1.09.030 to 1.09.049. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.080 Abatement proceduresImpoundment of carts.
A.    If a cart is not removed within the time period specified in the notice to correct, the code enforcement officer has the authority to impound the cart.

B.    Impounded carts shall be stored within the city at a location that is open at least 6 hours each city business day.

C.    Any costs incurred by the city in impounding the cart shall be added to the administrative fine imposed pursuant to Section 8.60.050.

D.    The responsible person shall be notified in writing that the cart was impounded, the times available to retrieve the cart, and all costs and penalties that must be paid before the cart can be reclaimed. No cart shall be released unless the responsible person pays all costs and penalties contained in the notice, or unless a final determination is made that the cart was impounded without proper authority.

E.    If a responsible person does not request an administrative hearing within the times specified in Section 1.09.030, and the responsible person also has not claimed the cart within 30 days of the date of the notice of administrative violation and notice of impoundment, the cart may thereafter be destroyed, sold or otherwise disposed of by the code enforcement officer.

F.    If a responsible person requests an administrative hearing, the cart(s) that are the subject of this hearing shall not be sold or otherwise destroyed pending the final outcome of such hearing and any subsequent court action, if any.

G.    If a cart is impounded pursuant to Section 8.60.060(C)(4), the cart shall not be destroyed for a period of 30 days. If the city is contacted by a responsible person who makes a claim to the cart, the cart shall be returned to the responsible person upon receipt of: (1) satisfactory proof of ownership; (2) payment of all costs associated with the removal and impoundment of the cart; and (3) proof that the cart will be properly identified as required by Section 8.60.020. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.090 Liens and special assessments.
If a responsible person fails to retrieve an abandoned cart within the times set forth in Section 8.60.070 and has not filed a timely request for an administrative hearing, all penalties and costs may be imposed as a lien or special assessment against the property of the responsible person as provided for in Section 1.09.062. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.100 Abandoned carts possibly impeding emergency services.
The code enforcement officer or any other designated city employee is authorized to immediately impound carts (whether identified or not) from public or private property without prior notice to the owner if the cart may impede emergency services. In such cases of an emergency impoundment, the responsible person shall be notified within 12 hours of the location of the cart. The procedures set forth in Section 8.60.080 shall thereafter govern the retrieval of the cart. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

8.60.110 Designated agent.
Each commercial establishment within the city that provides carts to its customers shall provide to the city a list of designated agents who can be notified during business hours that a cart is abandoned and must be retrieved. The designated agent shall be authorized to receive verbal notification of the notice to correct as specified in Section 8.60.060. (Ord. 869  2 (part), 1997)

Chapter 8.70
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

8.70.010    Findings.

8.70.020    Purpose and intent.

8.70.030    Definitions.

8.70.040    Construction.

8.70.050    Applicability.

8.70.060    Regulatory consistency.

8.70.070    Compliance disclaimer.

8.70.080    Severability.

8.70.090    Administration.

8.70.100    Disclaimer of liability.

Article II. Prohibited Discharges

8.70.110    Prohibited discharge.

8.70.120    Exceptions to discharge prohibition.

8.70.130    Exception to otherwise applicable exemptions.

8.70.140    General discharge prohibition.

8.70.150    Threatened prohibited discharge.

8.70.160    Illicit connections prohibited.

8.70.170    Negligence or intent not required.

Article III. Reduction of Pollutants in Stormwater

8.70.200    General requirements.

8.70.210    Containment and notification of spills.

8.70.220    Compliance with best management practices.

8.70.230    Best management practices.

Article IV. Inspection and Monitoring

8.70.300    Scope of inspections.

8.70.310    Establishment of stormwater management and discharge control fund.

8.70.320    Commercial and industrial facility inspections.

Article V. Enforcement

8.70.400    Enforcement.

8.70.410    Penalties.

8.70.420    Enforcement procedures, notice to correct.

8.40.430    Injunctions/civil penalties.

Article VI. Recovery of Cost

8.70.500    Abatement.

8.70.510    Regulatory actions.

Article I. General Provisions

8.70.010 Findings.
A.    The Federal Clean Water Act provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System requirements to stormwater and urban runoff discharge into the city stormwater conveyance system.

B.    The State Water Resources Control Board (state water board) is the state water pollution control agency for all purposes of the Clean Water Act pursuant to Section 13160 of the California Water Code (Water Code). The state water board is authorized by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to administer the NPDES program within the state of California. The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) provides authority for the state NPDES program, including provisions to issue NPDES permits and waste discharge requirements to regulate discharges of stormwater to waters of the state. The state water board, in turn, delegates authority to the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board (regional water board) for issuance and enforcement of municipal stormwater permits in Sacramento County.

C.    Stormwater flows from individual properties to the city stormwater conveyance system and then ultimately to the waters of the United States.

D.    The city is a co-permittee under the Waste Discharge Requirements for County of Sacramento, Cities of Sacramento, Folsom, Elk Grove, Citrus Heights, Rancho Cordova and Galt Area-Wide Storm Water Discharges From Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems Sacramento County, which also serves as a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit under the Federal Clean Water Act (NPDES No. CAS082597 municipal stormwater permit). As a co-permittee, the city is required to possess the necessary legal authority, and to implement appropriate procedures, to regulate the entry of pollutants and nonstormwater discharges into and from the city stormwater conveyance system.

E.    The citys municipal stormwater permit requires the city effectively to prohibit nonstormwater discharges from the incorporated area of the city into the city stormwater conveyance system except as otherwise permitted by federal law or the municipal stormwater permit.

F.    Nonstormwater discharges and stormwater pollutants that are discharged directly to waters of the state without passing through the city stormwater conveyance system are not subject to the requirements of the municipal stormwater permit. However, such discharges have the potential to degrade water quality and impact the quality of life for the people of the city. Regulation of such discharges by the city provides benefits to its people and protects the local environment.

G.    The city council finds in this regard that the provisions of this chapter are necessary to provide the city with the legal authority necessary to implement and otherwise comply with the requirements of its municipal stormwater permit. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.020 Purpose and intent.
A.    This chapter is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution which authorizes the city to exercise its police power to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. While stormwater runoff is one step in the natural cycle of water, human activities, including, but not limited to, agriculture, construction, manufacturing and the operation of an urban infrastructure, may result in undesirable discharges of pollutants and certain sediments. Such discharges may accumulate in the city stormwater conveyance system, local drainage channels and waterways and eventually may be deposited in the waters of the United States. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses, water bodies and wetlands within the incorporated area of the city in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and municipal stormwater permit No. CAS082597 by controlling the contribution of urban pollutants to stormwater runoff which enters the city stormwater conveyance system.

B.    It is the intent of the city council in adopting this chapter to provide the city with the legal authority to accomplish the following goals:

1.    To reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable (MEP);

2.    To effectively prohibit nonstormwater discharges into the city stormwater conveyance system;

3.    To comply with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and NPDES municipal stormwater permit No. CAS082597 as they apply to the discharge of pollutants into and from the city stormwater conveyance system;

4.    To fully implement the citys comprehensive stormwater management program as described in the current edition of the stormwater quality improvement plan approved by the regional water board;

5.    To protect the physical integrity and function of the city stormwater conveyance system from the effects of pollutants and materials other than stormwater;

6.    To prevent the contamination of groundwater as a result of pollution migration from the city stormwater conveyance system;

7.    To promote cost effective management and beneficial use of sediments in the city stormwater conveyance system;

8.    To protect the health and safety of maintenance personnel and the public who may be exposed to pollutants in the city stormwater conveyance system;

9.    To provide for the recovery of regulatory costs incurred by the city in the implementation of the comprehensive stormwater management program, including, but not limited to, enforcement activities, inspections, investigations, sampling and monitoring; and

10.    To establish appropriate enforcement procedures and penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.030 Definitions.
A.    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

Administrator means the public works director and his or her designees.

Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibition of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable pollutant discharges directly or indirectly to the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters. BMPs shall also be defined to include structural controls, treatment controls, source controls, training requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, and drainage from raw materials storage.

Business means any commercial/industrial/retail business, enterprise, trade, service, calling, vocation, profession, or any means of livelihood whether or not carried on for gain or profit.

City council means the city council of the city of Folsom.

City stormwater conveyance system or city storm drain system means those public and manmade facilities within the incorporated area of the city which are owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city by which stormwater may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, water quality basins, detention basins, constructed wetlands, artificial channels, aqueducts, canyons, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, sumps, pumping stations, drain inlets and storm drains.

County means the county of Sacramento.

Discharge means the release or placement of any pollutant into the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters.

Discharger means any person who discharges, or causes to discharge, either directly or indirectly, stormwater or any other material into the city storm drain system or receiving waters.

Illicit connection means any physical connection to the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters which is not expressly authorized by the city.

Illicit discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system or receiving waters that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes all nonstormwater discharges except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit, or discharges that are authorized by the regional water board.

Implementing agency means the agency or department designated by the administrator to enforce the provisions of this chapter with respect to a particular site, facility or industry category.

Industry or industrial activity means any service, business, enterprise, or any other activity conducted by any person for the purpose of monetary or other compensation, or in support of or promotion of such activity. This term shall also mean any similar activity conducted by a nonprofit corporation as defined by the state of California.

Material means any substance, including, but not limited to, raw materials, finished products, garbage and debris, lawn clippings, leaves and other vegetation, biological and fecal waste, sediment and sludge, oil and grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners and any fluid or solid containing chemicals.

Municipal stormwater permit means NPDES Permit No. CAS082597, including any amendments thereto or successor permits, issued by the regional water board to the city, the selected incorporated cities within the boundaries of the county, and the county of Sacramento.

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or NPDES permit means a permit issued by either the regional water board or the state water board pursuant to Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 13370) of Division 7 of the Water Code to control discharges from point sources to waters of the United States.

New development means activities to create urban and suburban forms on previously undeveloped land, including, but not limited to, land disturbing activities; structural development (including construction or installation of a building or structure); creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the city stormwater conveyance system or directly to the receiving waters that is not composed exclusively of stormwater.

Person means any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, public agency, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

Pollutant means any contaminant or other substance which, if present in sufficient quantities or concentrations, can cause exceedance of receiving water limitations defined in the municipal stormwater permit, or any successor permit, or otherwise cause a violation of the municipal stormwater permit. Pollutant may include, but is not limited to, solid waste, sewage, garbage, medical waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, radioactive material, dredged soil, rock, sand, industrial waste, feces, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, enterococcus, volatile organic carbon, surfactants, oil and grease, petroleum hydrocarbon, organic solvents, metals, phenols, pesticides, nutrients, suspended or settleable solids, materials causing an increase in biochemical or chemical oxygen or total organic carbon, substances which alter pH, and those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act.

Potential discharger means any person who, by nature of the enterprise, activity or business in which such person is engaged, or by the use, possession or ownership of specified types of building, facility, equipment or materials, is determined by the administrator to generate or have the capacity to generate pollutants which have significant potential to be discharged to the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters.

Premises means any building, lot, parcel or land, or portion thereof, whether improved or unimproved.

Private storm drain system means those manmade facilities within the city that are owned, operated, maintained or controlled by any person other than the city, by which stormwater may be conveyed to the city storm drain system or to receiving waters, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, water quality basins, detention basins, constructed wetlands, artificial channels, aqueducts, curbs, gutters, ditches, sumps, pumping stations, storm drain inlets, and storm drains.

Prohibited discharge means any nonstormwater discharge to the city stormwater conveyance system or directly to the receiving waters, which is not otherwise specifically authorized by this chapter, the regional water board, state or federal law, or an NPDES permit.

Receiving water limitations means those restrictions and prohibitions defined and listed in the municipal stormwater permit or any successor permit.

Receiving waters means surface bodies of water, as defined by the municipal stormwater permit, including, but not limited to, creeks and rivers, which serve as discharge points for the city stormwater conveyance system.

Regional water board means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region.

Sacramento Stormwater Quality Partnership is the name referring to the group of permittees covered by the municipal stormwater permit, including the county of Sacramento and the cities of Citrus Heights, Elk Grove, Folsom, Galt, Rancho Cordova and Sacramento.

Significant industrial activity means any industrial activity, individual industrial facility, or class of industrial facilities which is identified as a priority industry in the municipal stormwater permit. Significant industrial activity can also mean any industrial activity, individual industrial facility, or class of industrial facilities determined by the administrator to discharge (or have the potential to discharge) pollutants into stormwater, or nonstormwater in discharges, in quantities or concentrations which may contribute to or cause an exceedance of receiving water limitations.

Significant redevelopment means the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surfaces on an already developed site. Significant redevelopment includes, but is not limited to, expansion of a building footprint, addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

State Construction General Permit means the State Water Resources Control Boards National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities Order No. 2009-0009-DWQ, NPDES Permit No. CAS000002 and any successor documents.

State Industrial General Permit means the State Water Resources Control Boards Water Quality Order No. 97-03-DWQ, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General Permit No. CAS000001, Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Storm Water Associated With Industrial Activities Excluding Construction Activities and any successor documents.

Stormwater means surface runoff and drainage resulting from storm events and snowmelt.

Stormwater Quality Improvement Plan (SQIP) is a comprehensive description of the permittees program, including various program elements and associated activities, collectively developed by the permittees in accordance with the municipal stormwater permit. Implementation of the SQIP is intended to facilitate compliance with the municipal stormwater permit.

Threatened prohibited discharge means any condition or activity which does not currently result in a prohibited discharge but has a substantial likelihood of resulting in a prohibited discharge.

Waters of the state means any surface water or groundwater, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the state.

Waters of the United States has the same meaning as set forth in Part 122.2 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations or any successor provision.

B.    Any term(s) defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, in the NPDES regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and/or in the municipal stormwater permit that are not specifically defined in subsection A of this section shall, when used in this chapter, have the same meaning as set forth in such act or regulations. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.040 Construction.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and any acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and NPDES Permit No. CA 0082597 and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law, regulation, order or permit, the requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health and safety shall govern. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.050 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all dischargers and potential dischargers located within the incorporated area of the city and all dischargers or potential dischargers that discharge either directly or indirectly into the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.060 Regulatory consistency.
The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over and are controlling with respect to any conflicting or inconsistent provisions in this code. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.070 Compliance disclaimer.
Compliance by any person with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements relating to the control of pollutant discharges or protection of stormwater quality, or both. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.080 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof without regard to whether any other section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter would subsequently be declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.090 Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the administrator shall be responsible for the administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the administrator may be delegated by the administrator to other employees or, upon the approval of the city council, to employees of other public agencies. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.100 Disclaimer of liability.
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

Article II. Prohibited Discharges

8.70.110 Prohibited discharge.
Except as provided in Section 8.70.120, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any nonstormwater discharge into any of the following:

A.    The storm drain system.

B.    Receiving waters.

C.    A private storm drain system, where the design of the system will not prevent the nonstormwater discharge from reaching the city storm drain system or receiving waters. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.120 Exceptions to discharge prohibition.
The following discharges to the city stormwater conveyance system are exempt from the otherwise applicable discharge prohibition set forth in Section 8.70.110:

A.    Any discharge regulated under an NPDES permit issued to the discharger, and administered by the state pursuant to Chapter 5.5 of Division 7 of the Water Code; provided, that any such discharge is in compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit and all other applicable laws and regulations.

B.    Any discharge from the following activities; provided, that any such discharge does not cause or contribute to the violation of any receiving water limitation as determined by the administrator.

1.    Diverted stream flows;

2.    Rising groundwaters;

3.    Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20);

4.    Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

5.    Foundation drains;

6.    Springs;

7.    Water from crawl space pumps;

8.    Footing drains;

9.    Air conditioning condensation;

10.    Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

11.    Water line flushing;

12.    Landscape irrigation;

13.    Discharges from potable water sources;

14.    Uncontaminated irrigation water;

15.    Individual residential car washing;

16.    De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges;

17.    Lawn watering; and

18.    Street wash water.

C.    Emergency firefighting flows (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property) do not require immediate implementation of BMPs and are not prohibited.

D.    Any discharges which the administrator, the county health officer or the regional water board determines in writing are necessary for the protection of public health or safety.

E.    Additional categories of nonstormwater discharges which do not cause or contribute to the violation of any receiving water limitation may be exempted from the otherwise applicable prohibition by the administrator upon approval of the executive officer of the regional water board, as provided in the municipal stormwater permit. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.130 Exception to otherwise applicable exemptions.
Notwithstanding the exemptions provided for in Section 8.70.120, if the regional water board or the administrator determines that a discharge which is otherwise exempt from the prohibition on discharges causes or significantly contributes to the violation of any receiving water limitation or is identified as a source of pollutants to waters of the state, or is otherwise a danger to public health or safety, the administrator may give written notice to the owner or operator of the facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the discharge at issue following expiration of the thirty-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of such thirty-day period, any such discharge shall be unlawful. Upon finding that a continuance of the discharge poses an immediate significant threat to the environment or to public health and safety, the administrator may waive the thirty-day waiting period and require immediate cessation of the discharge. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.140 General discharge prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, any pollutant to the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters which results in, or contributes to, a violation of the municipal stormwater permit. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.150 Threatened prohibited discharge.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, or cause to be maintained, a threatened prohibited discharge after having received notice of the administrators determination as to the existence of a threatened prohibited discharge. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.160 Illicit connections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, use or maintain, or cause to establish, use or maintain, any illicit connection. Illicit connections shall be subject to removal and abatement by the city pursuant to Chapters 1.08 to 1.10 of this code. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.170 Negligence or intent not required.
A violation of the provisions of this article shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

Article III. Reduction of Pollutants in Stormwater

8.70.200 General requirements.
Any person engaged in activities which may result in nonstormwater or pollutants entering the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters shall undertake all measures to eliminate or reduce the risk of nonstormwater and/or pollutant discharges to the maximum extent practicable. The following requirements shall apply:

A.    Business Related Activities.

1.    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The administrator may require any business in the city that is engaged in activities that may result in nonstormwater and/or pollutant discharges to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan in accordance with requirements established by the administrator.

2.    Coordination with Hazardous Materials Release Response Plans and Inventory. Any business requiring a hazardous materials release response and inventory plan under Chapter 6.95 (commencing with Section 25500) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting nonstormwater discharges and illicit discharges, and requiring the discharge of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.

3.    Coordination with Hazardous Waste Generator Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures. Any business requiring a hazardous waste generator contingency plan and emergency procedures pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 66265.51 to 66265.56, shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting nonstormwater discharges and illicit discharges, and requiring the discharge of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.

B.    Development/Redevelopment.

1.    The administrator may establish requirements to control the long-term, post construction discharge of runoff, nonstormwater discharges and/or pollutants from new development or significant redevelopment to comply with the municipal stormwater permit. The requirements for new development and significant redevelopment may include, but are not limited to, standards and specifications for site design and design, construction and maintenance of control measures. Control measures may include, but are not limited to, BMPs for runoff reduction/low impact development, pollutant source control or water quality treatment.

2.    The administrator may require a property owner to establish, document and conduct a maintenance program, subject to city approval, for the private storm drain system or any BMP that they own related to said property, or to ensure continued compliance with city/manufacturer/industry performance standards for the BMP. This requirement shall apply to BMPs required by the city or voluntarily installed on the property. Such maintenance may be required to comply with the municipal stormwater permit or in cases where the administrator determines that maintenance is necessary to protect public safety, health, infrastructure or the environment.

3.    Any person associated with construction activities in the city shall prevent nonstormwater and/or pollutants from entering the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters and comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances or regulations including but not limited to the general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity issued by the State Water Resources Control Board and any city ordinance, regulation or standard related to development and grading.

C.    Compliance with General and/or Individual Stormwater Permits. Each discharger subject to any general and/or individual stormwater permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the city of Folsom shall comply with the requirements of such permit. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.210 Containment and notification of spills.
Any person owning or occupying a premises that has knowledge of any discharge of pollutants, any nonstormwater discharge or threatened prohibited discharge, from the premises to the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and otherwise minimize any such discharge and notify the city within twenty-four hours of such prohibited discharge or threatened prohibited discharge. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.220 Compliance with best management practices.
Every person undertaking any activity or use of a premises which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, or other nonstormwater discharges shall (1) comply with those best management practices or pollution control measures as may be established by the administrator and (2) properly operate and maintain those best management practices or control measures utilized on the premises to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, or other nonstormwater discharges as required by the administrator. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.230 Best management practices.
The administrator may require BMPs which shall be implemented by persons conducting activities associated with certain activities as designated by the administrator. Those activities for which BMPs may be required include, but are not limited to, new development and/or significant redevelopment, construction, maintenance, storage, material handling, food handling, waste handling, air pollution control, water and wastewater treatment, heating and cooling, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle washing, maintenance, loading, and fueling, and cleaning (including carpets, streets, sidewalks, buildings, etc.). BMPs may be required for individual activities, premises or businesses; or may be required generally for categories of activities or equipment.

Any discharger who relies on a structural BMP to achieve continued compliance with specified performance requirements, or with any provisions of this chapter, shall establish and conduct maintenance procedures to ensure the ongoing effectiveness of the BMP. Any such maintenance procedures may be subject to approval by the administrator. Maintenance procedures established pursuant to this subsection must be appropriate for the site conditions and design of the BMP and, as applicable, shall conform to manufacturer recommendations. Upon written notification from the administrator, the discharger shall keep documentation that demonstrates adequate maintenance of the structural BMP for a minimum of five years. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

Article IV. Inspection and Monitoring

8.70.300 Scope of inspections.
A.    To carry out the purposes of this chapter, the administrator may, at any reasonable hour of the day, or as authorized pursuant to Title 13 (commencing with Section 1822.50) of Part 3 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, do any of the following:

1.    Enter and inspect public or private property, including any business, plant, construction site, disposal site, transfer facility, or any establishment or any other place deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter and shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes, including, but not limited to, compliance with requirements of the municipal stormwater permit, visual evidence, complaints received, knowledge or physical evidence of industrial activities or other pollutant sources, random sampling, sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit connections, discharge of nonstormwater to the city storm drain system or similar factors.

2.    Complete any sampling activities necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter. Upon request, split samples shall be given to the person, or representative of the person, from whose property the samples were obtained.

3.    Investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the city storm drain system.

4.    Verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:

a.    Identify products produced, process conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property;

b.    Identify point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems, pollutants and other discharges from the property;

c.    Investigate the drainage patterns of the premises, including natural and graded slopes, and artificial conveyance systems;

d.    Establish the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system;

e.    Locate any prohibited condition, illicit connection, or the source of any prohibited discharge; and

f.    Verify implementation and maintenance of BMPs.

5.    Inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment, or any stationary equipment, which may reasonably be believed to be used by the business for business-related activities and to be associated with industrial sources of pollutants or with nonstormwater discharges.

6.    Inspect and copy all records of the owner or occupant of any premises relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including, but not limited to, materials and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics or diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, monitoring program plans or any other records relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges or the potential discharge of pollutants to the city storm drain system. In addition, the administrator may require the owner or occupant to furnish, within a reasonable time period, copies of all such records.

7.    Inspect, sample and test any are runoff, soils area (including any groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for the contribution of pollutants to the city storm drain system. The administrator may investigate the integrity and layout of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems or other pipelines on the premises using appropriate tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The administrator may take photographs or video/digital recordings, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the premises.

8.    Erect and maintain monitoring and sampling devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the city storm drain system.

9.    The administrator may require regular reports from a premises owner and/or business owner regarding the provisions of this chapter whose premises discharges to the city stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters.

B.    City-approved construction permits including approved building permits shall constitute permission by premises owner and/or business owner for administrator or designee to enter upon premises and conduct any and all inspections, monitoring and testing necessary to determine compliance with this code and approved permits.

C.    The business owner and/or premises owner shall bear all costs incurred by the city associated with the administration and enforcement of this chapter including, but not limited to, investigation, testing, reports, and monitoring. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.310 Establishment of stormwater management and discharge control fund.
Fees to defray the cost of processing applications, determining compliance, and monitoring compliance pursuant to this title may be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.320 Commercial and industrial facility inspections.
A.    The city and Sacramento County are co-permittees under NPDES Permit No. CAS082597 (municipal stormwater permit) which requires regular compliance inspections and enforcement at certain commercial and industrial facilities as defined by the municipal stormwater permit. Sacramento County operates an inspection, investigation and enforcement program that enforces compliance with environmental and water quality requirements by commercial and industrial facilities located within the county.

B.    Under Article 11, Section 8 of the California Constitution, and applicable provisions of the city and Sacramento County Charters, the city and Sacramento County may enter into agreements for Sacramento County to perform specified municipal functions within the city.

C.    In order to provide for effective and efficient administration and enforcement of this chapter with respect to certain commercial and industrial facilities within the city, and to ensure compliance with NPDES Permit No. CAS082597, the city council and the Sacramento County board of supervisors may enter into an agreement or agreements for Sacramento County to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter with respect to certain commercial and industrial facilities located within the city, by including certain commercial and industrial facilities located within the city in Sacramento Countys commercial and industrial compliance program. If the city council and the Sacramento County board of supervisors enter into such an agreement or agreements:

1.    The city may authorize Sacramento County and its authorized official(s) and employee(s), or other entity, to enforce the provisions of this chapter as they apply to certain commercial and industrial facilities located within the city, in accordance with the provisions of such agreement(s).

2.    The city may authorize Sacramento County and its authorized official(s) and employee(s), or other entity, to take any action with respect to certain commercial and industrial facilities located within the city, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such agreement(s).

3.    The city may establish and collect, or authorize Sacramento County, or other entity, to establish and collect from applicable commercial and industrial facilities located within the city such fees as may be necessary to cover the actual costs incurred by the city, Sacramento County, or other entity, to include these facilities in its commercial and industrial compliance program; provided, that the fees are established and collected in accordance with the provisions of such agreement(s) and all applicable legal requirements. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004)

Article V. Enforcement

8.70.400 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive.

B.    The administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.

C.    If the city council and the Sacramento County board of supervisors enter into an agreement for Sacramento County to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter with respect to certain commercial and industrial facility inspections within the city, pursuant to Section 8.70.320 of this chapter, any administrative or civil enforcement by Sacramento County of any provision of this chapter with respect to such facilities shall be governed by and conducted pursuant to Chapter 15.12 of the Sacramento County Code, and the provisions of subsections A and B of this section and Sections 8.70.410 and 8.70.420 of this chapter shall not apply. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.410 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020 of this code. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 of this code shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014 of this code, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a level E violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012 of this code. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(5) and may be imposed on a per day basis for each violation. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.70.420 Enforcement procedures, notice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty, or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09 of this code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 to 1.09.052, inclusive, of this code shall apply.

B.    Notwithstanding other provisions in Chapters 1.08 and 1.09, a notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, of this code. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A) of this code, a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027 of this code. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004: Ord. 922  1 (part), 2000)

8.40.430 Injunctions/civil penalties.
When any person has engaged in, is engaged in, or threatens to engage in any acts or practices which violate this chapter, or any resolution, rule, or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, the city attorney may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an order enjoining those acts or practices for an order directing compliance, and/or seek other civil remedies. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012)

Article VI. Recovery of Cost

8.70.500 Abatement.
A.    Any person engaged in activities which cause, allow, facilitate or result in a prohibited discharge or threatened prohibited discharge, whether on public or private property, shall bear all costs incurred by the city as a result of such prohibited discharge or threatened prohibited discharge including, but not limited to, the cost of abatement, cleanup and disposal.

B.    The administrator will keep an account of the administrative, labor, equipment and other costs of abatement, cleanup and recovery.

C.    Cost recovery shall include, but not be limited to, wage rates plus benefits, overhead expenses, vehicle and equipment usage costs. The purpose of cost recovery is to require the person/entity engaged in an activity requiring abatement to bear the full cost of response, cleanup, follow-up and other activities associated with a discharge. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004)

8.70.510 Regulatory actions.
Any person determined to be in violation of this chapter whose activities result in the city being in violation of any federal, state or local statute, ordinance, regulation or permit shall bear all costs incurred by the city resulting from or related to any correction of a violation or the payment of monetary sanctions, or both. (Ord. 1157  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1018  2 (part), 2004)

Chapter 8.80
REGULATION OF UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES
Sections:

8.80.010    Purpose and intent.

8.80.020    Definitions.

8.80.030    Permits.

8.80.040    Renewal of permits.

8.80.050    Requirements and maintenance.

8.80.060    Revocation of permit, removal of unattended donation boxes and liability.

8.80.070    ViolationPenalty.

8.80.080    Appeal to city manager.

8.80.090    Administrative fees.

8.80.100    Exemption.

8.80.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement of unattended donation boxes within the city. The procedures and requirements of this chapter are enacted to:

A.    Promote the communitys health, safety, and welfare by regulating unattended donation boxes for clothing or other salvageable personal property within the city;

B.    Ensure that unattended donation boxes do not pose a hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic;

C.    Ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the unattended donation boxes where it can be scattered by adverse weather conditions, animal contacts and human activities; and

D.    Establish criteria that avoid attracting vermin, unsightliness, and public health hazard. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.020 Definitions.
A.    Director means director of the community development department of the city of Folsom or designee.

B.    Operator means a person, entity, association or organization who places, maintains or operates unattended donation box(es) to solicit donations of salvageable personal property.

C.    Permittee means the property owner who is issued a permit authorizing placement of unattended donation box(es).

D.    Property owner means the person, entity, association or organization who owns the real property where the unattended donation box(es) are or are proposed to be located.

E.    Residential district includes residential zoning districts as established pursuant to Title 17, including but not limited to R-1-L, R-1-ML, R-1-M, R-2, R-3, RM, R-4, PD, and adopted specific plans with applicable residential zoning districts.

F.    Unattended donation box means any unattended container, receptacle, or similar device that is located on any property within the city used for soliciting and collecting donations of clothing or other salvageable personal property. This term does not include recycle bins for the collection of recyclable materials governed or regulated by the zoning code. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.030 Permits.
A.    Unless otherwise exempt, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any property owner or operator to place, operate, maintain or allow unattended donation boxes on real property unless the property owner first obtains a permit pursuant to this chapter and the donation box is placed, operated and maintained in accordance with all provisions in this chapter.

B.    The permit application shall be made on a form provided by the director and shall include the following information:

1.    The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone number of the applicant;

2.    Written proof sufficient to establish that the operator who will utilize the unattended donation box is qualified to solicit donations of salvageable personal property pursuant to California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 148.3, as amended;

3.    The text of the disclosures that will be made on the unattended donation box as required by Section 8.80.050(A)(3); and

4.    The physical address of the property owners real property and a drawing sufficient to indicate the proposed location of the unattended donation box on the property owners real property, as well as the size of the proposed unattended donation box.

C.    Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by city council resolution. This fee shall be in addition to any fee or tax imposed by the city pursuant to any other provision of this code.

D.    Applications shall be filed with the director.

E.    Within thirty days of receiving a completed application, the director shall issue a permit or deny the issuance of a permit.

F.    The director shall not issue a permit unless:

1.    The applicant has submitted a complete and accurate application accompanied by the applicable fee;

2.    The operator who will maintain or operate the unattended donation box is qualified to solicit donations of salvageable personal property pursuant to California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 148.3, as amended;

3.    The proposed location and placement of the unattended donation box on the property owners real property is in compliance with all applicable laws and will not impede pedestrian, bicycle, site distances onto adjacent streets or vehicular traffic.

G.    If the director denies an application, the director shall state, in writing, the specific reasons for denial.

H.    Permit issued hereunder shall be valid for one unattended donation box. Multiple unattended donation boxes shall have their own individual permits.

I.    The term of the permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance.

J.    No person or operator to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer, assign, or convey such permit to another person or operator.

K.    Prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee may voluntarily cancel the permit by notifying the director in writing of the intent to cancel the permit. The permit shall become void upon the directors receipt of a written notice of intent to cancel the permit. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.040 Renewal of permits.
A.    A permittee may apply for permit renewal by submitting to the director, before the expiration of the permit, a renewal application and a nonrefundable renewal fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

B.    The director shall either approve or deny the renewal of a permit within thirty days of receipt of the complete renewal application and payment of the renewal fee.

C.    The director shall approve the renewal of a permit if he or she finds that no circumstances existed during the term of the permit, existed at the time of submission of an application for renewal, or existed at any time during the review of the application for renewal that are inconsistent with any finding required for approval of a new permit as specified in Section 8.80.030 or that would justify the revocation of the permit as specified in Section 8.80.060. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.050 Requirements and maintenance.
A.    A permittee shall operate and maintain or cause to be operated and maintained all unattended donation boxes located in the city as follows:

1.    Unattended donation boxes shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust, and shall be free of graffiti;

2.    Unattended donation boxes shall be locked or otherwise secured;

3.    Unattended donation boxes shall contain the following contact information in two-inch type visible from the front of each unattended donation box: the name, address, email, and phone number of both the permittee and operator;

4.    Unattended donation boxes shall be serviced and emptied as needed, but at least once per month, or within five business days of a request by the director.

B.    The permittee shall maintain or cause to be maintained the area surrounding the unattended donation boxes free of any junk, garbage, trash, debris or other refuse material.

C.    The permittee and operator shall be individually and severally responsible for abating and removing all junk, garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material in the area surrounding the unattended donation boxes within twenty-four hours of written or verbal notice from the city.

D.    The permittee and operator shall be individually and severally responsible for all costs for abating and removing any junk, garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material from the area surrounding the unattended donation boxes.

E.    It shall be unlawful for any property owner or operator to place an unattended donation box in any residential district.

F.    No unattended donation box shall be placed within four hundred feet from another unattended donation box.

G.    No unattended donation box shall be placed on required parking spaces or within the site triangle as defined in Section 17.57.070(H)(2).

H.    No more than one unattended donation box shall be placed on each parcel of real property. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.060 Revocation of permit, removal of unattended donation boxes and liability.
The director shall have the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder if any of the grounds upon which he or she may refuse to issue an initial permit exists. In addition, the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this code or other law shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. The director shall provide a written notification to the permittee stating the specific grounds for revocation. Upon revocation, the unattended donation box shall be removed from the permittees real property within thirty calendar days and, if not removed within this time period, the city may remove, store and dispose of the unattended donation box at the permittees sole cost and expense. Upon revocation, a permittee shall be prohibited from applying for a permit for a period of one year. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to this code or as otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.070 ViolationPenalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.080 Appeal to city manager.
Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the director in granting or denying an application for a permit under this chapter or in revoking or refusing to renew a permit issued hereunder may appeal the decision to the city manager in accordance with Section 2.08.060. The appeal shall be made by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the decision of the director. The city manager shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty calendar days and, notwithstanding other provisions in Section 2.08.060, the decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.090 Administrative fees.
The city council may, by resolution, establish reasonable fees and deposits to defray the cost of processing applications, proposals and for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

8.80.100 Exemption.
Unattended donation boxes located entirely within the interior of a building are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1130  1 (part), 2010)

Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Chapters:

I. Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government

9.04    Interference with Fire System

9.08    Interference with Police Dog

II. Offenses Against the Person

(Reserved)

III. Offenses Against Public Health and Safety

9.20    Emergency Alarms

9.28    Explosives and Flammables

9.34    Hazardous Materials Disclosure

9.35    Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances

9.36    Fireworks

9.37    Fire Danger in Open Public Space

IV. Offenses Against Public Decency

9.42    Objectionable Behavior in Public View

9.45    Display of Harmful Matter in Public View

V. Offenses Against Public Peace

(Reserved)

VI. Offenses Against Property

9.60    Distribution of Advertising

9.64    Trespass

9.65    Abatement of Graffiti

9.68    Use of Park Facilities

9.69    Use of Skate Parks

VII. Consumer Protection

9.76    Solicitation

VIII. Offenses By or Against Minors

9.80    Curfew

9.85    Truancy

IX. Weapons

9.88    Firearms

X. Substance Abuse

9.90    Commission on Substance Abuse

9.95    Public Consumption of Marijuana

9.100    Camping

9.105    Public Consumption and Possession of Alcoholic Beverages

Chapter 9.04
INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE SYSTEM
Sections:

9.04.010    Right-of-way.

9.04.020    Fire equipment damage prohibited.

9.04.030    Driving over fire hose prohibited.

9.04.040    False alarm prohibited.

9.04.045    Enforcement.

9.04.050    Penalties.

9.04.060    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

9.04.010 Right-of-way.
In case of fire the right-of-way shall be given to the fire apparatus and to the chiefs car. (Prior code  5064)

9.04.020 Fire equipment damage prohibited.
No person shall wilfully and maliciously, injure or damage any fire engine, hose, or apparatus of any kind, or obstruct or impede in any manner the free movement of equipment or apparatus at any time, or obstruct or impede in any manner free access to any fire hydrant, fire house or apparatus in the city. (Ord. 289  1, 1972: prior code  5073)

9.04.030 Driving over fire hose prohibited.
No person shall wilfully and maliciously, drive, haul, or cause to be hauled or driven, any vehicle or thing on or upon or over any fire hose at any time, or ride, drive or cause to be ridden, driven, or moved any horse or other animal over or upon same. (Ord. 289  2, 1972: prior code  5074)

9.04.040 False alarm prohibited.
No person shall wilfully turn in, or cause to be turned in, any false fire alarm. The fire chief may turn in an alarm for tests or fire drills if he deems the same desirable. (Prior code  5075)

9.04.045 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The fire chief or designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 847  2 (part), 1996)

9.04.050 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in Section 9.04.050(A) of this chapter, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A). (Ord. 847  2 (part), 1996)

9.04.060 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be no less than 24 hours and no more than 7 days. (Ord. 847  2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 9.08
INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOG
Sections:

9.08.010    Interference with police dog.

9.08.015    Enforcement.

9.08.020    Penalties.

9.08.025    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

9.08.010 Interference with police dog.
No person shall wilfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the Folsom police department or other law enforcement agency in the performance of the functions or duties of such department or agency, or interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by such department or agency or any other member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of such departments or agency or of such officer or member. (Ord. 558  1, 1985)

9.08.015 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The police chief or designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 847  4 (part), 1996)

9.08.020 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in Section 9.08.020(A) of this chapter, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(B). (Ord. 847  2 (part), 1996)

9.08.025 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 847  2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 9.20
EMERGENCY ALARMS
Sections:

9.20.010    Definitions.

9.20.020    Permit for alarm system requiredCommercial fire alarm systems.

9.20.030    Application for permit.

9.20.040    Application for alarm permitInspection, issuance or denial.

9.20.050    Duration of permit.

9.20.060    Suspension or revocation of permits.

9.20.070    Notice of appeal.

9.20.080    False alarm penalty.

9.20.090    Alarm system standards and regulations.

9.20.100    Permit notification.

9.20.110    Fees.

9.20.120    Limitations on liability.

9.20.130    PenaltiesAdministrative and criminal remedies.

9.20.140    Application of this chapter.

9.20.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

Alarm agent means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, monitoring, responding to (excluding public safety officer), or causing others to respond to an alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility.

Alarm business means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other association conducting or engaged in the business of selling, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, servicing or monitoring any alarm system within the city, or any representative or employee of any such business.

Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device, or combination of devices, designed to signal the presence of a fire, intrusion, hazard, or other emergency situation which when activated transmits, relays or emits any signal intended to summon, or that could reasonably be expected to summon, a response from the Folsom police or fire department whether over telephone lines, wirelessly, or via any other method of signal transmission.

Applicant means a person, firm or corporation who files an application for permit as provided for in this chapter, including any government agency not legally exempt from city regulations, but excluding the city of Folsom itself.

Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of a fire or of an intrusion on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated.

False alarm means any alarm signal, either silent or audible, originating from any alarm system and causing a response from the Folsom police or fire department, where the emergency situation the alarm system was designed to detect does not exist. False alarms include any alarm signal caused by the actions of the person that owns, possesses, or controls the premises served by the alarm system, or by any malfunction of the alarm system. False alarms do not include any alarm signal resulting from violent acts of nature or abnormal natural conditions, such as high winds, earthquakes, floods, fires or similar natural events. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.020 Permit for alarm system requiredCommercial fire alarm systems.
No person shall install or use an alarm system without first obtaining an alarm permit issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

This permit shall be in addition to any permit required by any other chapter of this code for the installation, alteration, or modification of fire alarm or fire detection systems and related equipment.

Commercial fire alarm systems shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.20. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.030 Application for permit.
Application for an alarm permit shall be filed with the chief of police or designee on forms provided by the city and the applicant shall, at the time of application, pay a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The application shall be signed and verified by the owner or lessee of the premises covered by any alarm system for which the permit is requested, and the application shall contain the following information:

A.    The location of the premises, type of premises, and business name (if applicable);

B.    The type of alarm: silent or audible; business or residential; burglary, robbery, fire, panic, or combination thereof;

C.    Name, address and work, home, and emergency telephone number of the subscriber;

D.    Name, address and telephone numbers of at least two persons who can respond at any time to open or secure the premises or to operate or deactivate the alarm system;

E.    Name, address and telephone number of the alarm business responsible for maintaining, monitoring, and/or repairing the alarm system; and

F.    Such other information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police or fire chief.

G.    The permit shall state that penalties may be imposed for false alarm incidents, and that the permit holder is responsible for such incidents. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.040 Application for alarm permitInspection, issuance or denial.
Upon receiving an application from any person for an alarm permit, the chief of police or fire chief may cause an inspection or investigation to be made of the system to determine if the system complies with the requirements of this chapter. If the proposed system complies with this chapter, a permit shall be issued. In the event an alarm permit is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal that decision in accordance with Section 9.20.070. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.050 Duration of permit.
Permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Applications for renewal of a permit shall be accompanied by a renewal fee established by resolution of the city council and any unpaid past due fees or penalties. Permits will not be renewed until all fees and fines have been paid. Renewals shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.060 Suspension or revocation of permits.
A.    In addition to imposition penalties as set forth in Section 9.20.130, the following actions shall constitute grounds for the immediate imposition of a temporary suspension of an alarm permit:

1.    The violation of any provision of this chapter;

2.    A false statement on the permit application;

3.    Assessment of three or more false alarm activations within any calendar year from January through December;

4.    Failure to pay any false alarm penalty in a timely manner;

5.    Failure to pay any penalty or fine assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction for any violation of this chapter in a timely manner or by the city;

6.    Failure of a subscriber to repair, or cause to be repaired, any malfunctioning alarm system within a reasonable time.

B.    Upon the suspension of any alarm permit, such permit shall not be reinstated until all outstanding fees, fines, penalties, charges and any assessed administrative sanctions have been paid or compliance is demonstrated, and the subscriber has supplied written documentation that appropriate repairs and/or personnel training have been completed to reduce or eliminate future false alarms.

C.    In addition to imposition of the remedies set forth in Section 9.20.080, the following shall constitute grounds for the permanent revocation of an alarm permit:

1.    Suspension of the alarm permit on three or more occasions within any calendar year from January through December;

2.    If, upon notification of suspension and order of disconnection of the alarm system, the subscriber fails or refuses to disconnect the alarm system and continues to operate the alarm system in violation of this chapter.

D.    The police department shall have no duty to respond to signals from a burglar alarm system after the alarm permit has been duly suspended or revoked as described in this section, and notice of that suspension or revocation and the future non-response from either or both departments is delivered to the permit holder and the alarm agent. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.070 Notice of appeal.
A. If any permittee is aggrieved by any action of the chief of police and/or the fire chief pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may appeal to the city manager, by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the appeal. This notice of appeal shall be filed not later than fifteen days after service of a notice of revocation as provided for in Section 9.20.060(D). The city manager, or duly authorized representative, shall, within fifteen days from the date on which the appeal is filed, hold a hearing, consider all relevant evidence produced by the alarm permittee, the chief of police, the fire chief and any other interested party, make findings and determine the merits of the appeal.

B. The city manager, or a duly authorized representative, shall within fifteen days of completion of the appeal hearing affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the chief of police or fire chief, and the city managers decision shall be final. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.080 False alarm penalty.
Any person who maintains, uses or possesses an alarm system, and which alarm has caused any false alarm, shall pay a false alarm penalty (burglar or fire false alarm) as established by resolution of the city council.

A false alarm fee will be charged from either the second or the third false alarm at the same location within any calendar year from January through December, depending on whether the location has a current alarm permit with accurate information on file with the city, or any time a false alarm is generated by an individual working on a fire alarm system or fire sprinkler system. In the latter case, the person responsible for initiating the false fire alarm will be billed.

Such penalty shall constitute a reasonable charge for defraying the estimated direct costs of an unnecessary emergency response, including administrative enforcement of appropriate false alarm penalties, as well as serve as a deterrent for continued false alarms from the alarmed facility. The penalty may be different for dissimilar types of alarm activities, and the city council may also increase penalties for repeat false alarm incidents or waive penalties for one or more initial false alarms as set forth in the resolution. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.090 Alarm system standards and regulations.
The chief of police shall adopt standards and regulations governing the installation, maintenance and operation of burglar alarm systems, which may be included as conditions to the permit, and may specify the type of equipment to be utilized to aid or assist responding emergency equipment. No person shall engage in the business of an alarm agent unless the name of that person and a copy of that persons state identification card are submitted to the chief of police. No fee or application shall be required for such registration by the city. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.100 Permit notification.
The city permit number assigned to an alarm system by the police department shall be given to the police and/or fire dispatcher at the time an alarm is reported to the police by an alarm company, a central monitoring station, a telephone answering service or any other business that monitors and reports alarms. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.110 Fees.
Fees prescribed in this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the city for doing or conducting business within the city. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.120 Limitations on liability.
The city is under no obligation or duty to any permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter, or the exercise of any privilege by any permittee hereunder, including but not limited to any defects in a police or fire alarm system, any delay in transmission of an alarm message to any emergency unit, or damage caused by delay in responding to any alarm by any city officer, employee or agent. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.130 PenaltiesAdministrative and criminal remedies.
The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other criminal, civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code shall prevent the city from using any other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this section or to abate a public nuisance. Violation of this chapter shall constitute a crime punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction in the discretion of the city attorney, or may be punished as an administrative matter in accordance with Section 1.09.010. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

9.20.140 Application of this chapter.
Any person who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, possesses, has installed or uses an alarm system which requires a permit under this chapter shall apply for and receive a permit, as provided in this chapter, no later than August 15, 2012. (Ord. 1166  3 (part), 2012)

Chapter 9.28
EXPLOSIVES AND FLAMMABLES
Sections:

9.28.010    VehicleStopping, standing, parking requirements.

9.28.020    VehicleSutter Street restricted.

9.28.030    FlammablesPermit required.

9.28.040    ExplosivesManufacture prohibited.

9.28.050    ExplosivesPermit required.

9.28.010 VehicleStopping, standing, parking requirements.
The operator of any truck or vehicle used for the hauling or delivery, in quantities of more than thirty gallons, of gasoline, benzine, naphtha, crude petroleum, or products of petroleum, or hydrocarbon liquid which will flash or emit an inflammable vapor at a temperature below one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit shall not stop, stand, or park such truck or vehicle on any street, alley, or public highway within the corporate limits of the city except for the time during which such vehicle is in process of being actually loaded or unloaded. (Prior code  5030)

9.28.020 VehicleSutter street restricted.
Through tank trucks hauling gasoline, benzine, naphtha, crude petroleum or products of petroleum, or hydrocarbon liquid which will flash or emit an inflammable vapor at a temperature below one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit shall not be driven or moved along Sutter Street except for the purpose of loading or unloading the truck or vehicle. (Prior code  5031)

9.28.030 FlammablesPermit required.
A permit for the handling or storage of flammable liquid or gas, except in sealed containers or approved safety cans of not more than one gallon capacity for class I flammable liquids, nor more than five gallons capacity for class II flammable liquids, as said class I and class II flammable liquids are defined by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, must be obtained from the fire chief. Tanks for storage of flammable liquids or gas must comply with Fire Underwriters rules as to construction and installation.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to tank trucks, tank cars, freight at the railroad station or in transit, tanks of automobiles and trucks. (Prior code  5032)

9.28.040 ExplosivesManufacture prohibited.
The manufacture of explosives within the city limits is prohibited. (Prior code  5033)

9.28.050 ExplosivesPermit required.
A permit shall be obtained from the chief of police to have, keep, use, store, or transport any explosives. (Ord. 267  1, 1971: prior code  5034)

Chapter 9.34
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE
Sections:

9.34.010    Findings and purpose.

9.34.020    Definitions.

9.34.030    Designation of a hazardous material.

9.34.040    Filing of a hazardous material disclosure form.

9.34.050    Administrative procedureDisclosure of information.

9.34.060    Content of the disclosure form.

9.34.070    Exemptions from disclosure.

9.34.080    Fees.

9.34.090    Enforcement.

9.34.100    Trade secrets.

9.34.010 Findings and purpose.
The city council finds and declares:

1.    Hazardous substances and hazardous wastes present in the community may pose acute and chronic health hazards to individuals who live and work in this city, and who are exposed to such substances as a result of fires, spills, industrial accidents, or other types of releases or emissions.

2.    The people who live and work in this city have a right and need to know of the use and potential hazards of hazardous materials in the community in order to plan for and respond to potential exposure to such materials.

3.    Basic information on the location, type, and the health risks of hazardous materials used, stored, or disposed of in the city is not now available to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and residents.

4.    It is the intent of the city council that this chapter recognize the communitys right and need for basic information on the use and disposal of hazardous materials in the city and that it establish an orderly system for the provision of such information.

5.    It is further the intent of the city council that the system of disclosure set forth in this chapter shall provide the information essential to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and residents in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such a way that the statutory privilege of trade secrecy is not abridged. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows:

1.    CAS number means the unique identification number assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Service to specific chemical substances.

2.    Chemical name means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Service.

3.    Common name means any designation or identification such as code name, code number, trade name, or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name.

4.    Disclosure form means the written request for information prepared pursuant to Section 9.34.060.

5.    EPA waste stream code means the identification number assigned pursuant to the regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to specific types of hazardous waste.

6.    Finance department means the director of finance of the city.

7.    Fire department means the Folsom city fire department and where in this chapter any authority or discretion is granted to the fire department such authority or discretion shall be exercised by the fire chief or his designated representative.

8.    Hazardous material means any hazardous substance or hazardous waste as defined in subdivisions 9 or 10 in this section, or any material designated pursuant to Section 9.34.030.

9.    Hazardous substance means any substance or product:

a.    For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 of the California Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation;

b.    Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter 1, Title 10, Appendix B, maintained and updated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

10.    Hazardous waste means hazardous or extremely hazardous waste as defined by Sections 25115 and 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code and set forth in Sections 66680 and 66685 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code.

11.    Handle means to generate, treat, store or dispose of a hazardous waste in any fashion.

12.    MSDS means a material safety data sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor.

13.    Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, city, county, district and the state, or any department or agency thereof.

14.    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment.

15.    SIC code means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification code to specific types of businesses.

16.    Use includes the handling, processing or storage of a hazardous substance.

17.    User means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste.

18.    Physician means any person who holds a valid certificate from the state of California to practice the healing arts.

19.    Carcinogen refers to a substance or agency which causes cancer. For purposes of this chapter, carcinogens are those substances specified on the list developed by the United States Department of Health and Human Services on its Second Annual Report on Carcinogens. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.030 Designation of a hazardous material.
A.    A material may be added to the list of hazardous materials set forth in Section 9.34.020 upon finding by the fire department that it satisfies the following criterion: the material, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety to the environment if released into the community.

B.    A material added to the list of hazardous materials pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be designated as either a hazardous substance or hazardous waste by the fire department. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.040 Filing of a hazardous material disclosure form.
A.    Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must annually submit a completed disclosure form to the finance department with the annual renewal of the business license. The fire department may specify in writing such other time for the submittal of the form as it deems appropriate in individual cases.

B.    A person not required to obtain a business license who uses or handles a hazardous substance within the city shall submit a completed disclosure form to the fire department by September first of each year.

C.    In addition to the annual report as required by subsections A or B of this section, any person who uses or handles hazardous materials shall submit a completed disclosure form within fifteen days of any:

1.    New use or significant change in the use or handling of a hazardous material;

2.    New use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material;

3.    Change of business address;

4.    Change of business ownership; or

5.    Change of business name.

The user shall submit a disclosure form detailing the new use or handling or other appropriate information. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.050 Administrative procedureDisclosure of information.
A.    Upon receipt of a disclosure form, the finance department shall verify that the name and address on the form are correct and shall forward the disclosure form to the fire department for review and final approval.

B.    The fire department shall maintain files of all disclosure forms received. Subject to the provisions of Section 9.34.100 relating to trade secrets, these files shall be open to the public during normal business hours. The disclosure forms shall be filed by street address and parcel number and cross-referenced by the SIC number(s) and the CAS number(s) or EPA waste stream codes listed on the disclosure form.

C.    The fire department shall keep a record of all persons who request access to the hazardous materials disclosure forms. The record shall include:

1.    The persons name, address and telephone number;

2.    Name and address of the person, business or governmental agency such person represents; and

3.    Identity of the specific file(s) examined or requested, or requested to be copied. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.060 Content of the disclosure form.
A.    The disclosure form shall be prepared by the fire department after consulting with interested parties. The disclosure form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

1.    A copy of the MSDS for every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form; provided, however, that no such copy need be provided for any hazardous substance for which the fire department has on file a copy of the MSDS;

2.    A listing of the chemical name, any common names, and the CAS number of every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form;

3.    The EPA waste stream code of every hazardous waste handled by the person completing the disclosure form;

4.    The maximum amount of each hazardous material disclosed in either subdivision 2 or 3 of this subsection which is handled or used at any one time by the user over the course of the year;

5.    Sufficient information on how and where the hazardous materials disclosed in subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection are handled or used by the user to allow fire and safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency responses to potential releases of the hazardous materials;

6.    Sufficient information on any releases of the hazardous materials disclosed in subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection into the air, water, sewers, or land to permit the city to understand the sources and content of hazardous material releases;

7.    The SIC code of the business, if applicable;

8.    The name and phone number of the person representing the business and able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during nonbusiness hours.

B.    Upon request therefor, all users shall provide other pertinent information, which is in addition to the information required in the disclosure form filed pursuant to subsection A of this section, to the following:

1.    To the fire department where it is determined that such other pertinent information is necessary to protect the public health, safety or environment;

2.    To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient.

Any additional information furnished under this subsection shall be subject to the trade secret provisions of Section 9.34.100. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.070 Exemptions from disclosure.
The following materials, persons or entities shall be exempt from disclosure under this chapter:

1.    A material designated as a hazardous material by this chapter solely by its presence on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials shall be exempt from the requirement that a MSDS be submitted with the disclosure form;

2.    Hazardous substances contained in food, drug, cosmetic or tobacco products;

3.    Any person using or handling less than five hundred pounds or fifty-five gallons a month, whichever is the lesser, of a hazardous material shall be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the fire department has provided notice that he or she has lowered the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific hazardous material in response to public health concerns. The exemption of this subsection shall not apply to the using or handling of carcinogens except to the extent that such carcinogens are handled or used solely for personal purposes;

4.    Hazardous substances contained solely in consumer products packaged for use by and distributed to the general public;

5.    Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident thereto, provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the provisions of 49 Code of Federal Regulations, subchapter c;

6.    No MSDS shall be required for any hazardous substance for which an MSDS is not available at the time disclosure is required under Section 9.34.040; provided, however, that such MSDS shall be submitted to the fire department within fifteen days after receipt by the user of the MSDS. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to exempt from disclosure the remaining information contained in Section 9.34.060. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.080 Fees.
The city council may by resolution assess the cost of administering and coordinating the toxic chemical program. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.090 Enforcement.
A.    Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.030 of this code.

B.    In the event any person shall handle or use any hazardous substance without filing a disclosure form or shall file a false disclosure form in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the same is declared a public nuisance and the city attorney may bring and prosecute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin such person from maintaining or permitting the handling or use of hazardous materials in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 479  1 (part), 1983)

9.34.100 Trade secrets.
A.    If a user believes that a request for information made by either the disclosure form or otherwise pursuant to this chapter involves the release of a trade secret, the user shall so notify the fire department in writing. As used herein, trade secret shall have the meaning given to it by Section 6254.7 of the Government Code.

B.    Subject to the provisions of this section, the fire department shall protect from disclosure any trade secret coming into its possession when requested to do so in writing by the user.

C.    Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the fire department, or any of its representatives or employees, which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection B of this section shall not be disclosed to anyone except:

1.    To an officer or employee of the city, the state, or the United States of America, in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health, or to contractors with the city and their employees if in the opinion of the fire chief, such disclosure is necessary and required for the satisfactory performance of a contract for performance of work; or

2.    To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient.

D.    For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and county health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be considered employees of the city.

E.    Any officer or employee of the city, or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any contractor doing business within the city and any employee of such contractor, who has been furnished information as authorized by this section, shall be considered to be an employee of the city for purposes of this section. Any physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to subsection B of this section and who, knowing that the disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the information shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

F.    Information certified by appropriate officials of the United States, as necessarily kept secret for national defense purposes, shall be accorded the full protections against disclosure as specified by such official or in accordance with the laws of the United States.

G.    Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information which the user has notified the fire department is a trade secret pursuant to subsection A of this section, the fire department shall notify the user in writing of said request by certified mail. The fire department shall release the information thirty days after the day of mailing said notice, unless, prior to the expiration of said thirty days, the user institutes an action in an appropriate court for a declaratory judgment that said information is subject to protection under subsection B of this section and/or an injunction prohibiting disclosure of said information to the general public.

H.    The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required pursuant to this chapter to the fire department. (Ord. 479  1 (part) 1983)

Chapter 9.35
UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
Sections:

9.35.010    Purpose.

9.35.020    Definitions.

9.35.030    Design standards and monitoring systems for new facilities.

9.35.040    Monitoring systems for existing facilities.

9.35.045    Abandonment.

9.35.050    Permit required.

9.35.060    Application filing.

9.35.070    Application contents.

9.35.080    Issuance.

9.35.090    Term.

9.35.100    Contents of permit.

9.35.105    Monitoring.

9.35.110    Fees.

9.35.120    Transferability.

9.35.130    Violations.

9.35.140    Inspections.

9.35.150    Unauthorized release.

9.35.155    Repairs.

9.35.160    Hearing authority.

9.35.170    Appeals.

9.35.180    Appeal hearing.

9.35.190    Finality of determination.

9.35.200    Ground for revocation.

9.35.210    Method of revocation.

9.35.215    Administration.

9.35.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standards for construction and monitoring of facilities used for the underground storage of hazardous substances, and to establish a procedure for issuance of permits for the use of these facilities. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.020 Definitions.
A.    Board means the state water resources control board.

B.    Facility means any one, or combination of, underground storage tanks used by a single business entity at a single location or site.

C.    Hazardous substance means all of the following liquid and solid substances unless state water resources control board determines the substance could not adversely affect the quality of the waters of the county or the region:

1.    Substances on the list prepared by the director of the department of industrial relations pursuant to Section 6382 of the Labor Code of the state of California;

2.    Hazardous substances, as defined in Section 25316 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California;

3.    Any substance or material which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as a flammable liquid, a class II combustible liquid, or a class III-A combustible liquid.

D.    Permitting authority shall be the Folsom city council or its designee.

E.    Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, including a government corporation, partnership, and association. Person also includes any city, county, district, the state, or any department or agency thereof.

F.    Primary containment means the first level of containment, such as the portion of a tank which comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous substance being contained.

G.    Product-tight means impervious to the substance which is contained, or is to be contained, so as to prevent the seepage of the substance from the primary containment. To be product-tight, the tank shall not be subject to physical or chemical deterioration by the substance which it contains over the useful life of the tank.

H.    Secondary containment means the level of containment external to, and separate from, the primary containment.

I.    Single-walled means construction with walls made of only one thickness of material. For the purpose of this chapter, laminated, coated, or clad materials shall be considered single-walled.

J.    Storage or store means the containment, handling or treatment of hazardous substances, either on a temporary basis or for a period of years. Storage or store does not mean the storage of hazardous wastes in an underground storage tank if the person operating the tank has been issued a hazardous waste facilities permit by the State Department of Health Services pursuant to Section 25200 or granted interim status under Section 25200.5 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, and has submitted to the permitting authority documentation verifying the issuance of the permit or the granting of the interim status.

K.    Unauthorized release means any release or emission of any hazardous substance which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, unless this release is authorized by the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code of the state of California.

L.    Underground storage tank means any one or combination of tanks, including pipes connected thereto, which is used for the storage of hazardous substances and which is substantially or totally beneath the surface of the ground. Underground storage tank does not include any of the following:

1.    A tank used for the storage of hazardous substances used for the control of external parasites of cattle and subject to the supervision of the county agricultural commissioner if the county agricultural commissioner determines, by inspection prior to use, that the tank provides a level of protection equivalent to that required by Section 9.35.030, if the tank was installed after June 30, 1984, or protection equivalent to that provided by Section 9.35.040, if the tank was installed on or before June 30, 1984;

2.    Tanks which are located on a farm and store motor vehicle fuel which is used only to propel vehicles used primarily for agricultural purposes;

3.    Tanks used for aviation or motor vehicle fuel located within one mile of a farm and the tank is used by a licensed pest control operator, as defined in Section 11705 of the Food and Agricultural Code of the state of California, who is primarily involved in agricultural pest control activities;

4.    Structures such as sumps, separators, storm drains, catch basins, oil field gathering lines, refinery pipelines, lagoons, evaporation ponds, well cellars, separation pumps, lined and unlined pits, sumps and lagoons. Sumps which are a part of a monitoring system required under Section 9.35.030 or Section 9.35.040 are not exempted by this section.

M.    Special inspectors means a professional engineer, registered pursuant to Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 6700) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, who is qualified to attest, at a minimum, to structural soundness, seismic safety, the compatibility of construction materials with contents, cathodic protection, and the mechanical compatibility of the structural elements.

N.    Owner means the owner of an underground storage tank.

O.    Operator means the operator of an underground storage tank.

P.    Pipe means any pipeline or system of pipelines which is used in connection with the storage of hazardous substances and which are not intended to transport hazardous substances in interstate or intrastate commerce or to transfer hazardous materials in bulk to or from a marine vessel. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.030 Design standards and monitoring systems for new facilities.
No underground storage tank or facility shall be installed after January 1, 1984 unless a permit to operate is first obtained from the permitting authority. A permit to operate shall not be issued for any underground storage tank or facility installed after January 1, 1984, unless the underground storage tank or facility meets the following requirements:

1.    Be designed and constructed to provide primary and secondary levels of containment of the hazardous substances stored in them in accordance with the following performance standards:

a.    Primary containment shall be product-tight;

b.    Secondary containment shall be constructed to prevent structural weakening as a result of contact with any released hazardous substances, and also shall be capable of storing, for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released hazardous substance;

c.    In the case of an installation with one primary container, the secondary containment shall be large enough to contain at least one hundred percent of the volume of the primary tank;

d.    In the case of multiple primary tanks, the secondary container shall be large enough to contain one hundred fifty percent of the volume of the largest primary tank placed in it, or ten percent of the aggregate internal volume of all primary tanks, whichever is greater;

e.    If the facility is open to rainfall, then the secondary containment must be able to additionally accommodate the volume of a twenty-four-hour rainfall as determined by a one-hundred-year storm history;

f.    Single-walled containers do not fulfill the requirement of an underground storage tank providing both a primary and a secondary containment;

g.    The design and construction of underground storage tanks for motor vehicle fuels storage need not meet the requirements of subdivisions (a) through (f) of this subsection, if the primary containment construction is of glass fibre, reinforced plastic, cathodically protected steel, or steel clad with glass fibre reinforced plastic, any such alternative primary containment is installed in conjunction with a system that will intercept and direct a leak from any part of the tank to a monitoring well to detect any release of motor vehicle fuels stored in the tank and which is designed to provide early leak detection, response, and to protect groundwater from releases, and if the monitoring is in accordance with the alternative method identified in subdivision (c) of subsection 2 of Section 9.35.040. Pressurized piping systems connected to underground storage tanks used for the storage of motor vehicle fuels and monitored in accordance with subdivision (c) of subsection 2 of Section 9.35.040 shall also be deemed to meet the requirements of this subdivision;

2.    Be designed and constructed with a monitoring system capable of detecting the entry of the hazardous material stored in the primary containment into the secondary containment. If water could intrude into the secondary containment, a means of monitoring for water intrusion and for safely removing the water shall also be provided;

3.    When required by the permitting authority, a means of overfill protection for any primary tank, including an overfill prevention device or an attention-getting high level alarm, or both. Primary tank filling operations of underground storage tanks containing motor vehicle fuels which are visually monitored and controlled by a facility operator satisfy the requirements of this paragraph;

4.    Different substances that in combination may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of flammable, toxic, or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of a primary and secondary containment so as to avoid potential intermixing;

5.    If water could enter into the secondary containment by precipitation or infiltration, the facility shall contain a means of removing the water by the owner or operator. This removal system shall also provide for a means of analyzing the removed water for hazardous substance contamination and a means of disposing of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal facility. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.040 Monitoring systems for existing facilities.
No underground storage tank or facility installed on or before January 1, 1984, and used for the storage of hazardous substances shall continue to operate unless a permit to operate is obtained by January 1, 1985. No permit to operate such tank or facility shall be issued or remain valid unless the following actions are taken:

1.    On or before January 1, 1985, the owner shall outfit the facility with a monitoring system capable of detecting unauthorized releases of any hazardous substances stored in the facility, and thereafter, the operator shall monitor each facility, based on materials stored and the type of monitoring installed.

2.    On or before January 1, 1985, the owner shall provide a means for visual inspection of the tank, wherever practical, for the purpose of monitoring required by subsection 1 of this section. Alternative methods of monitoring the tank on a monthly, or more frequent basis, may be required by the permitting authority.

The alternative monitoring methods include, but are not limited to, the following methods:

a.    Pressure testing, vacuum testing or hydrostatic testing of the piping systems or underground storage tanks;

b.    A groundwater monitoring well or wells which are down gradient and adjacent to the underground storage tank, vapor analysis within a well where appropriate, and analysis of soil borings at the time of initial installation of the well. The permitting authority shall develop regulations specifying monitoring alternatives and shall approve the location and number of wells, the depth of wells and the sampling frequency, pursuant to these regulations;

c.    For monitoring tanks containing motor vehicle fuels, daily gauging and inventory reconciliation by the operator, if inventory records are kept on file for one year and are reviewed quarterly, the tank is tested for tightness hydrostatically or, when appropriate with pressure between three and five pounds, inclusive, per square inch at time intervals specified by the State Water Resources Control Board and whenever any pressurized system has a leak detection device to monitor for leaks in the piping. The tank shall also be tested for tightness hydrostatically or where appropriate, with pressure between three and five pounds, inclusive, per square inch whenever there is a shortage greater than the amount specified by the State Water Resources Control Board. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.045 Abandonment.
A.    No person shall abandon an underground storage tank or close or temporarily cease operating an underground storage tank except as provided in this section.

B.    An underground storage tank which is temporarily taken out of service, but which the operator intends to return to use, shall continue to be subject to all the permit, inspection, and monitoring requirements of this chapter, unless the operator complies with the provisions of subsection C of this section for the period of time the underground tank is not in use.

C.    No person shall close an underground storage tank unless the person undertakes all of the following actions:

1.    Demonstrates to the permitting authority that all residual amounts of the hazardous substance or hazardous substances which were stored in the tank prior to its closure have been removed, properly disposed of, and neutralized;

2.    Adequately seals the tank to minimize any threat to the public safety and the possibility of water intrusion into, or runoff from, the tank;

3.    Provides for, and carries out, the maintenance of the tank as permitting authority determines is necessary, for the period of time the permitting authority requires;

4.    Demonstrates to the permitting authority that there has been no significant soil contamination resulting from a discharge in the area surrounding the underground storage tank or facility. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.050 Permit required.
A.    No person shall operate a facility for the underground storage of any hazardous substance within the city limits unless by authority of a valid, unexpired and unrevoked permit to operate issued to the owner pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.35.030 or Section 9.35.040.

B.    A person shall be deemed to operate a facility and violate this section if the person, without a required permit to operate in effect, supervises, inspects, directs, organizes, manages or controls or is in any way responsible for or in charge of the facility for which the permit is required.

C.    This section does not obviate the requirements to obtain valid permits pursuant to and in compliance with other applicable ordinances, including but not limited to the Folsom zoning code and building code. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.060 Application filing.
All applications for a permit to operate shall be filed in the office of the city clerk or such other place as the permitting authority shall designate. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.070 Application contents.
The application for a permit to operate shall be filed on a form and contain such information as is prescribed by the permitting authority, including the following:

1.    A description of the construction of the underground storage tank or tanks;

2.    A list of all the hazardous substances which are or will be stored in the underground storage tank or tanks, specifying the hazardous substances for each underground storage tank;

3.    A description of the monitoring program for the underground storage tank or tanks;

4.    The name and address of the person, firm, or corporation which owns the underground storage tank or tanks and, if different, the name and address of the person who operates the underground storage tank or tanks;

5.    The address of the facility at which the underground storage tank or tanks are located;

6.    The name of the person making the application;

7.    The name and twenty-four-hour phone number of the contact person in the event of an emergency involving the facility;

8.    If the owner or operator of the underground storage tank is a public agency, the application shall include the name of the supervisor of the division, section, or office which operates the tank;

9.    Such other further information as is deemed necessary to administer the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.080 Issuance.
The permitting authority shall act upon the application not later than ninety days after the date it is accepted as complete unless the applicant has filed with the permitting authority written notice of a request and received written approval for extension of the time within which action is taken on the grounds that additional time is required to prepare or present plans or other information, obtain zoning variances or other permits, or make other corrections remedying inconsistencies with the provisions of this chapter; or the permitting authority has on file a written notice from a public agency showing just cause for an extension of time, and has approved an extension of time pursuant thereto. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.090 Term.
The term of the permit to operate shall be five years, at which time the permittee may apply for renewal pursuant to Section 9.35.080. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.100 Contents of permit.
A.    The permit to operate shall contain a complete description of the enterprise for which it is issued, the date of issuance and date of expiration, and a description of any and all conditions upon which the permit has been issued. A copy of the permit shall be kept on the premises and shall be made available to the permitting authority upon demand.

B.    As a condition of any permit to operate an underground storage tank, the permittee shall complete an annual report form prepared by the permitting authority, which will detail any changes in the usage of any underground storage tanks, including the storage of new hazardous substances, changes in monitoring procedure and unauthorized release occurrences. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.105 Monitoring.
A.    The operator of the underground storage facility shall monitor the facility using the method specified on the permit for the facility. Records shall be kept in sufficient detail to enable the permitting authority to determine that the operator has undertaken all monitoring activities required by the permit to operate.

B.    If the operator is not the owner, the owner shall provide a copy of the permit to operator, enter into a written contract with the operator which requires the operator to monitor the tank as set forth in the permit, and provide the operator with a copy of Section 9.35.130 or a summary of this section, in the form which the permitting authority specifies by regulation. The owner shall notify the permitting authority of any change of operator. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.110 Fees.
The city council may, by resolution and from time to time, prescribe fees for the issuance and renewal of a permit to operate and fees for the filing of appeals relating to denial of such permits or the revocation thereof. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.120 Transferability.
A.    Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no person shall operate an underground storage tank unless a permit to operate has been issued. Any person who is to assume the ownership of an underground storage tank from the previous owner shall complete the form accepting the obligations of the permit and submit the completed form to the permitting authority at least thirty days after the ownership of the underground storage tank is to be transferred. The permitting authority may review and modify, or terminate the transfer of the permit to operate the underground storage tank upon receiving the completed form.

B.    Any person assuming ownership of an underground storage tank used for the storage of hazardous substances for which a valid permit to operate has been issued shall have thirty days after the date of assumption of ownership to apply for a permit to operate or if accepting a transferred permit, shall submit to the permitting authority the completed form accepting the obligation of the transferred permit, as specified in subsection A of this section. During the period from the date of application until the permit is issued or refused, the person shall not be held to be in violation of this section. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.130 Violations.
A.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.01.190, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of the regulatory requirements of this chapter is an infraction subject to the procedures described in sections 19(c) and 19(d) of the California Penal Code, and punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation; (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance provision within one year.

B.    Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.140 Inspections.
A.    The permitting authority shall inspect every underground storage tank or facility at least once every three years. The purpose of the inspection is to determine whether the tank or facility complies with the design and construction standards of this chapter, whether the operator has monitored and tested the tank as required by the permit, and whether the tank is in a safe operating condition. After an inspection, the permitting authority shall prepare a compliance report detailing the inspection and shall send a copy of this report to the permit holder.

B.    In addition to, or instead of, the inspections specified in subsection A of this section, the permitting authority may require the permit holder to employ, periodically, special inspectors to conduct an audit or assessment of the permit holders facility to determine whether the facility complies with the factors specified in subsection A of this section and to prepare a special inspection report with recommendations concerning the safe storage of hazardous materials at the facility. The report shall contain recommendations consistent with the provisions of this chapter, where appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the permitting authority at the same time the inspector submits the report to the permit holder. Within thirty days after receiving this report, the permit holder shall file with the permitting authority a plan to implement all recommendations contained in the report or shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the permitting authority, why these recommendations should not be implemented.

C.    In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, any duly authorized representative of the permitting authority has the authority to inspect any place where underground storage tanks are located or to inspect real property which is within two thousand feet of any place where underground storage tanks are located. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.150 Unauthorized release.
A.    Any unauthorized release from the primary containment which the operator is able to clean up within eight hours and which does not escape from the secondary containment, does not increase the hazard of fire or explosion, and does not cause any deterioration of the secondary containment of the underground storage tank, shall be recorded on the operators monitoring reports.

B.    Any authorized release which escapes from the secondary containment, increases the hazard of fire or explosion, or causes any deterioration of the secondary containment of the underground tank shall be reported by the operator to the permitting authority within twenty-four hours after the release has been detected or should have been detected. A full written report shall be transmitted by the owner or operator of the underground storage tanks within five working days of the occurrence of the release.

The permitting authority shall review the permit whenever there has been an unauthorized release or when it determines that the underground storage tank is unsafe. In determining whether to modify or terminate the permit, the permitting authority shall consider the age of the tank, the methods of containment, the methods of monitoring, the feasibility of any required repairs, the concentration of the hazardous substances stored in the tank, the severity of potential unauthorized releases, and the suitability of any other long-term preventive measures which would meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.155 Repairs.
Any physical modification including replacement of an underground storage tank or facility shall be undertaken in compliance with applicable codes as specified in subsection C of Section 9.35.050. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.160 Hearing authority.
A.    Whenever the term hearing authority is utilized in this title, it shall be deemed to refer to one or more persons assigned the responsibility of conducting a hearing by the city manager. The city manager shall be authorized to assign hearing responsibilities from time to time to either:

1.    Any person or persons, qualified by training or experience, who the city manager may employ or who are retained by contract to conduct such hearings; or

2.    Administrative law judges assigned to the state of California Office of Administrative Hearings.

B.    The city manager is authorized to contract in the name of the city for the retention of hearing services at rates which do not exceed financial limitations established by the citys annual budget. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.170 Appeals.
Any decision of the permitting authority may be appealed to the hearing authority. Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the specific reasons therefor and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the clerk of the permitting authority not later than fifteen days after the date of service. If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of the action against which complaint is made shall be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.180 Appeal hearing.
Not later than thirty days, or longer if a notice of continuance is mailed to the appellant, following the date of filing an appeal within the time and in the manner prescribed by Section 9.35.170, the hearing authority shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the appeal should be granted. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the appellant not later than ten days preceding the date of the hearing.

During the hearing, the burden of proof shall rest with the appellant. The provisions of the California Administration Procedure Act, commencing at Section 11500 of the Government Code, shall not be applicable to such hearings; nor shall formal rules of evidence in civil or criminal judicial proceedings be so applicable. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing authority shall prepare a written decision which either grants or conditionally grants or denies the appeal, and contains findings of fact and conclusions. Notice of the written decision, including a copy thereof, shall be filed with the clerk of the permitting authority and mailed to the appellant not later than seven days following the date on which the hearing is closed. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.190 Finality of determination.
The decision by the hearing authority shall become final upon the date of filing and mailing. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.200 Ground for revocation.
Any permit to operate issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked during its term upon one or more of the following grounds:

1.    That an unauthorized release has occurred pursuant to subsection B of Section 9.35.150;

2.    That modifications have been made to the underground storage tank or facility in violation of the permit to operate;

3.    That the holder of the permit has violated one or more conditions upon which the permit has been issued. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.210 Method of revocation.
The permitting authority may revoke a permit to operate by issuing a written notice of revocation, stating the reasons therefor, and serving same, together with a copy of the provisions of this chapter, upon the holder of the permit. The revocation shall become effective fifteen days after the date of service, unless the holder of the license files an appeal within the time and in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.35.170. If such an appeal is filed, the revocation shall not become effective until a final decision on the appeal is issued. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

9.35.215 Administration.
Except as otherwise provided, the permitting authority shall designate the governmental department or agency charged with administering this chapter and it shall be authorized from time to time to promulgate and enforce such rules or regulations consistent with the purposes, intent, and express terms of this title as he or she deems necessary to implement such purposes, intent and express terms. Such rules shall be filed with the clerk of the city council and shall become effective thirty days thereafter. (Ord. 515  1 (part), 1983)

Chapter 9.36
FIREWORKS
Sections:

9.36.010    Fireworks prohibited generally.

9.36.020    Public fireworks displayCity council approval.

9.36.030    Fireworks useSpecial occasions.

9.36.040    Safe and sane fireworks permitted.

9.36.050    Safe and sane fireworksProhibited locations.

9.36.060    Permits required.

9.36.070    Permittee requirements.

9.36.080    Application requirements.

9.36.090    Permit issuance.

9.36.100    Contents of permit.

9.36.110    Maximum allowable permits.

9.36.120    Selection of permittees.

9.36.130    Sales personnel.

9.36.140    Sales commissions prohibited.

9.36.150    Sales stand specifications.

9.36.160    Sales safety requirements.

9.36.170    Enforcement.

9.36.180    Penalties.

9.36.190    Enforcement proceduresSuspension and revocationNotice of administrative violations.

9.36.200    Appeal.

9.36.210    Fines related to dangerous fireworks.

9.36.010 Fireworks prohibited generally.
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall possess, sell, use, display or explode any rocket, firecracker, roman candle, squib, torpedo, torpedo cane, fire balloon, wire core sparkler, wooden core sparkler, black cartridge or other combustible device or explosive substance, or any kind of fireworks, by whatsoever name known, within the city. The prohibition set forth in this section includes, without limitation, those fireworks classified as dangerous fireworks in the State Fireworks Law, Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.020 Public fireworks displayCity council approval.
Public displays of fireworks may only be given when authorized by resolution of the city council, after recommendation of the fire chief, and when under the supervision of a licensed pyrotechnic operator. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.030 Fireworks useSpecial occasions.
A.    The city council may alter in any given year the dates and/or times for which a person may sell, use or discharge any safe and sane fireworks as set forth in Section 9.36.040.

B.    The city manager may, with the advice of the fire chief, review and approve or deny requests for the use of safe and sane fireworks on special occasions, including for ceremonial or religious events where such events occur outside the dates upon which safe and sane fireworks are permitted. The city manager may impose terms and conditions upon the use of the fireworks with his/her approval. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.040 Safe and sane fireworks permitted.
A.    Such fireworks as are defined and classified as safe and sane fireworks in the State Fireworks Law, Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. of the state of California may be sold and displayed as permitted by this chapter.

B.    No person shall sell or offer to sell or expose for sale any of such safe and sane fireworks to any person under the age of eighteen years.

C.    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the transfer without consideration of such safe and sane fireworks to persons under the age of eighteen years.

D.    No person shall sell, use or discharge any safe and sane fireworks within the city of Folsom after midnight on July 4th through noon on June 28th of the following year.

E.    A violation of subsection D of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in state law. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.050 Safe and sane fireworksProhibited locations.
A.    It is unlawful to possess, use or discharge safe and sane fireworks, as defined in the State Fireworks Law, Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq., in the following areas:

1.    The civic center complex to include each of these locations and the streets, driveways, walkways and parking lots between and among these locations:

a.    Folsom City Lions Park (401 Stafford Street);

b.    Folsom City Zoo and Sanctuary (403 Stafford Street);

c.    Rodeo Park;

d.    Folsom Public Library, Georgia Murray Building (411 Stafford Street);

e.    Folsom Community Center (52 Natoma Street);

f.    Folsom City Hall (50 Natoma Street);

g.    Folsom Seniors and Arts Center (48 Natoma Street);

h.    Folsom police department (46 Natoma Street); and

i.    Stafford Street (back of sidewalk to back of sidewalk) from the intersection of Natoma Street to Rodeo Park.

2.    Kemp Park.

3.    B.T. Collins Park.

4.    Lew Howard Park.

5.    Hinkle Creek nature area.

6.    Lembi Community Parkexcept parking lot.

7.    Willow Springs reservoir.

8.    Livermore Community Park.

9.    Hazel McFarland Park.

10.    Phillip C. Cohn Park.

11.    Catlin Park.

12.    Nisenan Park.

13.    Folsom kids play park.

14.    City bike trails.

15.    Private property that has been posted by the owner.

16.    Any other city park or property as determined by the city manager where this prohibition is posted at each entrance to the park or property.

B.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.060 Permits required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell safe and sane fireworks within the city without having first applied for and received permits from the fire and finance departments therefor, in addition to the required state license. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.070 Permittee requirements.
No permit to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be issued to any person or business entity except nonprofit organizations or corporations, as defined in 26 USC 501(c) and/or the California Corporations Code, located within the city of Folsom and organized primarily for charitable, religious, educational, athletic, veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or similar purposes.

Each such nonprofit organization or corporation shall have a principal meeting place within the Folsom city limits and shall have been organized and established in an area which is presently within the Folsom city limits for a minimum of one year continuously preceding the filing of the application for the permit and shall have a bona fide membership of at least twenty Folsom residents over the age of seventeen years.

A principal meeting place shall include, but not be limited to, a structure, playing field, geographic area or service population which resides in or is located within the Folsom city limits. A Folsom mailing address or post office box, in and of itself, does not meet the requirements of this definition. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.080 Application requirements.
The following are requirements for the preliminary application for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks in the city:

A.    All preliminary applications for a permit shall be in writing to the fire chief on forms supplied by the city and shall be accompanied by the fee specified in the City of Folsom Master Fee Schedule for application to operate a firework stand.

B.    Applications must be filed ninety days prior to the actual sale or display.

C.    Applicants shall furnish such other data or information as may be required relating to the issuance of such fireworks permits.

D.    Applications shall identify the name, organization form, address of the principal meeting place, names and physical addresses of officers, names and physical addresses of twenty resident members, total number of members, the purpose of the organization or corporation and the date it came into existence within the city.

E.    Every application shall designate a minimum of one individual (twenty-one years of age or older) for each stand to be operated by the organization as the fireworks stand safety officer.

F.    False or deceptive statements made on the application shall disqualify the applying organization from current and future firework sales in the city of Folsom. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.090 Permit issuance.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the fire chief shall grant a permit to a nonprofit organization or corporation that has complied with the requirements of this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, an organization or corporation granted such a permit is a licensed organization. The permit is issued to and valid only to that organization and is not transferable to any other organization or corporation. If the permit is not issued, notice shall be served on the applicant in writing with the reasons stated.

B.    The fire chief shall collect fees as specified in the current City of Folsom Master Fee Schedule for the permitting and inspection of a fireworks stand from each permittee upon the issuance of a permit, which shall be used to defray the expense of administering the provisions of this chapter.

C.    The final permit application shall set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand subject to approval of the fire chief. A scaled or dimensioned site plan that is a true and accurate representation of the location shall be included with the application. No fireworks stands shall be permitted in a location which restricts or endangers the free flow of traffic on city streets or roadways.

D.    The applicant shall provide a copy of the certificate or evidence of insurance, the State Fire Marshal sales license, and any additional information as required by the fire chief prior to issuing the permit. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.100 Contents of permit.
A.    The permit shall include the name of the licensed organization, a description of the activity for which it is issued, the location for which it is issued, the date of issuance, the date of expiration, and any and all conditions upon which the permit has been issued. The permit shall be kept at the site during the activity for which the permit was issued.

B.    The fire chief may at the time of issuance of the permit impose such conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, other city ordinances, or state or federal laws, or are reasonably calculated to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

C.    The permit shall include, as a minimum, the following conditions:

1.    Prior to the sale of any fireworks, a certificate or evidence of insurance in a form approved by the city attorney showing public liability insurance coverage in the amount of one million dollars must be delivered to the fire chief;

2.    Prior to the sale of any fireworks, a license issued by the State Fire Marshal in accordance with the State Fireworks Law, Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. of the state of California shall be delivered to the fire chief. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.110 Maximum allowable permits.
Not more than one permit for each six thousand residents of the city or fraction thereof shall be issued during any one calendar year. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.120 Selection of permittees.
The issuance of permits shall be determined by the fire chief as follows:

A.    All applicants meeting the requirements of Sections 9.36.070 and 9.36.080 shall be grouped into one of the following categories of organizations: educational organizations, religious organizations, fraternal/service/veterans organizations, athletic and arts/cultural/other organizations. Permits shall be distributed in the categories by utilizing the ratio of qualified applicants to the number of total authorized permits. A drawing shall be held and permits will be drawn for each category in turn.

B.    After the authorized number of permits has been drawn, all qualified applicants shall be combined into one group, and one applicant shall be drawn as the first alternate and one applicant shall be drawn as the second alternate. The alternates shall be offered a permit if one of the original permittees cannot meet the requirements of this section or if a permittee voluntarily surrenders the permit. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.130 Sales personnel.
A.    Individuals designated as fireworks stand safety officers shall be required to attend a fireworks stand operators safety seminar and orientation session conducted by the Folsom fire department prior to issuance of the permit. The designated individual must attend the seminar each year they are designated as a fireworks stand safety officer regardless of whether or not they have previously attended such a seminar. Failure to attend this seminar may be cause to revoke the permit.

B.    Those wholesale or retail vendors of safe and sane fireworks providing fireworks to organizations in the city of Folsom must participate in the fireworks safety seminar.

C.    Each person participating in the sales of fireworks shall be eighteen years of age or older and shall be required to be knowledgeable in fire safety and emergency procedures for fireworks stands as instructed by the fireworks stand safety officer. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.140 Sales commissions prohibited.
No person shall be paid on a commission basis for selling or otherwise participating in the retail sale of fireworks. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.150 Sales stand specifications.
All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and retail sale from any other building or structure is prohibited. Temporary stands are subject to the following provisions:

A.    Fireworks stands shall be located only on property zoned commercial (C-1, C-2 or C-3), industrial (M-1, M-2 or M-3), or on commercial or industrial designated areas within the SP zone, and where the operation of a stand will not create a fire hazard to surrounding properties.

B.    No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building or within one hundred feet of any gasoline station.

C.    Fireworks stands may be erected without obtaining a building permit; however, all stands shall be constructed to reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. The city building inspector and fire inspector shall inspect all fireworks stands for compliance with all applicable fire and electrical codes and installation requirements.

D.    No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty square feet.

E.    Each stand shall have at least two exits. Each stand in excess of forty feet in length shall have at least three exits spaced approximately equal distance apart; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance between exits exceed twenty feet.

F.    Each stand shall be provided with two two-and-one-half-gallon pressurized water-type fire extinguishers, in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire.

G.    All stands shall be subject to fire safety inspections by the city without notice at any time. Safety deficiencies will be required to be corrected immediately. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.160 Sales safety requirements.
A.    Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions:

1.    Stands shall not be located closer than six hundred feet apart, unless separated by a roadway four lanes wide or greater.

2.    All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from a twenty-five-foot radius around the stand.

3.    No smoking signs shall be prominently displayed on all sides of the fireworks stand.

4.    Signs shall be conspicuously posted that identify those locations within the city where the use or discharge of fireworks is prohibited. The signs shall be provided by the city fire marshal.

5.    Each stand must have at least one individual designated as a fireworks safety officer in attendance and in charge thereof when the stand is being used for the sale, dispensing or storage of fireworks.

6.    Stands shall be open no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and no fireworks shall be sold after 9:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified in the permit; the sale dates of operation of the stand shall be from noon on June 28th until 9:00 p.m. on July 4th.

7.    All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the city within forty-eight hours of expiration of the permit.

8.    Unless otherwise specified in the permit, the fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by 12:00 noon on July 12th, and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from the location by said time and date.

9.    No fuel-powered generators or similar equipment shall be allowed within fifty feet of the stand.

10.    No vehicles shall be parked or operated within twenty-five feet of the stand. When the stand is adjacent to a drive aisle, this distance may be reduced to no less than ten feet when approved, substantial barriers are provided and No ParkingFire Lane signs are prominently posted.

B.    The fire chief is authorized to modify any of the above permit conditions for any specific permit upon a finding that there are practical difficulties in the imposition of the condition, and a finding that modification of the conditions meets the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that such modification does not lessen health, life or fire safety standards or impair public health or welfare. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.170 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The fire chief or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.180 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. In addition to any other enforcement remedy authorized by Title 1, any organization may be disqualified from obtaining a permit for a period of up to two years.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level C violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(3).

D.    Nothing in this section prohibits the use of criminal penalties as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.190 Enforcement proceduresSuspension and revocationNotice of administrative violations.
A.    The fire chief may immediately suspend or revoke any permit upon a determination that the licensed organization, its members, or any person selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks by the licensed organization has violated any of the provisions of this chapter and is creating an imminent threat of harm to person or property.

1.    The fire chief shall provide a factual description of the activities that create the imminent threat of harm to person or property and shall deliver the information in a notice of administrative violation. The notice of administrative violation shall contain such other information as required by Section 1.09.024.

2.    When a notice of administrative violation is served pursuant to this subsection, the licensee shall be entitled to an appeal hearing no later than seventy-two hours after service of the notice. The request for an appeal hearing and the procedures pursuant to which such an appeal is conducted shall otherwise be subject to the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.030 through 1.09.048, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    Except for violations that create an imminent threat of harm to person or property, prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the fire chief or his/her designee shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.052, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply. A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.200 Appeal.
A.    There shall be no appeal of any enforcement action taken pursuant to this chapter to the city council.

B.    Whenever the fire chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, the applicant may appeal the decision in writing to the city council within ten calendar days of the action. Such appeal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars to cover the administrative cost of the appeal.

C.    As to those appeals allowed by subsection B of this section, the city council shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the appeal should be granted not later than the next regularly scheduled meeting following thirty calendar days after the date of filing an appeal within the time and in the manner prescribed by this section. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be served by the city clerk upon the applicant or permittee, not later than ten days preceding the date of the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either grant or deny the appeal, and shall adopt findings of fact and conclusions in support thereof. The written findings, including a copy thereof, shall be filed with the city clerk. The clerk shall serve such findings on the applicant or permittee. The decision of the city council shall become final upon the date of filing and service with respect to any appeals. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

9.36.210 Fines related to dangerous fireworks.
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 12557, the following provisions shall apply to fines related to dangerous fireworks imposed pursuant to this chapter:

A.    The city shall provide cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal pursuant to regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal addressing the State Fire Marshals cost for the transportation and disposal of dangerous fireworks seized by the city, which costs will be part of any administrative fine imposed.

B.    Imposition of fines related to dangerous fireworks under this chapter shall be limited to persons who possess, or the seizure of, twenty-five pounds or less of such dangerous fireworks.

C.    Fines collected pursuant to this chapter related to dangerous fireworks shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code Section 12706, which section provides that certain fines collected by a court of this state be deposited with, and disbursed by, the county treasurer. (Ord. 1088  2 (part), 2007)

Chapter 9.37
FIRE DANGER IN OPEN PUBLIC SPACE
Sections:

9.37.010    Purpose.

9.37.020    Definitions.

9.37.030    Unauthorized fire prohibited.

9.37.040    Exemption.

9.37.050    Enforcement.

9.37.060    Declaration of a nuisance.

9.37.070    Penalty not exclusiveViolation constitutes a crime.

9.37.010 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that unauthorized fire in the citys public open space during one of the most severe droughts on record in California constitutes an urgent and immediate threat to the publics life, health and safety. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce and prevent fire hazards and fire danger in the public open space throughout the city. (Ord. 1248  3 (part), 2015)

9.37.020 Definitions.
A.    Code enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

B.    Fire chief means the chief of the Folsom fire department or his/her designee.

C.    Police chief means the chief of the Folsom police department or his/her designee.

D.    Public open space means any area within the city designated as open space, open space conservation, agricultural reserve, or parks under the citys general plan and zoning code. (Ord. 1248  3 (part), 2015)

9.37.030 Unauthorized fire prohibited.
A.    No person shall ignite, maintain, or use any fire in any public open space except within a designated picnic area using a barbecue cooker or other cooking device authorized by the fire chief for purpose of safe outdoor cooking.

B.    No person shall ignite or maintain a fire of materials deposited in any pit, trench, ditch, dugout, dirt, grassy or wooded area in any public open space.

C.    No person shall ignite or maintain a fire of materials deposited in any can, box, or other receptacle intended for garbage disposal or incineration in any public open space. (Ord. 1248  3 (part), 2015)

9.37.040 Exemption.
Fire activities with a valid permit issued by the fire chief are exempt from the prohibition in Section 9.37.030. This exemption does not relieve any person or entity from complying with all other applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations including, but not limited to, regulations related to air quality and nuisances. (Ord. 1248  3 (part), 2015)

9.37.050 Enforcement.
The fire chief shall enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to fire suppression and prevention of fire danger and hazards. The police chief and code enforcement officer shall enforce all other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1248  3 (part), 2015)

9.37.060 Declaration of a nuisance.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this chapter and Title 1. (Ord. 1248  3 (part), 2015)

9.37.070 Penalty not exclusiveViolation constitutes a crime.
A.    Violation of this chapter shall constitute a crime punishable either as a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, or as an infraction in the discretion of the city attorney.

B.    The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other criminal, civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code shall prevent the city from using any other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this chapter or to abate a public nuisance. (Ord. 1248  3 (part), 2015)

Chapter 9.42
OBJECTIONABLE BEHAVIOR IN PUBLIC VIEW
Sections:

9.42.010    Urination and defecation in public.

9.42.020    Penalty.

9.42.010 Urination and defecation in public.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public place, other than a restroom, or in a place open to public view, or upon the private property of another without the consent of the owner or person in lawful possession. (Ord. 458  2 (part), 1981)

9.42.020 Penalty.
A.    A violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction, punishable by a one hundred dollar fine.

B.    The second violation of any provision of this chapter within a twelve-month period is an infraction, punishable by a two hundred dollar fine.

C.    The third and each subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter within a twelve-month period is a misdemeanor, punishable by a three hundred dollar fine. (Ord. 1086  2, 2007: Ord. 847  5(1), 1996)

Chapter 9.45
DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATTER IN PUBLIC VIEW
Sections:

9.45.010    Restrictions on display of harmful matter in public view.

9.45.020    Penalty.

9.45.010 Restrictions on display of harmful matter in public view.
No person shall display in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, any material which is harmful to minors unless a device such as that commonly known as a blinder rack is placed in front of the materials or the material is otherwise displayed so that the lowest two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. For purposes of this chapter, the phrase material which is harmful to minors means matter and harmful matter as those terms are defined in California Penal Code Section 313, and as such section may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1032  2 (part), 2005)

9.45.020 Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or an administrative violation punishable as follows:

A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement as set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Notwithstanding the procedure for administrative violations provided in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, no notice to correct as provided in Section 1.09.023 shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of administrative violation.

C.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of this chapter.

D.    Based on the criteria for the imposition of administrative violations set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter committed by a non-management employee shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. Based on the criteria for the imposition of administrative violations set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter committed by an owner or manager shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A).

E.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof and shall be punished accordingly.

Nothing in this section shall be deemed or constituted to prevent the city from commencing any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration and/or abatement of a public nuisance. (Ord. 1032  2 (part), 2005)

Chapter 9.60
DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING*
Sections:

9.60.010    Definitions.

9.60.020    Permit required.

9.60.030    Business license required.

9.60.040    Litter unlawfulException.

9.60.050    Motor vehicle distribution unlawful.

9.60.060    Placing on motor vehicleRestrictions.

9.60.070    Private premisesRestrictions.

9.60.080    No advertising sign.

9.60.090    Private premisesDistribution requirements.

9.60.100    Exemptions.

9.60.110    Seditious, obscene literature unlawful.

9.60.120    Public postingPermit required.

9.60.130    Private postingOwner consent required.

9.60.140    PermitApplication.

9.60.150    PermitRevocationHearing.

9.60.160    PermitAppealHearing.

9.60.170    Short title.

9.60.180    Severability.

9.60.190    ViolationPenalty.

*    See also Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations.

9.60.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and certain provisions shall be construed as herein set out, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

1.    Advertising matter means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, advertisement, broadside, handbill, card, poster, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature;

2.    Commercial advertising matter means and includes any advertising matter as herein defined which:

a.    Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing, or

b.    Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales, or

c.    Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city, or

d.    While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor;

3.    Newspaper means and includes any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with Section 132.2 and following, of the Postal Manual, as the same exist upon the date this chapter becomes effective, any bona fide publication disseminating news of a general nature, even though such publication has not been published for a sufficient time to obtain a decree of court determining the same to be a newspaper of general circulation, and, in addition thereto, shall include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.

4.    Noncommercial advertising matter means and includes any advertising matter as herein defined which is not included in the aforesaid definitions of commercial advertising matter or a newspaper;

5.    Permit officer means the officer or person charged with the issuance of business licenses in the city;

6.    Public place means and includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, plazas, grounds and buildings. (Prior code  9850)

9.60.020 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute or circulate, or directly or indirectly cause to be distributed or circulated, any advertising matter as herein defined, unless there is printed, stamped, written, lithographed, or otherwise designated upon each piece of advertising matter the permit number issued to the distributor by the city. The permit number shall be shown in the following form: Folsom Permit No. ____. (Prior code  9851)

9.60.030 Business license required.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute or circulate, or directly or indirectly cause to be distributed or circulated, any commercial advertising matter, as herein defined, unless such person has a business license. (Prior code  9852)

9.60.040 Litter unlawfulException.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter in or upon any public place within the city; provided, however, that it is not unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any advertising matter in any public place to any person willing to accept such advertising matter. (Prior code  9853)

9.60.050 Motor vehicle distribution unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter from any moving automobile or other motor vehicle. (Prior code  9854)

9.60.060 Placing on motor vehicleRestrictions.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting, or distributing of any advertising matter to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who is willing to accept the same. (Prior code  9855)

9.60.070 Private premisesRestrictions.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, or where a previous days distribution of advertising matter has not been removed. (Prior code  9856)

9.60.080 No advertising sign.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any advertising matter upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, and so as to be clearly readable from the sidewalk, a sign bearing the words, No Advertising, indicating that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such advertising matter left upon such premises.

The sign shall contain not less than seven square inches and the letters thereon shall be not less than three-fourths of an inch in height. (Prior code  9857)

9.60.090 Private premisesDistribution requirements.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, or distribute any advertising matter in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any such advertising matter directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided herein, such person, unless requested in writing by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such advertising matter in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such advertising matter is so prepared, placed, or deposited on the porch or other covered area of the building so as to secure or prevent such advertising matter from being blown or drifted about such premises, or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. (Prior code  9858)

9.60.100 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, as defined herein, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon private property. (Prior code  9859)

9.60.110 Seditious, obscene literature unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute or circulate, or cause to be distributed or circulated, any advertising matter which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this state by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence, or which urges any unlawful conduct, or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the public peace or good order of the community; or which is offensive to public morals or decency, or which contains blasphemous, obscene, libelous, or scurrilous language. (Prior code  9860)

9.60.120 Public postingPermit required.
It is unlawful for any person, except a public officer or employee in performance of a public duty, to place, paste, paint, print, nail, tack, or otherwise fasten any advertising matter or notice of any kind; or cause the same to be done, on any curb, lamppost, electrolier, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, post, building, or any other structure or thing in, or upon any street or public property in the city unless a permit therefor has been first secured. The permit shall contain a time limit within which such advertising matter shall be removed by the poster thereof. If such time limit is not complied with, no further permits shall be issued to permit advertising by the person so in default. (Prior code  9861)

9.60.130 Private postingOwner consent required.
Except as provided in Section 9.60.120, it is unlawful for any person, except a public officer or employee in performance of a public duty or a private person in giving a legal notice, to place, post, paste, paint, print, nail, tack, or otherwise fasten any advertising matter, or notice of any kind, upon any private property without the written consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent, or trustee thereof. (Prior code  9862)

9.60.140 PermitApplication.
Any person desiring to engage, as principal, in the business of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills for hire, shall make application to and receive from the permit officer a permit in the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this chapter and by all relevant provisions of the municipal code. The applicant shall make written application to the permit officer upon a form or forms provided for such purpose by the permit officer. Such permit shall contain among other things that may be required, the name, the business address, and a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the applicant, the probable number of agents or employees so to be engaged, together with a request for a permit for the period for which the applicant seeks to engage in such business. (Prior code  9863)

9.60.150 PermitRevocationHearing.
Without excluding other grounds for revocation, the permit officer may revoke any permit obtained under application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the applicant with intent to obtain a permit by means of false or fraudulent representations, or for violation of this chapter, or any other grounds specified by law.

Before revoking any permit, the permit officer shall order a hearing. Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the permit holder not less than one week before the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be served by depositing a copy thereof in the United States Post Office enclosed in an envelope addressed to the permit holder at his last known business address with the postage fully prepaid thereon. Service shall be deemed complete when such copy is deposited in the Post Office. (Prior code  9864)

9.60.160 PermitAppealHearing.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the permit officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within 5 days following the effective date of the action or decision from which the appeal is taken.

Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed from and shall include a statement of facts relied upon to avoid such order.

At the time of filing any such appeal, a copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the permit officer. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. Written notice of such hearing of appeal shall be served upon the permit holder not less than 1 week before the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be served by depositing a copy thereof in the United States Post Office enclosed in an envelope addressed to the permit holder at his last known business address, with the postage fully prepaid thereon. Service shall be deemed complete when such copy is deposited in the Post Office.

The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code  9865)

9.60.170 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the city of Folsom advertising distribution and antilitter ordinance. (Prior code  9866)

9.60.180 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Prior code  9868)

9.60.190 ViolationPenalty.
Any violation of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1.12.030 of this code. (Prior code  9869)

Chapter 9.64
TRESPASS
Sections:

9.64.010    Business premisesRemoval notice.

9.64.020    ViolationPenalty.

9.64.010 Business premisesRemoval notice.
No person shall remain upon the premises of any business establishment licensed pursuant to the provisions of this code, after having been notified in writing by the owners or operator thereof to remove himself from the premises. The notice shall be in writing, signed by the owner or operator, and be delivered to such person personally. The notice shall contain the date, a description of the premises involved, the name or description of the person to whom directed, and the reason for requesting such removal. The notice shall further state that remaining on the premises after receipt of such notice is punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in the Folsom city code. (Ord. 232  1 (part), 1968)

9.64.020 ViolationPenalty.
Any person remaining on the premises after receiving the notice described in Section 9.64.010, or returning to the premises immediately thereafter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 232  1 (part), 1968)

Chapter 9.65
ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI
Sections:

9.65.010    Purpose and findings.

9.65.020    Definitions.

9.65.030    Declaration of public nuisance.

9.65.035    Enforcement.

9.65.037    Right of entry.

9.65.040    Prohibition of application of graffiti.

9.65.050    Abatement obligations.

9.65.055    Penalties.

9.65.058    Enforcement procedures.

9.65.060    Abatement.

9.65.070    Notice to abateHearing procedure.

9.65.080    Criminal penaltyGraffiti abatement cost recovery and parental civil liability.

9.65.090    Alternative means of enforcement.

9.65.010 Purpose and findings.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program and enforcement tools in addition to those already provided by state law for the removal of graffiti from property, buildings, structures, walls and places on both public and private property, and to prevent and control further spread of graffiti in the city. The city council finds and declares that graffiti on public or private buildings, structures and places creates a condition of blight within the city that tends to reduce the value of property, promotes deterioration of surrounding property, invites vandalism, and results in the loss of pride in affected neighborhoods and loss of business to neighboring commercial enterprises, all to the detriment of the city. While state law imposes criminal penalties for the application of graffiti, state law does not provide adequate means for prompt abatement and removal of graffiti.

The city council further finds and declares that the proliferation of graffiti constitutes a public nuisance that presents an imminent danger to the public safety and welfare. Law enforcement officials and other experts agree that immediate removal of gang-related graffiti is necessary to reduce the risk of violent and other criminal activities associated with gangs and gang territories. The failure to immediately abate graffiti encourages the proliferation of additional graffiti which results in neighborhood blight, additional criminal activity and increased costs of abatement. Such a public nuisance therefore, constitutes an immediate threat to public health and safety that must be abated.

The city council further finds and declares that the city shall be graffiti-free and directs all city departments to adopt a policy of zero tolerance and to use all lawful means at their disposal to abate graffiti from this community.

The city council intends, through the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to give notice to all who disregard the property rights of others, that the city will strictly enforce all laws prohibiting graffiti, including, but not limited to, California Penal Code Sections 594, 594.1 and 640.5, California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6, and all provisions of this chapter. The city council further intends, by adoption of said ordinance to implement a graffiti eradication program to assist Folsom residents and businesses with the eradication of graffiti from public and private property. (Ord. 849  2(1) (part), 1996)

9.65.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section.

Code enforcement officer means the person designated by the city manager to abate graffiti as further set forth in this chapter.

Graffiti means and includes any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on real or personal property, or on any building, structure or other facility, surface, place or thing, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component and regardless of the content or nature of the inscription, word, figure, mark or design. (Ord. 849  2(1) (part), 1996)

9.65.030 Declaration of public nuisance.
The city council finds and declares that the existence of graffiti on any public or private property within the incorporated area of the city constitutes a public nuisance that presents an imminent danger to the public safety and welfare, and that graffiti may be abated according to the provisions and procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 825  2 (part), 1995)

9.65.035 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The code enforcement officer and the police chief and his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 849  2(2) (part), 1996)

9.65.037 Right of entry.
The code enforcement officer may enter upon private property to inspect and enforce the provisions of this chapter according to the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.025. (Ord. 849  2(2) (part), 1996)

9.65.040 Prohibition of application of graffiti.
It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti, as defined in Section 9.65.020, upon any real or personal property, whether publicly or privately owned, including on any buildings, structures, fences, walls, signs, sidewalks, windows, streets, vehicles, trees or other such places, or things within the city. (Ord. 849  2(3) (part), 1996)

9.65.050 Abatement obligations.
A.    Obligation of Property Owner and/or Possessor of Property to Abate Graffiti. It shall be the duty of both the owner of the property on which the graffiti is located and any person who is in possession of such property to at all times maintain such property that can be viewed by any person utilizing any public right-of-way free from graffiti. If the owner and/or possessor of the property on which the graffiti is located is determined to have no responsibility for the placement of the graffiti on the property, the city may assist in the abatement of the graffiti as provided for in this chapter, and may waive costs for abatement upon a showing of financial or physical hardship to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer. In all cases, if the owner and/or person in possession of the property fails to maintain such property free of graffiti at any time, the graffiti may be summarily abated by the code enforcement officer or his/her designee pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter.

B.    Removal by Person Applying Graffiti. Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove such graffiti immediately, but not longer than 72 hours after notice by the city, under conditions and circumstances approved by the property owner and, upon request of the property owner, under the supervision of the police department or code enforcement officer. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute a separate violation. Every day that such graffiti is not removed after notice shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 849  2(3) (part), 1996)

9.65.055 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. This punishment shall be cumulative of and in addition to, any other applicable punishment or relief provided by state law, including, but not limited to, Vehicle Code Section 13202.6 and Penal Code Sections 594, 640.5, 640.6 and 640.7.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in Section 9.65.055(A), based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(B). (Ord. 849  2(4) (part), 1996)

9.65.058 Enforcement procedures.
A.    The code enforcement officer shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09 to enforce this chapter. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be no longer than 10 days and may be as short as 5 days. The time allowed for abatement shall be determined based upon: (1) the amount of the graffiti; (2) the difficulty in removing the graffiti; (3) the cost that will be entailed in removing the graffiti; (4) whether the continuing presence of the graffiti is likely to cause a proliferation of additional graffiti at the site; and (5) whether the continuing presence of the graffiti is likely to encourage the proliferation of criminal activity at the site. The notice to correct shall be served: (1) on the owner and/or possessor of the property, (2) on any person believed to be responsible for applying the graffiti, and (3) on the parent or legal guardian of a person believed to be responsible for applying the graffiti if such person is under the age of 18.

C.    If the graffiti is not abated and removed after service of the notice to correct, the code enforcement officer shall serve a notice of administrative violation as provided for in Section 1.09.024. The code enforcement officer may determine not to serve a notice of administrative violation on a property owner and/or possessor of the property if the code enforcement officer determines that such person(s) are not responsible for the application of the graffiti.

D.    A notice to abate may be served with a notice to correct or at any time after service of a notice to correct. The notice to abate shall be served in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 1.10.010 through 1.10.030, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code, except that the notice to abate may provide that abatement must occur within 5 calendar days of the service of the notice. The notice to abate shall contain all of the information required by Section 1.10.020(B) and shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.10.020(C). (Ord. 849  2(4) (part), 1996)

9.65.060 Abatement.
A.    Abatement at Expense of City.

1.    Summary AbatementImminent Danger to the Public Safety. The code enforcement officer or his/her designee may summarily abate graffiti at the expense of the city when it appears that the continued presence of such graffiti presents an imminent danger to the public safety and welfare. If the code enforcement officer intends to take such action as allowed in this subsection, the code enforcement officer shall notify the property owner and/or possessor of the property of his/her intent to enter onto the property to take such action at least 24 hours prior to entering onto the property. If the property owner and/or person possessing the property has not objected within said 24-hour period, such person(s) will be deemed to have consented to summary abatement by the city. If the code enforcement officer or his/her representative is notified either in writing or verbally that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property objects to the summary abatement of graffiti on his or her property, the code enforcement officer shall terminate his/her efforts to summarily abate such graffiti and shall comply with the hearing procedure set forth in Sections 1.09.030 through 1.09.049, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. Any such hearing will receive priority and shall be set as soon as practicable.

2.    Abatement Where Graffiti Contributes to Conditions of Blight. In addition, the code enforcement officer may abate graffiti upon the request of the city manager and at the expense of the city when such graffiti is contributing to a condition of blight after following the notice and hearing procedures set forth in Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    Summary AbatementStatement of CostsWaiver of Costs. If the graffiti is not abated within the time prescribed in the notice to correct, or in the hearing officers order if a timely request for hearing was filed, all persons served with such notices and orders shall be deemed to have consented to the entry onto their property by the city and the code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall be authorized to immediately abate such graffiti. The code enforcement officer shall keep an account of the costs and expenses, including all direct and indirect costs and expenses in abating such graffiti, and shall render a statement of such costs to the person or persons receiving the notice to abate. Such person or persons receiving the notice to abate shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in abating the graffiti, unless financial or physical hardship is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer. In the event the property owner and/or person possessing the property has presented the code enforcement officer with such written evidence of financial or physical hardship, the code enforcement officer will notify the property owner and/or person possessing the property in writing if costs of abatement will be waived before proceeding to abate such graffiti. In the event the code enforcement officer determines that such costs should not be waived, the property owner and/or person possessing the property may file a request for a hearing as provided for in Section 1.09.032.

C.    Failure to Pay CostsAuthority to Record Lien. Except as to persons who have demonstrated a financial or physical hardship in paying for the costs of abatement and/or abatement at their own expense, the city may impose liens and/or assessments in the amount of any administrative penalties and costs or expenses as provided for in Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 849  2(5), 1996)

9.65.070 Notice to abateHearing procedure.
A.    Notice Requirement. Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that graffiti is located on privately or publicly owned property within the city in violation of this chapter and the owner or person occupying the property refuse to consent to abatement by the city, the code enforcement officer shall serve a written notice to abate such graffiti upon the owner of the property (as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is most current), and on any persons known to be possessing such property.

B.    Contents of Notice. The notice shall be in substantially the same form as Attachment 1 and shall include the following information:

1.    The street address, legal description or other description sufficient to identify the affected property;

2.    A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property has 5 days from the date of the notice to voluntarily abate the graffiti;

3.    A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property, may, during the period of voluntary abatement: (1) file a written request for a hearing with the code enforcement officer if there is an objection to the demand to abate the graffiti; or (2) present written evidence to the code enforcement officer to show that the property owner or person in possession of the property had no responsibility for placing the graffiti on the property and that to be required to remove or abate such graffiti will cause financial or physical hardship; and

4.    A statement that if the graffiti is not voluntarily abated within the stated period, and the property owner and/or person in possession of the property fails to present the information set forth in subsection (B)(3) of this section or to file a timely written request for a hearing, all persons served with such notice shall be deemed to have consented to the abatement of the graffiti and that the city will abate the graffiti, and that, at the election of the city, the costs for such abatement may be charged against the premises and may be recorded as a lien against the premises.

C.    Service of Notice. The notice to abate the graffiti shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 5 days. The failure to make or attempt such service on any person as required herein shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter as to any other person duly served.

D.    Request for Hearing. A written request for a hearing must be received by the code enforcement officer or his/her designated representative within 5 days of the date of the notice. The code enforcement officer shall set a time and date for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing in writing of the time, date and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be before a person designated by the city manager. The hearing shall be an informal opportunity for the person requesting the hearing to present his or her objections to the abatement of the graffiti.

E.    Decision After Hearing. After conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision in writing that either upholds or denies the citys authority to abate the graffiti. If the citys authority to abate the graffiti is sustained, the decision shall contain an order to abate and a deadline for abatement which shall not be more than 5 days from the date of the decision. The decision shall be served on the person requesting the hearing by first class United States mail. The decision of the hearing officer shall be the final administrative decision by the city.

F.    Summary AbatementStatement of CostsWaiver of Costs. If the graffiti is not abated within the time prescribed in the hearing officers order, or if a timely request for a hearing is not filed, all persons served with such notices and orders shall be deemed to have consented to the entry onto their property by the city and the code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall be authorized to immediately abate such graffiti. The code enforcement officer shall keep an account of the costs and expenses, including all direct and indirect costs and expenses in abating such graffiti, and shall render a statement of such costs to the person or persons receiving the notice to abate. Such person or persons receiving the notice to abate shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in abating the graffiti, unless financial or physical hardship is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer. In the event the property owner and/or person possessing the property has presented the code enforcement officer with such written evidence of financial or physical hardship, the code enforcement officer will notify the property owner and/or person possessing the property in writing if costs of abatement will be waived before proceeding to abate such graffiti. In the event the code enforcement officer determines that such costs should not be waived, the property owner and/or person possessing the property may file a request for a hearing within 5 days of the date of that notice.

G.    Failure to Pay CostsAuthority to Record Lien. Except as to persons who have demonstrated a financial or physical hardship in paying for the costs of abatement and/or abatement at their own expense, if all or any portion of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the graffiti and accounted for by the code enforcement officer remain unpaid after 30 days, pursuant to authority created by law, including Government Code Section 38773 et seq., such portion thereof as remains unpaid shall constitute and is declared to constitute a lien on the real property which was the subject of notice to abate. The city manager or his/her designee shall present a resolution of lien to the city council, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the Sacramento County recorders office. (Ord. 825  2 (part), 1995)

9.65.080 Criminal penaltyGraffiti abatement cost recovery and parental civil liability.
Any and all violations of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. This punishment shall be cumulative of and in addition to, any other applicable punishment or relief provided by state law, including, but not limited to, Vehicle Code Section 13202.6 and Penal Code Sections 594, 640.5 and 640.6. In addition, any conduct prohibited by this chapter causing damage to property, shall cause the violator, or a parent or guardian having custody of a minor, to be jointly and severally liable with the minor, for any damages resulting from such misconduct, including, but not limited to, the costs expended to remove or otherwise abate such graffiti damage, including court costs and attorneys fees incurred in the civil prosecution of any claim for damages. The city manager shall have the authority to seek reimbursement for the citys cost of removal and abatement pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b). (Ord. 825  2 (part), 1995)

9.65.090 Alternative means of enforcement.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of state law as an alternative to proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 825  2 (part), 1995)

Attachment 1

NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI

Date: ______

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as ____________________, Folsom, California, which is visible to public view, within five (5) days after the date of this notice; or, if you fail to do so, you will be deemed to have consented to allow City employees or private City contractors to enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti.

Unless you present written evidence of financial or physical hardship to the Code Enforcement Officer for the City of Folsom at 50 Natoma Street, Folsom, California, 95630, within five (5) days of the date of this notice, the cost of the abatement by the City employees or its private contractors will be assessed as a lien upon your property and such costs will be recovered by civil process. In the event you present written evidence of financial or physical hardship, the Code Enforcement Officer will notify you in writing if costs of abatement will be waived before proceeding to abate such graffiti. In the event the Code Enforcement Officer determines that such costs should not be waived, you may file a request for a hearing with the Code Enforcement Officer at the above-referenced address within five (5) days of the date of that notice.

All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer for the City of Folsom or his/her designated representative within five (5) days from the date of this notice. If no such written objections are received by the City by the conclusion of this five (5) day period, the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.

CITY OF FOLSOM

______________________

Code Enforcement Officer

Chapter 9.68
USE OF PARK FACILITIES
Sections:

9.68.010    Purpose.

9.68.020    Restrictions.

9.68.030    ViolationPenalty.

9.68.010 Purpose.
This chapter governs the use, by the public, of all park and recreation facilities within the city. (Prior code  9980)

9.68.020 Restrictions.
No person shall:

1.    Possess, consume, sell, or distribute any beer, wine, or alcoholic beverage in designated childrens playground areas or play fields;

2.    Take any dog into any designated playground areas, nor in any other park facility, unless upon a leash, except in designated off-leash dog park areas;

3.    Operate any gasoline powered model airplane, boat, or midget car, except in properly designated areas;

4.    Sponsor or carry on any religious or commercial program or venture without a special permit;

5.    Play baseball except in designated areas;

6.    Mar or deface any buildings, equipment, grounds, or any park or recreation facility;

7.    Use any sound amplifiers, except by special permit;

8.    Ride bicycles within any designated childrens playground areas;

9.    Drive or park vehicles off of defined roadways and parking areas;

10.    Drive commercial vehicles through the parks, except for deliveries within the areas;

11.    Start any fire outside of designated picnic areas;

12.    Dump any live or glowing coals upon any grass areas;

13.    Pick or cut any flowers or wilfully injure any growing tree or shrub;

14.    Use any guns, air rifles, slingshots, or archery equipment except in designated areas;

15.    Sell any refreshment, food, novelties, or other commodity, without formal concession agreement;

16.    Ride any horse, except on designated bridle paths;

17.    Dispose of any trash or garbage except in proper designated containers;

18.    Use any park or recreation facility for private fund raising activity, except with permission of the city council;

19.    Distribute any hand bills, or circulars, or post, place or erect any bills, notices, paper, or advertising device or matter of any kind, without permission of the city council;

20.    Use any park facility or loiter or remain upon park property after closing hours as designated from time to time by the city council and posted upon such facility or entrance thereto;

21.    Purvey, sell, or dispense any drink or beverage in any park facility except in disposable containers other than bottles or cans;

22.    No person shall transport, bring or carry any can, bottle or other container designed or used for holding liquids into the rodeo arena of Folsom Park. This prohibition shall not apply to a concessionaire, or its employees and agents, which is authorized by the city to purvey, sell or dispense beverages within said area;

23.    Take any dog, other than a service dog, leashed or unleashed, onto any synthetic turf playing field in any park facility;

24.    Take any dog, other than a service dog, leashed or unleashed, into any city-owned cemetery. (Ord. 1078  2, 3, 4, 2007; Ord. 431  1, 1981; Ord. 213A  1, 1966; prior code  9981)

9.68.030 ViolationPenalty.
The violation of this chapter is an infraction and shall be punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year. (Ord. 431  2, 1981: prior code  9982)

Chapter 9.69
USE OF SKATE PARKS
Sections:

9.69.010    Title.

9.69.020    Purpose.

9.69.030    Definitions.

9.69.040    Skate parkSafety equipment.

9.69.050    Skate park regulations.

9.69.060    Closing skate park.

9.69.070    Signing and posting.

9.69.080    Enforcement.

9.69.090    Penalties.

9.69.100    Enforcement procedures.

9.69.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as The Use of Skate Parks. (Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.020 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, welfare, health and safety of persons in the city by establishing regulations for the use of city skate parks and to provide an accessible place for people to skate, skateboard, roller skate, scooter, ride bicycles during designated times, and participate in similar nonmotorized wheeled activities, in a clean and enjoyable environment. (Ord. 1288  2, 2018: Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.030 Definitions.
Bicycles means a human-powered, pedal-driven, single track vehicle having two wheels attached to a frame one behind the other. For the purposes of this chapter the bicycle wheel shall be a minimum of sixteen inches.

Roller skates means any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one or more wheels are attached. This definition includes, but is not limited to, inline skates and roller blades.

Safety equipment means helmet, elbow pads and kneepads, which are suitable safety devices, functional and protective, properly sized and designed for their intended use at a skate park.

Scooters means a vehicle typically ridden as a form of recreation, consisting of a footboard mounted on two wheels and a long steering handle, propelled by resting one foot on the footboard and pushing the other against the ground.

Skateboard means a platform of any dimension or size to which two or more wheels are attached and which is intended to be human propelled and ridden by one or more persons standing, crouching, or kneeling upon it to which there is not affixed any seat or any other device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels.

Skating means the use of roller skates, skateboards, or similar nonmotorized wheeled recreational devices, including but not limited to scooters and wheelchairs.

Skate park means any public recreation facility, structure, or area which has been specifically designed and built to provide skating opportunities to persons using roller skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar nonmotorized wheeled recreational devices, or bicycles if permitted by the director of parks and recreation or his/her designee, and which has been designated as a skate park by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1288  3, 2018: Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.040 Skate parkSafety equipment.
Skating and bicycling are hazardous recreational activities. Because of the particular design features of a skate park, skating, or riding bicycles used to perform tricks and stunts, at a skate park is considered a stunt, trick or luge activity. All persons skating, or bicycling, in a skate park do so at their own risk.

Any person entering, using or remaining in a skate park shall wear safety equipment as set forth in Section 9.69.050(C) for skating or for bicycling. Failure to wear safety equipment shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and will subject violators to the penalties set forth in Section 9.69.090. (Ord. 1288  4, 2018: Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.050 Skate park regulations.
All persons using skate parks within the city shall comply with the following rules and regulations:

A.    The skate park shall have fixed hours of use. No person shall use the skate park at times other than the times posted at the skate park.

B.    The skate park shall only be used for skating, except as otherwise may be permitted by the director of parks and recreation or his/her designee.

C.    No person shall enter, use or remain in the fenced area designated for skating within a skate park unless they wear proper safety equipment including a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. All such safety equipment must be suitable safety devices, functional and protective, properly sized and designed for its intended use at the skate park. Helmets shall conform to state standards relating to bicycle safety helmets.

D.    No person shall enter, use or remain in the fenced area generally designated for skating for the purpose of bicycling, unless they wear proper safety equipment, including a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. Pegs shall either be removed or be made of plastic. Metal pegs are prohibited in the skate park.

E.    No spectators are allowed in the fenced area of the skate park except persons teaching or coaching beginner skaters or bicyclists. Any person teaching or coaching beginner skaters or bicyclists while not skating or bicycling is required to wear a safety helmet while in the skate park. Any person teaching or coaching beginner skaters or bicyclists while skating or bicycling is required to wear safety equipment as set forth in subsection C of this section.

F.    The skate park is a designated childrens playground area. No alcohol or tobacco is permitted.

G.    No person shall cause graffiti or tagging or place stickers or decals in the skate park or anywhere in the surrounding park areas.

H.    Safe and courteous skate park use is required. No person shall skate or use any skateboard, roller skates, or bicycle in a skate park in an unsafe or reckless manner or with willful disregard for the safety of persons or property.

I.    No person shall skate or bicycle on curbs, fences, railings, walls, benches, tables, and/or driveways of the city-owned area surrounding the skate park.

J.    Food and drink are prohibited in the skate park except in designated eating areas.

K.    Structures, obstacles or other materials (ramps, jumps) may not be brought into the skate park.

L.    No audio earphones, headphones, or cell phones shall be used while skating or bicycling. Personal amplified sound systems are not permitted in the skate park. The director of parks and recreation or his/her designee may authorize the use of amplified sound for special events; however, such authorization shall only be effective if obtained in advance and in writing.

M.    No skating or bicycling is allowed when skate park surfaces are wet.

N.    All skating or bicycling contests, events, or organized exhibitions of any kind must have prior written approval from the director of parks and recreation or his/her designee.

O.    No animals are allowed in the skate park.

P.    Bicycling is only permitted at those times permitted by the director of parks and recreation or his/her designee.

Q.    Call 911 for immediate medical attention. Report all injuries to the parks and recreation department: (916) 355-7285. (Ord. 1288  5, 2018: Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.060 Closing skate park.
A.    The director of parks and recreation, or his/her designee, may close the skate park whenever it is determined that such closure is necessary, or may promulgate other rules as necessary, for the protection of public property or for public safety.

B.    The director of parks and recreation, or his/her designee, as recommended by the parks and recreation commission, may close the skate park to skaters and permit bicycles exclusive use of the skate park for limited periods of time each week. (Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.070 Signing and posting.
The director of parks and recreation, or his/her designee, shall place and post signs in one or more conspicuous and visible area(s) of the skate park, stating that all persons entering, using, or remaining in the skate park for the purposes of skating activities, or for the purposes of bicycling when permitted, must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads (Section 9.69.040), and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation and penalties pursuant to Sections 9.69.080 and 9.69.090. Additional signage shall summarize the skate park regulations set forth in Section 9.69.050. (Ord. 1288  6, 2018: Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.080 Enforcement.
A.    Except as otherwise set forth herein, this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive.

B.    The chief of police or his/her designee, director of parks and recreation or his/her designee or designated city employees pursuant to Sections 1.09.020 and 1.13.030 shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.090 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. A violation of this chapter by a person under the age of eighteen shall result in the issuance of a notice of administrative violation against the parent or legal guardian as provided for in Section 1.09.028. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, the violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.

B.    Each of the sanctions available for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. In addition to the sanctions set forth in Chapter 1.09, the chief of police or his/her designee, the parks and recreation department director or his/her designee, or any other city employees authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to:

1.    Impound and retain possession of any skateboards, roller skates, bicycles, or similar wheeled recreational devices which are being used or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter until satisfactory assurance is given that the provisions of this chapter are complied with or for a period not to exceed thirty days, whichever is sooner;

2.    Suspend use of the skate park for a period not to exceed one year; or

3.    Any combination of allowed sanctions and penalties which the enforcement authority deems appropriate under the circumstances.

C.    In addition to any criminal penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanction set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is defined in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A). (Ord. 1288  7, 2018; Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

9.69.100 Enforcement procedures.
A.    Prior to the assessment of any administrative monetary sanctions, impoundment of equipment or suspension of use of the skate park, or the commencement of any other administrative enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.052, inclusive, shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Title 1. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 1159  2 (part), 2012: Ord. 1001,  1 (part), 2003)

Chapter 9.76
SOLICITATION*
Sections:

9.76.010    Permit required.

9.76.020    RegistrationFee.

9.76.030    RegistrationApplicationIssuance.

9.76.040    RegistrationSeparate required.

9.76.050    Residence defined.

9.76.060    Fixed place of business defined.

9.76.070    RegistrationCertificate issuance.

9.76.080    Effect.

9.76.090    County permitProvisions waiver.

*    Also see Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations.

9.76.010 Permit required.
No person shall visit any house within the city for the purpose of soliciting food, clothing or alms, or solicit alms or money or charitable assistance from any person on any public street, way or place, within the city, unless he shall first obtain a permit from the chief of police so to do. This section shall not apply to the acts of members of any association or society for benevolent or charitable purposes or for the purpose of assisting or aiding any church or like organization. (Prior code  9962)

9.76.020 RegistrationFee.
Every person not having a fixed place of business or residence in the city who sells, solicits, or takes orders for goods, wares, merchandise, periodicals, subscriptions or photographs, from house to house, shall pay a registration fee of $.50 a day. (Prior code  9963)

9.76.030 RegistrationApplicationIssuance.
Application for registration shall be made to the city clerk and shall be referred by him to the chief of police for approval or disapproval. No registration shall be issued by the clerk without approval of the chief of police or until a surety bond is filed with the city clerk in the amount of $1,000 to assure full compliance with this chapter and the integrity of the applicant. (Prior code  9964)

9.76.040 RegistrationSeparate required.
Where a person has more than 1 solicitor employed, 1 surety bond may be posted covering all solicitors in the sum herein specified. The chief of police shall not approve or disapprove an applicant until the applicant has been finger-printed. Separate registrations must be obtained for each solicitor, even though employed by the same person. (Prior code  9965)

9.76.050 Residence defined.
Residence means continuous residence in the city for at least 30 days immediately preceding the filing of the application. (Prior code  9966)

9.76.060 Fixed place of business defined.
Fixed place of business means a place of business continuously maintained for at least 30 days immediately preceding the filing of the application. (Prior code  9967)

9.76.070 RegistrationCertificate issuance.
The clerk shall issue a certificate of registration for a period of not less than 30 days which shall be carried upon the person at all times when house to house solicitation is being made. (Prior code  9968)

9.76.080 Effect.
This chapter is additional to and not in lieu of any other city ordinances relating to house solicitations. (Prior code  9969)

9.76.090 County permitProvisions waiver.
The city clerk may waive the provisions of this chapter upon a showing that the applicant has in his possession a valid, unrevoked permit issued by the county for the purpose of making such solicitations. (Prior code  9970)

Chapter 9.80
CURFEW
Sections:

9.80.010    Restrictions.

9.80.020    Parent, guardian responsibility.

9.80.030    Enforcement.

9.80.040    Penalties.

9.80.050    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

9.80.010 Restrictions.
No minor under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places, between the hours of ten-thirty p.m. and daylight immediately following. The provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment or recreational activity directed, supervised or sponsored by the local educational authorities, or when the presence of such minor in said place or places is connected with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged. (Prior code  9950)

9.80.020 Parent, guardian responsibility.
No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall permit or allow such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places, between the hours of ten-thirty p.m. and daylight immediately following, contrary to the provisions of Section 9.80.010. (Prior code  9951)

9.80.030 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The police chief or designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 847  8 (part), 1996)

9.80.040 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in Section 9.08.040(A), based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is defined in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A). (Ord. 847  8 (part), 1996)

9.80.050 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of a fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be issued. (Ord. 847  8 (part), 1996)

Chapter 9.85
TRUANCY
Sections:

9.85.010    Purpose and intent.

9.85.020    Definitions.

9.85.030    Truancy prohibited.

9.85.040    Valid excuses for absence from school.

9.85.050    Enforcement.

9.85.060    Penalties.

9.85.070    Enforcement against habitual truants.

9.85.080    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

9.85.090    Responsibility of parent or other legal guardian.

9.85.100    Contents of warning notice.

9.85.110    Cost recovery.

9.85.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public safety, health and welfare by reducing the incidence of juvenile criminal activity during daytime hours by providing local law enforcement with remedies to decrease unexcused absenteeism in schools within the city. This chapter is intended to encourage juveniles to take advantage of the educational opportunities available to them, and to improve the accountability of parents and other legal guardians for the attendance of their children in school. The anti-truancy provisions of this chapter are intended to complement rules established through the Folsom Cordova Unified School District, and the enforcement procedures established in this chapter are intended to be used in cooperation with the school attendance review board (or any successor thereto) established by the Folsom Cordova Unified School District. Nothing in this chapter is intended to repeal, reduce, or abridge any enforcement authority granted to a school district or a school attendance review board by California law, including but not limited to those remedies provided for in the California Education Code and the California Welfare and Institutions Code. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

Absent from school means physical presence away from a public school facility during school attendance hours.

Compulsory education or compulsory continuing education shall have the meaning set forth in California Education Code Section 48200.

School attendance hours means and includes the hours designated as the length of the school day by the governing board of the school district.

School attendance review board means and includes any administrative panel established by the school district pursuant to the authority established in California Education Code Section 48321.

School district means and includes the Folsom Cordova Unified School District, or any successor school district that governs the operation of elementary and secondary schools within the city.

Student means and includes any person who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuing education pursuant to requirements imposed by state law. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.030 Truancy prohibited.
It is unlawful for any student who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuing education to be absent from school during school attendance hours unless such student has a valid excuse as specified in Section 9.85.040. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.040 Valid excuses for absence from school.
The prohibition set forth in Section 9.85.030 shall not apply if a student has one of the following excuses:

A.    The student has in his/her possession a written excuse from the students parent or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor which provides a reasonable explanation for the students absence from school;

B.    The student is in the company of his/her parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the student;

C.    The student is on an emergency errand directed by the students parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the student;

D.    The student is going to or returning directly from a medical appointment and can provide written verification of the medical appointment;

E.    The student has permission from the school or the school district to be absent from a school campus, and has in his/her possession a valid, school-issued, off campus permit;

F.    The student is going to or returning directly from a public meeting or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school approved activity for the student or the student is otherwise under the supervision of school personnel;

G.    The presence of the student away from school is connected with or required by a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession or occupation in which the student is lawfully engaged; or

H.    The student is receiving instruction by a qualified tutor pursuant to California Education Code Section 48224, or is otherwise exempt from attendance at a public or private full-time day school as set forth in the California Education Code. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.050 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive.

B.    The police chief or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.060 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If the matter proceeds to a hearing, the administrative hearing officer may request findings and recommendations from the school attendance review board for the imposition of any penalty or remedial action that the school attendance review board may deem appropriate in addition to the remedies set forth herein. The administrative hearing officer shall make the final determination of the penalty after a hearing and, to the extent the administrative hearing officer relies upon the findings and recommendations of the school attendance review board, those findings and recommendations shall be incorporated in the written decision of the administrative hearing officer that is required by Section 1.09.048.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in Section 9.85.060(A), based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012, with the administrative sanction set at $250.

D.    If the matter proceeds to a hearing, the hearing officer may impose 10 hours of community service to be performed under the supervision of the chief of police or his/her designee in lieu of any other penalty. Such community service shall be performed during times other than regular school hours. In deciding whether to allow community service, the hearing officer shall consider whether the student has any prior violations of this chapter. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.070 Enforcement against habitual truants.
Upon recommendation by the chief of police, the school board, the school attendance review board, or a probation officer, the city will cease enforcement action against a minor who is deemed eligible to be adjudged a ward of the court pursuant to the procedures established in California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 601, et seq. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.080 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the commencement of any enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall issue a warning notice to the student and his/her parent, legal guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of the student. The warning notice shall be in substantially the form set forth in Section 9.85.100. The warning notice shall be served in person or pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 1.09. The warning notice shall be in place of any notice to correct that is otherwise required by Chapter 1.09.

B.    If a subsequent violation of this chapter occurs after the service of a warning notice, pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027 unless the police chief or his designee has determined to issue an infraction as provided for in Section 9.85.060(A).

C.    The enforcement authority shall make a good faith effort to issue a warning notice prior to the issuance of a notice of administrative violation or citation for an infraction. However, the failure to serve a warning notice prior to the issuance of a notice of administrative violation or citation for an infraction shall not invalidate further enforcement proceedings under this chapter.

D.    The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, shall apply. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.090 Responsibility of parent or other legal guardian.
A.    No parent, legal guardian, or other person having legal custody or control of a student shall cause, permit or allow a student to violate the provisions of this chapter.

B.    If a parent, legal guardian, or other person having legal custody or control of a student violates subsection A of this section, such person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 9.85.060. In addition to the penalties set forth therein, the parent, legal guardian, or other person having custody or control of the student may be required to attend parenting classes approved by the school attendance review board. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.100 Contents of warning notice.
The warning notice required by Section 9.85.080 shall be substantially in the form attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, subject to revision by the chief of police as necessary. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

9.85.110 Cost recovery.
A.    Determination by Court. In addition to the other penalties imposed by this chapter, if a court determines that a minor under 18 years of age is subject to civil or criminal liability based on violation of this chapter, it may provide that the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing law enforcement personnel to supervise the minor during his or her detention, over and above the cost of services normally provided by the citys law enforcement agency.

B.    Determination by Chief of Police. When the chief of police or designee thereof determines that the citys law enforcement agency incurred costs over and above the cost of services normally provided by the agency in providing law enforcement personnel to supervise a minor during his or her detention for violation of this chapter, and when it has been determined by a court that the minor was civilly or criminally liable for such misconduct, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the minor may be assessed, and billed for, such additional costs.

C.    Appeal. Any person receiving a bill for law enforcement services pursuant to this chapter may, within 15 days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of the charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal the billing. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the city manager, or designee thereof, as the hearing officer. Within 10 days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the law enforcement services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer is issued. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within 30 days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer. (Ord. 862  2 (part), 1997)

Chapter 9.88
FIREARMS
Sections:

9.88.010    Use restrictions.

9.88.020    Shooting gallery provisions.

9.88.030    Peace officers excepted.

9.88.040    Sportsmens club exception.

9.88.050    Enforcement.

9.88.060    Penalties.

9.88.070    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

9.88.010 Use restrictions.
A.    No person within the corporate limits of the city shall discharge any rifle, shotgun, pistol, cannon or any instrument of any kind, character or description which may throw or project bullets or missiles of any kind to any distance, by means of an elastic force or any explosive substance. No person shall make use of any device by which missiles of any kind or description are hurled or projected by any explosive substance, or any manner use the same to the danger or annoyance of any person or injury to property.

B.    1.    No person shall possess or discharge a paint ball gun or instrument of any kind which may throw or project paint balls or similar projectiles on city owned or controlled property or property zoned or designated as open space or parkland, without a permit issued by or written agreement with the city granting permission to do so at a specified location.

2.    No person shall possess, in a vehicle, a loaded paintball gun or a loaded instrument of any kind which may throw or project paintballs or similar projectiles and no person shall, from a vehicle, discharge a paintball gun, or instrument of any kind which may throw or project paintballs or similar projectiles. (Ord. 983  2, 2003: prior code  9944.1)

9.88.020 Shooting gallery provisions.
Section 9.88.010 shall not prohibit the operation of any shooting gallery, where a permit for the operation of same has first been obtained from the chief of police, and the chief of police is authorized and directed to issue permits for the operation of shooting galleries, when upon investigation, he has determined that such shooting gallery may be safely operated. (Prior code  9944.2)

9.88.030 Peace officers excepted.
This chapter shall not prohibit the discharge of firearms in the protection of person or property or by duly elected or appointed peace officers of the city, county, state or the United States of America. (Prior code  9944.3)

9.88.040 Sportsmens club exception.
This chapter shall not prohibit the discharge of firearms within the city limits upon authorized shooting ranges or property of an organized sportsmens club where a permit has been issued therefor by the chief of police. (Prior code  9944.4)

9.88.050 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The police chief or designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 847  9(1), 1996)

9.88.060 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A). (Ord. 847  9(2) (part), 1996)

9.88.070 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of a fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be issued. (Ord. 847  9(2) (part), 1996)

Chapter 9.90
COMMISSION ON SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Sections:

9.90.010    CreationMembership.

9.90.020    Terms.

9.90.030    Commission rules.

9.90.040    Duties.

9.90.050    Removal from office.

9.90.010 CreationMembership.
There is created a Folsom Commission on Substance Abuse. The commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 675  1, 1990)

9.90.020 Terms.
The members first appointed shall serve staggered terms: three shall serve for a period of one year, three shall serve for a period of two years and three shall serve for a period of three years. In making the initial appointments the mayor shall designate for which term each member is appointed. Except as in Section 9.90.050 provided, members appointed after the expiration of a term, shall serve for three years. Members appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of the member leaving office. Except in the case of a vacancy, terms shall commence on January first of each year and continue until December thirty-first or until the appointment of the successor to the member whose term expires, whichever is last to occur. (Ord. 675  1, 1990)

9.90.030 Commission rules.
The commission shall adopt its own rules for the conduct of its business and shall elect its own officers. Five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote of members present shall be sufficient to take action. (Ord. 675  1, 1990)

9.90.040 Duties.
The commission shall investigate the nature and extent of the substance abuse problem within the city, placing emphasis on its effect on local schools and law enforcement. The commission shall perform such other related functions as are directed by the city council. Periodically the commission shall make written reports and recommendations to the city council. (Ord. 675  1, 1990)

9.90.050 Removal from office.
The members of the commission serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office by a 4/5th vote of the members of the city council. No public hearing need be held prior to removal and no cause for removal need be shown. (Ord. 675  1, 1990)

Chapter 9.95
PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA
Sections:

9.95.010    Title.

9.95.020    Prohibition.

9.95.030    Enforcement.

9.95.040    Penalties.

9.95.050    Administrative enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

9.95.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Public Consumption of Marijuana Ordinance. (Ord. 881  2 (part), 1997)

9.95.020 Prohibition.
The consumption of marijuana otherwise permitted by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 is prohibited on any public property or in any facility or space to which members of the public have access. (Ord. 881  2 (part), 1997)

9.95.030 Enforcement.
A.    This title shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 881  2 (part), 1997)

9.95.040 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 of Chapter 1.09 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in Section 9.95.040(A) of this chapter, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(2). (Ord. 881  2 (part), 1997)

9.95.050 Administrative enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    If administrative enforcement procedures are to be used in place of criminal prosecution, prior to any such enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 881  2 (part), 1997)

Chapter 9.100
CAMPING
Sections:

9.100.010    Purpose.

9.100.020    Definitions.

9.100.030    Unlawful camping.

9.100.040    Permitted camping.

9.100.050    Storage of personal property in public places.

9.100.060    Public nuisance declared.

9.100.070    Applications of covenants, conventions and restrictions (CCRs).

9.100.080    Penalty.

9.100.010 Purpose.
The streets and public property within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to make use of these areas for their proper function. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard that adversely impacts neighborhoods, commercial property and the general welfare of the city. Camping on private property without the consent of the owner, proper sanitary measures and for other than a minimal duration adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and welfare. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and private property within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the city. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

9.100.020 Definitions.
A.    Camp means to do any of the following:

1.    To sleep any time between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. in any of the following places:

a.    Outdoors with or without bedding, tent, hammock or other similar protection or equipment.

b.    In or under any structure not intended for human habitation, whether with or without bedding, tent, hammock, or other similar protection or equipment.

c.    In, on or under any parked vehicle, including an automobile, bus, truck, travel trailer or other recreational vehicle.

B.    Setting up campsite means to, at any time, establish or maintain outdoors or in, on or under any structure not intended for human habitation, at any time during the day or night, a temporary or permanent place for cooking or sleeping, by setting up any bedding, including, but not limited to, a sleeping bag, blanket, mattress, tent, hammock or other sleeping equipment or by setting up any cooking equipment with the intent to use that location for sleeping or habitation.

C.    Camp facilities means structures, equipment or vehicles used for camping, including, but not limited to, tents, huts, temporary shelters, trailers or vehicles, if the vehicle is being used for habitation.

D.    Camp paraphernalia means implements and equipment used while camping including, but not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, blankets, mattresses, hammocks, operational cooking facilities, and similar equipment.

E.    Campsite includes any location used for the purposes of camping.

F.    Habitation means the intentional use of a space as temporary or permanent living quarters.

G.    Recreational vehicle means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation, for recreational, emergency, or occupancy as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18010.

H.    Store means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping or to place or leave in a location. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

9.100.030 Unlawful camping.
A.    No person shall camp anywhere in the city of Folsom, whether on public or private property, except as hereinafter expressly permitted in Section 9.100.040 of this chapter.

B.    It shall be an affirmative defense under this chapter for any person, without the purpose of habitation, to temporarily occupy and use a vehicle for emergency reasons such as escape from or avoidance of an abusive person(s), avoidance of driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, even though the person may sleep during the period of that use. For purposes of this section, temporarily occupy means a duration of twelve hours or less.

C.    Camping, although otherwise authorized under this chapter, shall not be permitted when conducted in such a manner as to create noise, inadequate sanitation, or is conducted in a manner that poses a danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding property; nor where the activity would be prohibited under any other provision of this code concerning the use of mobile homes or recreational vehicles. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

9.100.040 Permitted camping.
Camping is permitted in the city of Folsom only under the following circumstances:

A.    On public property specifically set aside and clearly marked for public camping purposes.

B.    In conjunction with events authorized and expressly provided for in a special event permit issued by the city of Folsom. To ensure fair and consistent application of this section, the city manager or designee may promulgate guidelines defining the criteria for permit issuance contained in this section.

C.    In motor homes or travel trailers designed and equipped for habitation while on designated areas on public or private property in conjunction with community or sporting events in which one or more of the occupants is a participant in or organizer of the event. Camping in connection with a community or sporting event shall not exceed three consecutive nights and only in areas identified by the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager may promulgate guidelines for designated parking areas for such events.

D.    In the rear or side yard of a residence with the consent of the owner or occupant of the residence. Camping in the rear or side yard is only permitted if the campsite is separated from the street by a fence, hedge or other permanent obstruction.

E.    Inside a licensed and registered vehicle or travel trailer designed and equipped for habitation while in a residential off-street driveway with consent of the owner and occupant of the residence. No more than one vehicle shall be permitted at any one location. No residential driveway shall be used for camping under this subsection for more than ten days during any one calendar month.

F.    Inside a licensed and registered vehicle or travel trailer designed and equipped for habitation while on a public residential street and as guests of owners or occupants of a residence within one hundred feet of the location where the vehicle or travel trailer is parked. No vehicle or travel trailer shall be used for camping under this subsection for more than ten days during any one calendar month.

G.    Overnight camping in connection with city-sponsored programs. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

9.100.050 Storage of personal property in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or leave unattended camp facilities or camp paraphernalia on public property, unless such storage is expressly authorized and in conjunction with a permitted camping activity under this chapter. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

9.100.060 Public nuisance declared.
Any campsite established in the city in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is authorized to abate the nuisance and remove camp facilities and camp paraphernalia as authorized by law. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

9.100.070 Applications of covenants, conventions and restrictions (CCRs).
Nothing in this chapter is intended to preempt CCRs that are more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

9.100.080 Penalty.
A.    Any person who violates any provision in this chapter is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a one hundred dollar fine.

B.    Any person cited for a second violation of the same section within a twelve-month period is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a two hundred dollar fine.

C.    Any person found in violation of any section of this chapter for the third time within a twelve-month period is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or imprisonment not to exceed six months.

D.    This chapter may also be enforced as an administrative violation under Folsom Municipal Code Chapter 1.09 and other civil remedies as authorized by law. Violations of this chapter shall be a Level A violation with a minimal initial monetary sanction of one hundred dollars. (Ord. 1043  2 (part), 2005)

Chapter 9.105
PUBLIC CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sections:

9.105.010    Purpose.

9.105.020    Definitions.

9.105.030    Consumption prohibited.

9.105.040    Possession of open containers in public places.

9.105.050    Exceptions.

9.105.060    Penalty.

9.105.070    Preemption by state law.

9.105.010 Purpose.
Public property and public areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The consumption of alcoholic beverages in these areas can constitute a public health and safety hazard that adversely impacts neighborhoods, commercial areas and the general welfare of the city. It is the citys intent to promote the use and enjoyment of public property and specified private property while balancing special events where alcoholic beverages may be permitted with appropriate conditions and regulations in place. (Ord. 1034  1 (part), 2005)

9.105.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A.    Alcoholic beverage means any alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances, as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 23004, as may be hereafter amended.

B.    ABC means the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board for the state of California.

C.    Open container means any bottle, can, jug or other receptacle which is open or has been opened and contains any alcoholic beverage.

D.    City facilities means structures, buildings, or parks owned or controlled by the city of Folsom.

E.    Public area means any noncommercial private property that is open to the general public, including but not limited to private streets and private open space areas. Public areas are not intended to include public or private golf courses or other private recreational areas.

F.    Public property means any property owned or controlled by the city of Folsom, including, but not limited to, a street, sidewalk, bike path, alley, parking lot, or public park. (Ord. 1034  1 (part), 2005)

9.105.030 Consumption prohibited.
Except as provided in Section 9.105.050, it is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in the following places:

A.    On any public property or public area in the city of Folsom.

B.    On private property open to the public, including, but not limited to, parking lots and shopping centers, except where expressly permitted pursuant to the terms of a license issued by the ABC.

C.    On a private driveway, exterior stairway or other exterior portion of private property unless the person is on such premises with the permission of the owner, his/her agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof. (Ord. 1034  1 (part), 2005)

9.105.040 Possession of open containers in public places.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage on public property or a public area in the city of Folsom, except as provided in Section 9.105.050.

B.    It is unlawful for any person possessing an open container of any alcoholic beverage to enter, be or remain on the posted premises of any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the California Business and Professions Code, including the posted parking lot or parking lots adjacent to the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to the premises.

1.    As used in this section, posted premises means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and which have been posted to prohibit the possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages.

2.    Every person owning or operating a business licensed for the retail off-sale of packaged alcoholic beverages pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code shall post and maintain a sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height visible to the patrons of such business and the adjacent parking lot, setting forth the prohibitions contained in this section. (Ord. 1034  1 (part), 2005)

9.105.050 Exceptions.
A.    This chapter shall not apply when the possession of an open container of alcohol or consumption of alcoholic beverages is within a structure or designated area located in a park or other public area for which an alcohol license has been issued by the ABC.

B.    This chapter shall not apply to city facilities during the course of approved city events where the consumption of alcoholic beverages has been specifically permitted.

C.    This chapter shall not prohibit consumption of alcoholic beverages in areas specifically described or included in an ABC license.

D.    This chapter shall not apply on public property when:

1.    The city has issued a permit for temporary use and occupancy of public property or public area, and the permit provides that alcoholic beverages will be sold or consumed as a part of the function for which the permit is issued. The city may apply reasonable conditions relating to the consumption of alcohol to any permit. The department, as designated by the city manager, that is responsible for issuance of a permit may specify those areas where alcoholic beverages may be consumed consistent with conditions of the permit.

2.    Unless otherwise exempt by state law, events occurring on public property or public areas owned or controlled by the city, which involve the sale of alcoholic beverages, must have a daily alcohol beverage license issued by the ABC and written approval of the chief of police or his/her designee. The chief of police may impose reasonable conditions through the ABC. The written approval may be modified, suspended or revoked at any time by the chief of police or his/her designee without notice or a hearing where there is a danger to the public health, safety or general welfare of the residents, public or event participants. A modification, suspension or revocation by the chief of police may be appealed directly to the city manager or his/her designee whose decision shall be final, except where the event is concluded and in such case, there shall be no right to an appeal.

a.    Should an appeal be requested pursuant to subsection (D)(2) of this section, the matter will be presented to the city manager or his/her designee as soon as reasonably practicable with the permit holder and the city representative(s) presenting relevant information to the city manager. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply and there shall be no right to cross examination of the presenters. The city manager or his/her designee shall set the time and place for the appeal and may establish the procedure for the appeal. (Ord. 1034  1 (part), 2005)

9.105.060 Penalty.
Unless another penalty is specified in state law, the following penalties shall be imposed for violations of the provisions of this chapter:

A.    The first violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars.

B.    A second violation of this chapter within one year is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars.

C.    Unless otherwise prohibited by state law, a third violation of this chapter within one year is a misdemeanor.

D.    A violation of this chapter shall also be punishable as an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020 and subject to enforcement proceedings as specified in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10. Violations of this chapter shall be a Level A violation with a minimum initial monetary sanction of one hundred dollars. Notwithstanding the procedure for administrative violations provided in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, no notice to correct as provided in Section 1.09.023 shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of administrative violation. (Ord. 1034  1 (part), 2005)

9.105.070 Preemption by state law.
This chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as applicable to any act or acts regulated by state law, but shall be limited to permitted subjects of local regulation not preempted by state law. (Ord. 1034  1 (part), 2005)

Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:

10.02    Traffic Safety Committee

10.04    Traffic Signs and Signals

10.05    Medians

10.08    Speed Limits

10.12    Commercial Vehicle Regulation and Weight Limit

10.16    Abandoned, Wrecked or Inoperative Vehicles

10.20    Parking

10.24    Bicycles

10.25    Use and Riding of Skateboards and Skates

10.28    Bridges

10.32    Off-Street Operation of Motor Vehicles

10.36    Anti-Cruising

10.40    Use of Electric Assist Mobility Devices on Class I Bike Trails

10.50    Light Rail Transportation Service Fee

Chapter 10.02
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
Sections:

10.02.010    Purpose.

10.02.020    Functions of the committee.

10.02.030    Membership qualifications and appointment.

10.02.040    Terms of membershipVacancies and replacement.

10.02.050    Officers.

10.02.060    Meetings.

10.02.070    AgendasOrder of businessVoting.

10.02.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the city of Folsom traffic safety committee (the committee) is to provide the city council with recommendations on policy related, traffic safety (operational) issues based on sound technical and practical criteria and to act as a sounding board for citizens concerns. (Ord. 911  2 (part), 1999)

10.02.020 Functions of the committee.
The committee shall have the following functions:

A.    To adopt a comprehensive set of traffic safety guidelines for recommendation to the city council, which shall apply to all items reviewed by the committee;

B.    To study and make recommendations to the city council on matters related to traffic safety;

C.    To review development proposals on a voluntary basis. (Ord. 911  2 (part), 1999)

10.02.030 Membership qualifications and appointment.
A.    The committee shall consist of 7 members, with the following membership: The police chief or his/her representative, the public works director or his/her representative, the fire chief or his/her representative, a representative from the school district, 2 at-large representatives comprised of city residents who represent a wide cross section of interests, and a third at-large representative who has demonstrated an interest in or a concern for pedestrian and bicycle safety.

B.    The at-large members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 961  2, 2002; Ord. 940  3 (part), 2001; Ord. 911  2 (part), 1999)

10.02.040 Terms of membershipVacancies and replacement.
A.    The terms of at-large members of the committee shall be 2 years. The mayor may reappoint a member, with the approval of the city council, to additional 2 year terms.

B.    The city council may remove any at-large member of the committee at any time by majority vote of all councilmembers. No public hearing shall be required prior to removal of any member of the committee and no cause for removal need be shown.

C.    A vacancy in office resulting from death, resignation, removal, disqualification, or any other cause shall be filled by an appointment from the mayor in accordance with Section 10.02.030 of this Code.

D.    A committee member is subject to disqualification and removal from the committee if he or she has 3 unexcused absences from any regularly scheduled meetings. (Ord. 940  3 (part), 2001; Ord. 911  2 (part), 1999)

10.02.050 Officers.
A.    The officers of the committee shall be the chairperson and vice-chairperson.

B.    The chairperson and the vice-chairperson shall be elected by the committee every 2 years by majority vote of the committee members. The public works representative is not eligible to serve as an officer. An officer can be replaced by majority vote of the committee at any time. No public hearing shall be required prior to removal of the officer and no cause for removal need be shown.

C.    The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the committee, or such other members as may be presiding in the aforementioned positions, shall not be deprived of any of the rights or privileges of any member by reason of his/her occupying the chair and may move, second, and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members.

D.    The chairperson shall preside and preserve order at all regular and special meetings of the committee. The chairperson shall state every question coming before the committee, announce the decisions of the committee on all subjects, and decide all questions of order without debate, subject to an appeal to the committee on which a member shall speak but once, the chairperson having precedence in speaking on questions of order.

E.    In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties and obligations of the office of chairperson.

F.    A secretary shall be assigned to the committee by the public works director. The secretary shall serve as staff support to the committee and shall be responsible for preparing agendas and agenda packets, scheduling meetings and meeting places, calling and recording roll, calling and recording votes, preparing summary minutes of the committee meetings, and other duties as required. The secretary shall not be an official voting member nor considered an officer of the committee.

G.    The terms of office of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be 2 years. If no successor is named by the conclusion of any officers term, the officer shall continue in the office until a successor has been named. (Ord. 911  2 (part), 1999)

10.02.060 Meetings.
A.    Regular meetings of the committee shall be held at City Hall, 50 Natoma Street, Folsom, California. Regular meetings shall be held on a day and time established by the committee. There shall be no minimum number of meetings per quarter. A regularly scheduled meeting may be canceled at any time.

B.    Special meetings may be called in the manner specified by applicable state law.

C.    Four members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. When there is no quorum at a regular meeting, the chairperson, or any member of such body, shall adjourn such meeting until the next regular meeting.

D.    The chairperson or in the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall call the committee to order. In the absence of the chairperson and vice-chairperson, the public works director or his/her representative shall call the committee to order whereupon a temporary chairperson will be elected from among the members present. Upon the arrival of the chairperson or vice-chairperson, the temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the item before the committee. (Ord. 911  2 (part), 1999)

10.02.070 AgendasOrder of businessVoting.
A.    The agendas for meetings of the committee shall be prepared by the clerk/secretary of the committee. Items may be placed on an agenda by contacting the chairperson, the public works director or his/her representative, or the clerk/secretary. Agendas shall be approved by the chairperson prior to the start of the meeting. Citizens or interested parties may address the committee by having his or her specific item(s) placed on an agenda or by addressing the committee during the business from the floor portion of the meeting. Agendas shall be published as required by state law.

B.    At the regular meetings of the committee, the following shall be the order of business:

1.    Roll call;

2.    Review of summary/minutes (if applicable);

3.    Agenda of the traffic safety committee;

4.    Business from the floor/good of the order;

5.    Adjournment.

C.    On all matters acted upon by the committee, the voting shall be a roll-call vote of the members present. The ayes and noes of the members shall be recorded upon the summary of the meeting by the clerk/secretary. All actions of the committee shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of the committee present and eligible to vote at the particular meeting where action is to take place.

D.    All rules of order not herein provided shall be determined in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order, Revised.

E.    The committee may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment, whether or not a quorum has been established. If a quorum is not established, no business other than adjournment may be transacted. (Ord. 911  2 (part), 1999)

Chapter 10.04
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
Sections:

10.04.010    Arterial streets, stop intersection designation.

10.04.020    Stop signErection.

10.04.030    Stop signStop required.

10.04.040    School crossingStop required.

10.04.050    Traffic direction by minor.

10.04.010 Arterial streets, stop intersection designation.
The city council shall designate certain streets or parts of streets as arterial streets and shall designate the entrance of named streets into other streets as stop intersections. (Prior code  9800)

10.04.020 Stop signErection.
Signs shall be erected bearing the word STOP at the entrance of each street into such arterial street or at the entrance of a named street into the other street. (Prior code  9801)

10.04.030 Stop signStop required.
In conformance with the Vehicle Code of the state every operator of a vehicle traveling on streets where stop signs are displayed, shall stop his vehicle at the place where such street meets the nearest property line of the intersection before entering the intersection. (Prior code  9802)

10.04.040 School crossingStop required.
No person driving or operating, propelling or causing to be propelled any vehicle shall fail to stop at least 5 feet from the nearest side of a school pedestrian lane where any signal device, flagman, or other person is stationed giving warning that children are to cross or are crossing the street. No person shall proceed until such signal has stopped, raised or been removed, or the flagman or person stationed at such pedestrian lane has given a signal to go, or has left the locality. (Prior code  9902)

10.04.050 Traffic direction by minor.
No minor shall direct or attempt to direct traffic unless authorized to do so by order of the chief of police. (Prior code  9903)

Chapter 10.05
MEDIANS
Sections:

10.05.010    Purpose.

10.05.020    Definitions.

10.05.030    Remaining on medians and roundabouts prohibited.

10.05.040    Exemptions.

10.05.050    Enforcement.

10.05.060    Penalties.

10.05.010 Purpose.
The city council finds that when persons remain on public medians and roundabouts without continuing on to cross the street, their presence and conduct in said medians and roundabouts obstruct traffic, distract drivers, and threaten their safety and the safety of others in the community. Accordingly, the purpose of regulating the use of medians and roundabouts in the community is to protect the public safety and the safety of the pedestrians and the traveling public. (Ord. 1208  2 (part), 2014)

10.05.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

Median means a traffic fixture consisting of a strip of ground dividing or separating a street, roadway or highway into lanes according to the direction of travel, whether said traffic fixture is paved, striped, landscaped or non-landscaped. These traffic fixtures are commonly referred to as median strips, median islands, chokers, curb bulb outs, diverter islands, traffic calming devices, and traffic circles.

Remain means using a median or roundabout other than actively crossing, or assisting another person crossing, the street, roadway or highway in a timely and safe manner.

Roundabout means a raised traffic fixture, typically circular in appearance, located in an intersection of two or more streets, roadways or highways around which vehicular traffic travels around it for the purpose of continuing through the intersection or moving from one of the intersections streets onto another of the intersections streets. Roundabouts may be paved, striped, landscaped or non-landscaped and may include roundabout median, splitter islands, and truck aprons. (Ord. 1208  2 (part), 2014)

10.05.030 Remaining on medians and roundabouts prohibited.
Unless exempt under Section 10.05.040, it shall be unlawful for any person to remain on a public median or roundabout other than actively crossing, or assisting another person crossing, the street, roadway or highway in a timely and safe manner. (Ord. 1208  2 (part), 2014)

10.05.040 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:

A. A pedestrian actively crossing a street, roadway or highway.

B. Any government employee or authorized agent while in the performance of official duties.

C. Utility or landscaping employees when performing utility work or landscape installation, maintenance, or repair.

D. A motorist encountering an emergency or mechanical breakdown that requires public safety response.

E. Use of medians and/or roundabouts associated with a special event permit issued by the city.

F. Medians located in residential neighborhoods where pedestrian occupancy was intended based on the design of the median, and the speed limit on the street in which the median is located is twenty-five miles per hour or less. Designs of a median permitting pedestrians are limited to those with sidewalks within the median, medians with a width forty feet or more, park benches, playground equipment, or drinking fountains. (Ord. 1208  2 (part), 2014)

10.05.050 Enforcement.
A. A verbal warning shall be issued by a peace officer for the first offense.

B. Subsequent violations involving the same individual may be enforced with a citation. (Ord. 1208  2 (part), 2014)

10.05.060 Penalties.
The following penalties shall be imposed for violations of the provisions of this chapter:

A. The first violation shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars.

B. A second violation within one year shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars.

C. A third and subsequent violations within one year shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars for each violation. (Ord. 1208  2 (part), 2014)

Chapter 10.08
SPEED LIMITS
Sections:

10.08.010    Uniform prima facie speed limit.

10.08.020    Basic speed law.

10.08.030    Designated streetsMaximum speed limit.

10.08.040    Temporary increase in limitsDesignated streets.

10.08.050    Temporary decrease in limitsDesignated streets.

10.08.060    City park/city alley/city parkingSpeed limit.

10.08.070    ViolationPenalty.

10.08.080    Appropriate notice.

*    Prior Code  9500, 9504 through 9507, and Ordinance Nos. 247, 344, 394, 480, 484 and 561, previously contained herein, have been superseded by Ordinance No. 628.

10.08.010 Uniform prima facie speed limit.
The uniform prima facie speed limit on all city streets is 25 miles per hour, except on those streets which are subject to a lesser prima facie speed by state law, and except wherein this chapter the prima facie speed limit is decreased or increased for specifically designated streets, portions of streets, or districts. No section shall be construed to relieve a person from obeying the basic speed law. (Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

10.08.020 Basic speed law.
No person shall drive a vehicle on any city street at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent having due regard for the weather, visibility, the traffic on, the surface and width of the street, or in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property. (Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

10.08.030 Designated streetsMaximum speed limit.
The maximum speed limit upon any residential street shall be 25 miles per hour. The maximum speed limit upon all other streets or highways, within the city, shall be 55 miles per hour. Any street may have a speed limit other than those listed above when a valid engineering and speed survey is conducted and when the recommendation of the survey are adopted by a resolution of the city council.

All action by city council to change existing limits shall be noticed in accordance with public hearing notification procedures. (Ord. 816 (part), 1995: Ord. 706  1, 1990: Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

10.08.040 Temporary increase in limitsDesignated streets.
When a street is completed and dedicated to the city, the city engineer is authorized to designate the maximum speed limit which is most appropriate on that street to facilitate orderly movement of traffic in a reasonable and safe manner. Within 1 year after the dedication of such street, such street shall be resurveyed and the speed limit shall be set in accordance with Section 10.08.030 of this chapter. This section does not apply to streets classified as a local street. Local streets shall remain regulated by Section 10.08.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 816 (part), 1995: Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

10.08.050 Temporary decrease in limitsDesignated streets.
The city engineer is authorized to designate a speed restriction in areas where work is being done on the roadway, or so close thereto that workers would be endangered by passing traffic. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to relieve the operator of a motor vehicle from complying with the basic speed law. Posting shall meet the requirements of CVC 22362. (Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

10.08.060 City park/city alley/city parkingSpeed limit.
The maximum speed limit in any city park, city alley, or city parking facility, shall be 15 miles per hour. (Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

10.08.070 ViolationPenalty.
It is unlawful to violate any section of this chapter and such violation is an infraction as defined in the California State Penal Code.

A minimum fine of $4 for each mile per hour in excess of the maximum, prima facie, or safe speed, shall be assessed for each violation of this chapter. A maximum fine of $100 shall be assessed, pursuant to CVC 42001, unless the person convicted has prior convictions. With 1 prior conviction, the maximum fine shall be $200, and with two prior convictions the maximum fine shall be $250. Penalty assessments and other fees at the discretion of the court are in addition to the stated fines.

Nothing in this section shall preclude the filing of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor violation, pursuant to CVC 40000.28, if, as stated in this section, the defendant has been convicted of 3 or more violations in the preceding 12 months. (Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

10.08.080 Appropriate notice.
Where the speed limit has been increased or decreased, from the prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour, such increase or decrease shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof have been erected. The chief of police, or his designate, in conjunction with the public works director, or his designate, shall provide for the posting of the appropriate signs. (Ord. 628  2 (part), 1989)

Chapter 10.12
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE REGULATION AND WEIGHT LIMIT
Sections:

10.12.010    Reserved.

10.12.040    Truck routes.

10.12.050    Length limitation.

10.12.060    Parking restriction.

10.12.070    Residential off-street truck parking by permit.

10.12.090    Exceptions.

10.12.100    Extralegal load, permits and fees.

10.12.110    ViolationPenalties.

10.12.010 Reserved.
(Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 650  2 (part), 1989)

10.12.040 Truck routes.
Any commercial vehicle or combination of vehicles, as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code, with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, with an origin or termination point within the city, of freight, merchandise or load, must drive on streets and highways designated by resolution of the city council as truck routes. These vehicles may leave the designated truck route to legally park. These vehicles may drive off the designated truck routes only to pick up or deliver freight, merchandise or loads within the city and they must do so from the city-designated truck route that is closest to the destination site or from a street, road, or highway of an adjoining city or county upon which the vehicle is legally authorized to travel. Residential streets shall not be used unless the delivery or pick up destination is on that street or an immediately adjoining street. (Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005)

10.12.050 Length limitation.
The police department and/or public works department is authorized to establish length limitations for combinations of vehicles pursuant to Section 35401 of the California State Vehicle Code. Affected streets shall be posted with signs that advise of the length limitation. (Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 650  2 (part), 1989)

10.12.060 Parking restriction.
A.    All commercial vehicles or combination of commercial vehicles, as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code, with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, are prohibited from parking or standing on designated truck routes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

B.    All commercial vehicles, or combination of commercial vehicles, as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code, with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, are hereby prohibited from parking or standing on any street in a residential zone, and are further prohibited from parking off-street in a residential zone, except as authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. This applies to detached trailers with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more. The parking restrictions in this section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted streets or highways or while delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained. (Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 650  2 (part), 1989)

10.12.070 Residential off-street truck parking by permit.
A.    Permit Required. Except as otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter or other applicable law, no person shall park a commercial vehicle subject to the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 10.32, with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, off-street in a residential zone of the city without first obtaining an off-street truck parking permit from the chief of police and paying the required fee therefor.

B.    Permit Information. Applications for an off-street truck parking permit shall be made to the chief of police upon forms furnished by the police department and shall contain the following information:

1.    Name, address and drivers license number of applicant;

2.    Make, size, year and license number of vehicle;

3.    Name and address of both the registered owner and legal owner and any PUC permit number.

C.    Required Conditions for Issuance. No off-street truck parking permit pursuant to this section shall be granted unless all of the following conditions are met:

1.    The residential property upon which the truck is to be parked is greater than ten thousand eight hundred ninety square feet or one-quarter of an acre;

2.    The truck is parked only in the rear yard of the property;

3.    No repair work is performed upon the truck while it is parked in a residential area except for minor preventative maintenance;

4.    A truck shall not enter the residential area later than 10:00 p.m. nor depart from it earlier than 5:30 a.m.;

5.    The permit shall be issued only to a property owner or tenant for parking of a single truck on such property;

6.    The truck must be parked on an impervious surface;

7.    The truck must be full, complete, operational, and legally registered to operate on California streets, roads, and highways;

8.    The permit shall be valid for one year from date of issuance and may be annually renewable.

D.    Fee. The fee for an off-street truck parking permit shall be one hundred dollars and shall be nonrefundable. The amount of the fee may be changed by resolution of the city council.

E.    Investigation by Issuing Authority. Prior to issuing an off-street truck parking permit, the chief of police may cause such investigation as he or she deems necessary to be made to verify the contents of the application and the compatibility of off-street truck parking with neighborhood conditions.

F.    Permit Display. The off-street truck parking permit issued by the chief of police shall be displayed on the lower right-hand side of the front windshield of the vehicle whenever the vehicle leaves the posted truck route or is parked or left standing in a residential zone.

G.    Suspension or Revocation. Any off-street truck parking permit may be suspended or revoked at any time by the chief of police on any of the following grounds:

1.    If it is determined by the chief of police that any of the facts stated on the application are untrue;

2.    Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter.

H.    Appeal. The denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit pursuant to this section may be appealed to the city manager, whose decision shall be final, subject only to a timely and properly filed civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. Any such appeal to the city manager must be in writing and must be filed with the city clerk within thirty days of the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. Pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any judicial action to review the decision of the city manager must be filed no later than the ninetieth day following the city managers decision. In rendering a final decision, the city shall give notice to the aggrieved party of the time within which judicial review must be sought. (Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 650  2 (part), 1989)

10.12.090 Exceptions.
The following vehicles are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

A.    Public utility vehicles and public agency vehicles bearing California or federal exempt license plate registration;

B.    Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 1031) of Chapter 5 of Part 1 of Division 1 of the Public Utilities Code;

C.    Any vehicle which has been issued and has displayed a valid permit pursuant to Chapter 10.32 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 650  2 (part), 1989)

10.12.100 Extralegal load, permits and fees.
A.    Any vehicle with an extralegal load, as the term is defined by California Vehicle Code Section 320.5, which cannot be reasonably reduced in size or weight so that it can be legally transported without a permit as provided by California Vehicle Code Section 35780, must obtain a transportation permit following application to the Folsom community development department. The permit may be issued to each vehicle either on an annual or single-trip basis. Permit holders shall obey any and all reporting requirements and restrictions adopted by the city. Annual transportation permits are limited to qualified companies whose business is to move commercial loads that would routinely exceed the maximum weight, height, width or length restrictions in the California Vehicle Code.

B.    Fees for the transportation permit shall be set by resolution by the city council. Additional fees, for special city services necessitated by the permitted transport, shall be paid by the permit holder. Examples of special services include, but are not limited to, police inspection, police transport, tree trimming, overhead wire and fixture removal, and engineering services. Department heads shall determine the actual cost for each service provided. The fees shall be collected from the permit holder at the time the permit is issued. (Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 650  2 (part), 1989)

10.12.110 ViolationPenalties.
It is unlawful to violate any section of this chapter. Unless state law specifies a different and greater penalty, violations of this chapter shall be punishable as infractions and subject to the following fine schedule:

Section 10.12.100

First violationup to $100

Second violation within one yearup to $200

Third violation within one yearup to $250

Plus: weight table fine as specified in Section 42030 of the Vehicle Code.

All other provisions of this chapter

First violationup to $100

Second violation within one yearup to $200

Third violation within one yearup to $250

(Ord. 1047  2 (part), 2005)

Chapter 10.16
ABANDONED, WRECKED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES*
Sections:

10.16.010    Declared nuisanceDefinitions.

10.16.020    Application.

10.16.030    Enforcement.

10.16.040    Alternative means of enforcement.

10.16.050    Right of entry.

10.16.060    Administrative costs assessment.

10.16.070    Abatement and removal authority.

10.16.080    Abatement notice.

10.16.090    AppealHearing.

10.16.100    HearingProcedure.

10.16.110    RemovalAuthority.

10.16.120    RemovalNotice to Department of Motor Vehicles.

10.16.130    Disposition of abandoned vehicle.

10.16.140    Administrative costs assessmentDelinquent action.

10.16.150    Unlawful.

10.16.160    Removal compliance required.

10.16.170    RemovalAuthority.

*    See also Chapter 8.28, Nuisances.

10.16.010 Declared nuisanceDefinitions.
In addition to and in accordance with the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code, the city council makes the following findings and declarations with respect to the removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances:

A.    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    As used in this chapter: Appraiser means a person designated as having the authority to make appraisals of the value of vehicles pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22855 and includes regularly salaried employees of the City designated by the Folsom city council to perform this function. The chief of police and the code enforcement officer are designated by the Folsom city council as appraisers pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22855.

Chief of police means the regularly salaried, full- time employee of the city, charged with administration of this chapter.

Code enforcement officer means the person designated to assist the chief of police in administration and enforcement of this chapter and shall have those responsibilities and rights as further set forth in this chapter, including but not limited to the removal of vehicles or parts thereof as allowed by this chapter.

Highway means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

Owner of the land means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

Owner of the vehicle means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

Public property does not include highway.

Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.020 Application.
This chapter shall not apply to:

A.    A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

B.    A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.030 Enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the chief of police, who shall designate the code enforcement officer or his/her designee to administer all provisions of this chapter. No officer, employee or agent of the city shall be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.040 Alternative means of enforcement.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of state law as an alternative to proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.050 Right of entry.
The chief of police, the code enforcement officer, or, any person or persons with whom the city council has contracted to provide such services, shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property as provided in Chapter 1.08 to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.060 Administrative costs assessment.
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof under this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.070 Abatement and removal authority.
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to serve abatement notices and the chief of police will cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.080 Abatement notice.
A.    The following abatement notice is required prior to removal of any vehicle or parts thereof as provided in this chapter:

1.    A 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle (the notice to abate), or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

2.    The notice to abate shall be in the form set forth in Exhibit A.

B.    The notice to abate is not required in the following circumstances:

1.    A vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission or wheels and each of the following conditions are found to exist by the code enforcement officer:

a.    The vehicle or part thereof is incapable of being towed,

b.    The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than $200 by an appraiser as defined in this chapter,

c.    The vehicle or part thereof is determined by the code enforcement officer to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, and

d.    The property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; or

2.    The property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.090 AppealHearing.
A.    The owner of the vehicle and/or the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located shall have the right to request a hearing before the community services director if such request is submitted to the community services director in writing within 10 days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, with respect to the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is located.

B.    If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such 10-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence.

C.    Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by certified mail, at least 10 days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If no request for hearing or sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land is received within the 10 days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding any hearings. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.100 HearingProcedure.
A.    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the community services director who shall hear all facts and testimony as he/she deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on private or public property. The community services director shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn, written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial.

B.    The community services director may impose such conditions and take such other actions as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He/she may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify such delay. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the community services director may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. Any costs required to be paid for the removal and disposition of any vehicle determined to be abandoned shall not exceed those for towing and 7 days of storage. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

C.    If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he/she has not subsequently acquiesced in his/her presence, the community services director shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

D.    If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the community services director but does not appear, he/she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.110 RemovalAuthority.
Five days after determination by the community services director that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and is a public nuisance, or 5 days from the date of mailing notice of such decision (when a notice is required by Section 10.16.100), the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantlers yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5004:

A.    The vehicle qualifies for horseless carriage license plates or;

B.    The vehicle qualifies for historical vehicle license plates.

In either such case, the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.120 RemovalNotice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
Prior to final disposition of such a vehicle, or parts thereof, the local agency holding the vehicle or parts thereof shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts thereof, and if the vehicle or part(s) are not claimed and removed from the location specified in the notice, where the vehicle or parts thereof are being held, within 12 days after the notice is mailed, final disposition may proceed. Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed and any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title or license plates. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.130 Disposition of abandoned vehicle.
Vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions set forth in California Vehicle Code Sections 22850 through 22856. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.140 Administrative costs assessmentDelinquent action.
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of the parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.16.100 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. Any costs required to be paid for the removal and disposition of any vehicle determined to be abandoned shall not exceed those for towing and 7 days of storage. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.150 Unlawful.
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of 10 days unless the vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100, in addition to any costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle that may be assessed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.160 Removal compliance required.
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100, in addition to any costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle that may be assessed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

10.16.170 RemovalAuthority.
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be left standing any vehicle on any highway or roadway within the city for a period of 72 or more consecutive hours and if such vehicle appears to be wrecked, dismantled, abandoned or inoperative it may be removed pursuant to this section. The ordinance codified herein is pursuant to Section 22652(a) of the California Vehicle Code and does not apply to any vehicle left standing as to constitute a traffic hazard under Section 22651 (B) of said Vehicle Code. (Ord. 824  2 (part), 1995)

Exhibit A

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND

REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,

DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of owner of the land)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.16.070 of the Folsom Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ____________, license number ______, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of Section 10.16.010 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Community Services Director within such 10 day period, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn, written statement within such 10 day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

Notice Mailed:

______________________________

______________________________

Code Enforcement Officer

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND

REMOVE AN ABANDONED WRECKED,

DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehiclenotice should be given to both if different)

As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehiclemake, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.16,070 of the Folsom Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (described location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Section 10.16,010 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice.

As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Community Services Director within such 10 day period, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

Notice Mailed:

______________________________

______________________________

Code Enforcement Officer

Chapter 10.20
PARKING
Sections:

Article I. In General

10.20.010    Purpose.

10.20.020    Authority.

10.20.030    Definitions.

Article II. On-street Parking

10.20.100    General.

10.20.110    Curb markings and signs.

10.20.120    Designated spaces.

10.20.130    Angle parking.

10.20.140    Taxi stands.

10.20.150    Metered parking.

10.20.200    Specific regulations.

10.20.210    Sutter Street.

10.20.220    Folsom Dam Road.

10.20.230    Folsom Dam RoadVehicle removal.

10.20.240    Sale or transfer of parked vehicles.

10.20.270    Utility trailers.

10.20.280    Storage of recreational vehicle or utility trailer prohibited.

Article III. Public Parking Facilities

10.20.310    Regulations.

10.20.320    Permits.

10.20.330    Parking meters and fees.

10.20.340    Posting of regulations.

10.20.350    Violation.

10.20.360    Manner of driving.

10.20.370    Removal of vehicles.

10.20.380    Prohibition on payment for parking in public parking facilities within the historic districtHistoric district defined.

Article IV. Miscellaneous Regulations

10.20.410    Slugs and substitutes.

10.20.420    Tampering.

10.20.430    Improper use.

10.20.440    Emergency regulation.

10.20.450    Suspension.

10.20.460    Liability.

10.20.470    Parking on lawns and yards.

Article V. Penalties

10.20.510    General.

10.20.520    Violation of Section 10.20.410.

10.20.530    Violation of Section 10.20.420 or 10.20.360.

10.20.540    Violation of California Vehicle Code parking regulations.

10.20.550    Late payment fees.

10.20.560    Collection.

Article VI. Administrative Adjudication Procedure

10.20.610    General.

Article I. In General

10.20.010 Purpose.
Pursuant to provisions of the California Vehicle Code, the city desires to regulate and enforce the parking of motor vehicles on public roadways and on publicly owned or operated parking facilities. Such regulation and enforcement is necessary to ensure the proper flow of traffic on public streets and to ensure the proper use of parking privileges on publicly owned or operated parking facilities. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.020 Authority.
Sections 22500 et al. of Chapter 9 of the California Vehicle Code authorize local public agencies to regulate the parking of vehicles on public roadways and on publicly owned or operated parking facilities. Specifically:

Section 22507 allows local authorities to regulate parking on public roadways;

Section 22519 allows local authorities to regulate parking within publicly owned or operated parking facilities;

Section 22503 allows local authorities to permit angle parking on public streets;

Section 22508 allows local authorities to establish parking meter zones and collect fees on public roadways.

Sections 40200 through 40230 of Division 17 of the California Vehicle Code makes the city, or its designate, responsible for the processing of parking citations, collection of fines and the appeals process should someone contest a parking citation. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.030 Definitions.
Within the content of this chapter, the following words shall have meanings as defined:

Person means the driver, owner or other person in control of any vehicle.

Processing agency means the party responsible for the processing of the notices of parking violations and notices of delinquent parking violations.

Public parking facility means any facility designed and intended for the parking of motor vehicles which is owned by the city or which is privately owned but operated by the city, and which is held open for common public use.

Recreational vehicle means any vehicle, whether self-propelled or drawn by another motor vehicle, which is originally designed or permanently altered, and equipped for human habitation, and is designed for travel on public thoroughfares at the maximum allowable speed limit. The term recreational vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motorhomes, mini-motorhomes, travel trailers, 5th-wheel trailers, campers and tent-trailers.

Utility trailer means any vehicle that is not self-propelled and was originally designed or altered to be drawn by another motor vehicle, which is not designed for human habitation, but rather for the hauling of rubbish, boats, motorcycles, and like equipment.

Vehicle means any device used for the transportation of persons or property as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code, and which is subject to registration requirements under Division 3 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

Article II. On-street Parking

10.20.100 General.
Whenever any section of any public roadway has been designated by the city manager and marked as required below to restrict the parking of vehicles, it is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in violation of the indicated restrictions. The indicated restricted roadway shall be designated by the city manager in writing and be filed with the police department. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.110 Curb markings and signs.
The city manager may designate portions or sections of certain streets as restricted parking areas. When such areas have been designated, they shall be marked by signs or curb markings, as described below:

A.    Red curbNo person shall park, stop or leave standing, any vehicle at any time;

B.    Green curbNo person shall park any vehicle for a period exceeding twenty consecutive minutes, except that when signs are posted indicating another limit, no vehicle shall be parked in excess of that limit;

C.    Yellow curbNo person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle except for the purpose of loading or unloading freight, and then only for the amount of time needed for same, but not to exceed in any event a period of twenty consecutive minutes;

D.    White curbNo person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, and then only for the time actually necessary for same, but in no event to exceed a period of five consecutive minutes;

E.    Blue curbNo person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, unless such vehicle displays either a disabled persons license plate or a disabled persons placard issued by the state of California to that vehicle or to one of the occupants of that vehicle;

F.    White sign with green border and printingNo person shall park any vehicle for a period in excess of twenty consecutive minutes, or in excess of any other time limit as designated in the upper lefthand corner of the posted sign;

G.    White sign with red border and printingNo person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle at any time, except during hours specifically exempted on the posted sign;

H.    Blue sign with white outline and white profile view of an occupied wheelchairNo person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, unless such vehicle displays a disabled persons license plate or disabled persons placard issued to that vehicle or one of the vehicles occupants. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.120 Designated spaces.
The city manager is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings on any public roadway. When such markings are in place, no vehicle may be parked, stopped or left standing except within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.130 Angle parking.
The city manager may designate portions of some public roadways for angle or diagonal parking. When markings are in place to indicate angle parking, no vehicle may be parked except at the angle indicated by the markings, within a single marked space, and with the front wheel nearest the curb no farther than six inches from the curb. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.140 Taxi stands.
The city manager may designate any portion of a public street as a taxi stand. Any area so designated and marked by posted signs shall be for the exclusive use of a licensed commercial taxicab and no other vehicle may be parked in that area. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.150 Metered parking.
The city council may, by separate ordinance, establish any portion of any public street as a metered parking area, and may set the rate of fees for use of such area. Whenever any parking meter zone has been established, and meters installed, no vehicle may be stopped, parked or left standing in any metered parking space when the adjacent meter shows a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.200 Specific regulations.
Specific regulations for on-street parking are set out in Sections 10.20.210 through 10.20.270. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.210 Sutter Street.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle upon Sutter Street between the intersections of Riley Street and Decatur Street at any time, except as necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo or passengers, and then only for the amount of time needed for same. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.220 Folsom Dam Road.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle on any portion of Folsom Dam or Folsom Dam Road between East Natoma Street and Folsom-Auburn Road, including the one-way portion commonly known as Bug Camp Road. This prohibition shall not apply to the designated parking areas with the observation point viewing area, nor to vehicles of the U.S. Department of the Interior, or the state of California, used for maintenance or security purposes. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.230 Folsom Dam RoadVehicle removal.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, any vehicle parked in violation of Section 10.20.220 may be removed at the owners expense. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.240 Sale or transfer of parked vehicles.
No person shall sell or transfer, or attempt to sell or transfer, any vehicle parked on any public roadway, vacant lot, public or private parking facility, or other commercial or industrial property, except upon a lot operated by a licensed car dealership, or as otherwise permitted in this code. No person shall sell or transfer or attempt to sell or transfer any vehicle parked upon any residential property, unless such person is a resident of that property. This section shall not apply to any vehicle parked in any location for less than two hours.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle which has a For Sale sign displayed in the window and is legally parked for the purpose of conducting other lawful business in the immediate area. This exemption is valid only when the occupant of the vehicle is in the immediate area, and in the process of conducting such business. (Ord. 1104  2, 2008: Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.270 Utility trailers.
No person shall leave standing any utility trailer on a public roadway without having a vehicle attached to the utility trailer capable of immediately towing it at the request of a public safety officer. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.280 Storage of recreational vehicle or utility trailer prohibited.
A.    Except as otherwise permitted under Section 9.100.040, no person shall store or cause to be stored any recreational vehicle or utility trailer upon any city street accessible by vehicular traffic, whether or not said street is publicly or privately maintained.

B.    A recreational vehicle or utility trailer shall be considered stored when it has been left standing upon a street without having been moved at least one mile within a seventy-two-consecutive-hour period. In order to be considered moved, the recreational vehicle or utility trailer must be moved and remain at least one mile away from its original location at the conclusion of the seventy-two-hour period for a minimum of twenty-four hours.

C.     A person may request, up to a maximum of four times per year, a seventy-two-hour extension permit from the city to park a recreational vehicle or utility trailer on the street; provided, that the size and the condition of the recreational vehicle or utility trailer and the parking location do not otherwise pose a public hazard. If issued, the extension permit shall be conspicuously displayed upon the recreational vehicle or utility trailer for which it was issued.

D.    In addition to other penalties and remedies available by law, a violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a parking penalty in the amount of fifty dollars for the first violation, one hundred dollars for the second violation within one year of the initial violation, and three hundred dollars for the third and each subsequent violation within the aforementioned one-year period.

E.    After the third violation within the aforementioned one-year period, the recreational vehicle or utility trailer shall be deemed abandoned. The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to serve abatement notices and the chief of police will cause the abatement and removal in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Chapter 10.16. (Ord. 1261  2, 2017)

Article III. Public Parking Facilities

10.20.310 Regulations.
The city manager may establish regulations as needed or desired to restrict parking within any public parking facility. Regulations may include hours of operation, time limits and other restrictions as needed. The parking regulations shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.320 Permits.
The city council may, by resolution, establish any public parking facility, or portion thereof, as a permit only parking facility, and may establish eligibility requirements and fees for such permits. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.330 Parking meters and fees.
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for the use of any public parking facility. They may establish regulations for the collection of fees, by attendant or by parking meter. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.340 Posting of regulations.
All regulations and fees applicable to any public parking facility shall be prominently posted at every entrance to such facility. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.350 Violation.
When regulations and fees applicable to any public parking facility are properly posted, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in violation of the posted restrictions. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in any public parking facility when the required fees for parking such vehicle have not been paid. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.360 Manner of driving.
In any public parking facility, it is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in excess of any posted speed limit, contrary to the signed traffic flow pattern, or in violation of any provision of Division 11, Rules of the Road, of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.370 Removal of vehicles.
Whenever signs have been posted pursuant to Section 22651(n) of the California Vehicle Code at every entrance to a public parking facility, the Folsom police department may cause the removal of any vehicle in violation of regulations applicable to that facility. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.380 Prohibition on payment for parking in public parking facilities within the historic districtHistoric district defined.
A.    No payment shall be required for parking within any public parking facilities located within the historic district of downtown Folsom.

B.    For purposes of this chapter, the historic district shall be as defined in Chapter 17.52.

C.    Nothing in this section shall limit the city managers authority to permit paid parking for special events. (Ord. 1162  2, 2012)

Article IV. Miscellaneous Regulations

10.20.410 Slugs and substitutes.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or other fee collection device, any slug, device or other substitute for any United States coin, or any city parking token. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.420 Tampering.
It is unlawful for any person, other than an authorized employee of the city, to open or remove fees from any parking meter or other fee-collection device. It is unlawful for any person to damage, injure, tamper with, break, impair the usefulness of, or wilfully destroy any parking meter or other fee-collection device. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.430 Improper use.
No person shall hitch any animal or vehicle to any parking meter, or use any parking meter or other fee-collection device for any purpose other than the payment of fees. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.440 Emergency regulation.
Whenever the city manager shall determine that excessive traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of any public or private assemblage or function, or for any other reason, the city manager shall have the power and authority to temporarily prohibit parking on any street or public parking facility, providing that signs are placed advising of the temporary prohibition. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.450 Suspension.
The city manager may, during public or private assemblages or other functions, suspend the enforcement of the provisions and regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.460 Liability.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended, nor shall they be construed, to create a special relationship between the city and the user of any parking space or public parking facility. Neither shall the provisions of this chapter be construed as a waiver of any immunity provided governmental agencies for tort liability contained in the California Government Code.

The city shall not be liable for theft of or damage to any vehicle parked in any provided parking space or in any public parking facility, nor for the theft of or damage to any property contained in any such vehicle. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.470 Parking on lawns and yards.
A.    Unless specifically exempt under subsection B of this section, no vehicle, recreational vehicle, utility trailer, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, camper, or other mode of transportation, whether or not motorized or operational, shall be parked or stored on a front yard, side yard, lawn, landscaped areas visible from the public right-of-way, or grass, except on a permanent driveway or parking place specifically designed and approved by the city for the purpose of parking vehicles and constructed of concrete, paver blocks or other paved surface approved by the city.

B.    Provided that written permission is first obtained from the city, which may contain reasonable conditions, subsection A of this section shall not apply to nonprofit organizations actively engaged in providing charitable services to city residents.

C.    The installation of a driveway or parking place on any residential property must preserve at least forty percent of lawn, grass, or other landscaping and permeable surfaces in the front yard setback area of the property. (Ord. 1261  3, 2017)

Article V. Penalties

10.20.510 General.
The violation of any section of this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be punishable by a parking penalty of twenty-five dollars for each violation. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.520 Violation of Section 10.20.410.
Any violation of Section 10.20.410 of this chapter shall be an infraction. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.530 Violation of Section 10.20.420 or 10.20.360.
Any violation of Section 10.20.420 or 10.20.360 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in this code. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.540 Violation of California Vehicle Code parking regulations.
All California Vehicle Code parking violations shall be punishable by a parking penalty of twenty-five dollars for each violation, except the following sections:

Section 22507.8aHandicapped Parking Space: The penalty shall be one hundred dollars for each violation;

Section 22500(L)Blocking Wheelchair Access to Sidewalk: The penalty shall be one hundred dollars for each violation;

Section 22500.1Fire Lane: The penalty shall be thirty-eight dollars for each violation;

Section 5204(a)Current Registration Tags Not Properly Displayed: The penalty shall be sixty dollars for each violation. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.550 Late payment fees.
Failure to respond to a parking citation within twenty-five calendar days will result in a ten dollar late payment fee added to the penalty and a delinquency notice being mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the citation was issued. Failure to respond to the delinquency notice within the specified time will result in an additional late payment fee of $15 added to the penalty. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

10.20.560 Collection.
The penalties prescribed in this chapter shall be collected by the city or by a public entity or private vendor acting pursuant to a contract with the city. (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

Article VI. Administrative Adjudication Procedure

10.20.610 General.
The city council may establish, by resolution, the administrative adjudication procedure required by Chapter 1244, Statutes of 1992. The city manager shall establish qualifications for the examiner and shall appoint the examiner referred to in California Vehicle Code Section 40215(b)(3). (Ord. 794  1 (part), 1994)

Chapter 10.24
BICYCLES
Sections:

10.24.010    LicenseIssuance.

10.24.020    LicenseEffect.

10.24.030    LicenseType.

10.24.040    LicenseRecords.

10.24.050    LicenseFee.

10.24.060    LicensePublicity.

10.24.070    Riding restrictions.

10.24.075    Folsom Dam Road riding prohibition.

10.24.080    Impoundment.

10.24.090    Passenger prohibited.

10.24.100    Minor requirements.

10.24.110    Public auction.

10.24.120    ViolationPenalty.

10.24.010 LicenseIssuance.
The chief of police or his designee shall issue upon written application, bicycle licenses which shall be effective until January 1, 1979, and shall be issued thereafter with expiration dates of the first day of January of every third year following January, 1979. Any such license shall expire earlier upon the date of transfer of ownership, which shall be reported by the owner to the chief of police. License fees for newly acquired bicycles may be prorated by the chief of police on a quarterly basis. Any person failing to renew a license for a bicycle within 30 days after the date of expiration of its license shall pay a fee of that established in Section 10.24.050. (Ord. 338 (part), 1976: Ord. 301  1, 1973: Ord. 285  1, 1972; prior code  9910)

10.24.020 LicenseEffect.
Licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle, for which the license has been issued, upon all the streets, alleys, and public highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, of the city. (Prior code  9911)

10.24.030 LicenseType.
The license shall be the license tag or decal designated by the state of California in accordance with Section 39001 of the California Vehicle Code, and shall be permanently affixed to the bicycle in a visible location and which bears a unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state. (Ord. 388 (part), 1976: prior code  9912)

10.24.040 LicenseRecords.
The chief of police or his designee shall maintain records on each bicycle licensed. Such records shall include but not be limited to the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, the make, type, and model of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee. Records shall be maintained during the period of validity of the license or upon notification the bicycle is no longer to be operated. (Ord. 388 (part), 1976: prior code  9913)

10.24.050 LicenseFee.
The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be $1 per year and the license shall remain in effect until it expires as set forth in Section 10.24.010. All fees collected shall be retained in a fund known as the Bicycle Fund which shall be used for the support of this chapter of the municipal code, to improve bicycle safety programs, and establish bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and lanes, within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 388 (part), 1976: Ord. 285  2, 1972: prior code  9914)

10.24.060 LicensePublicity.
The chief of police shall take such steps as are reasonably necessary and desirable to properly give publicity to this chapter and shall work in conjunction with school authorities to see that all bicycles are properly licensed. (Prior code  9915)

10.24.070 Riding restrictions.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk and the rider of a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when passing a standing vehicle or when making a left turn at an intersection. (Prior code  9916)

10.24.075 Folsom dam road riding prohibition.
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on Folsom Dam Road between Folsom-Auburn Road and East Natoma Street. The violation of this section shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Government Code Section 36.900(b). (Ord. 618  1, 1988)

10.24.080 Impoundment.
Any bicycle being operated at night without proper lighting and reflectors as required by law shall be impounded by the chief of police, until satisfactory assurance is given that the bicycle will be equipped as required by law. (Prior code  9917)

10.24.090 Passenger prohibited.
No operator of any bicycle shall carry any other person upon the bar, handle, or fender of such bicycle and no person shall so ride upon such bicycle. (Prior code  9918)

10.24.100 Minor requirements.
The failure to obtain a license as required by this chapter shall not, in the case of any person below the age of majority, constitute a violation of this chapter unless the person owning such bicycle is given written notice of the license requirements and such notice is also given to the parents and guardian of such minor. Notice shall be deemed given if mailed to the address shown on school records. (Prior code  9919)

10.24.110 Public auction.
The chief of police shall, at least once in each year, cause to be sold at public auction, all unlicensed bicycles coming into his possession as custodian of lost or stolen property. He shall not sell any such bicycle without using reasonable efforts to determine its ownership, and shall not sell such until it has been in his possession at least 3 months. The chief shall cause notice of such sale to be published at least once 5 days prior to such sale, and the sale shall be made to the highest bidder. At the time of sale, the chief may determine to sell all such bicycles as a lot sale, or sell individual parts thereof, or may refuse to sell to any person unless a reasonable price is obtained therefor. He may continue from time to time any advertised sale by reason of lack of bids, without further publication. (Ord. 301  2, 1973: Ord. 214  1, 1966)

10.24.120 ViolationPenalty.
The chief of police or his designee shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. A fine of $5 shall be imposed for every violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 39011 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 338 (part), 1976: Ord. 301  2, 1973)

Chapter 10.25
USE AND RIDING OF SKATEBOARDS AND SKATES
Sections:

10.25.010    Purpose and intent.

10.25.020    Definitions.

10.25.030    Prohibited activities.

10.25.040    Penalty.

10.25.010 Purpose and intent.
The city of Folsom recognizes the popularity, usefulness, practicality and sport of skateboarding and the use of in-line skates and roller skates. The city further acknowledges and recognizes that the improper use and riding of skateboards, in-line skates and roller skates has lead to injuries to riders and pedestrians, inconvenience to businesses, and damage to public and private property. With reasonable regulations in place, the health, safety and general welfare of the city of Folsom, its residents and public and private property are protected. It is the intent of this chapter to place reasonable restrictions on the use of skateboards, in-line skates and roller skates on public and private property in the city of Folsom. (Ord. 1014  1 (part), 2004)

10.25.020 Definitions.
Bike path means a path constructed for the primary purpose of bicycle travel on a path separate from the public roadway.

In-line skate means a shoe or boot that is fitted with wheels in a straight line on the sole of the shoe or boot.

Public property means any and all property owned or controlled by the city.

Public roadway is defined as that term is found in Vehicle Code Section 530.

Roller skate means a shoe or boot that is fitted with 4 or more wheels, 2 asides on the sole of the shoe or boot.

Sidewalk is defined as that term is found in Vehicle Code Section 555.

Skate or skating for purposes of this chapter refers collectively to riding a skateboard, in-line skate or roller skate.

Skateboard means a board mounted on wheels and made of any material that is used for gliding or riding upon. (Ord. 1014  1 (part), 2004)

10.25.030 Prohibited activities.
A.    Prohibitions on Private Property.

1.    No person shall skate on private property that has been posted by the owner at the main entrances to the property to prohibit skating on the property.

2.    No person shall skate on private property after being advised, within the previous 7 days, by the owner, a person in control of the property who is authorized by the owner or a police officer with the owners authorization not to skate on the private property.

B.    Use on Public Property. Skating is permitted only on the following public property: public roadways, sidewalks, bike paths and walkways or other pathways for pedestrian travel within city parks. Any person skating on public property shall skate in the manner provided in this chapter.

C.    Conduct Governing Skating on Public Property.

1.    No person shall skate in a reckless manner or without due care for pedestrians.

2.    Any person skating shall yield the right of way to pedestrians.

3.    No person shall skate in a manner that impedes vehicular traffic.

4.    No person shall skate on a public roadway, except on the far left side of the roadway or in the bike lane marked on the left side of the roadway.

5.    No person shall skate on public property, including public roadways and sidewalks that has been posted to prohibit skating. Signs prohibiting skating may be authorized by the chief of police with the concurrence of the public works director upon a determination that skating on such public property would constitute a danger or hazard or is otherwise contrary to the public health, safety or general welfare of the skaters, pedestrians, business owners, residents, motorists or users of the posted area.

D.    Use Upon Handicap Access Ramps, Stairs, Curbs and Fixtures. No person shall skate upon any of the following on public or private property: Ramps or passageways designed or built to afford access to buildings or structures by handicapped or disabled persons, stairs, curbs or fixtures, including, but not limited to benches, handrails or surfaces not intended for skating.

E.    Clinging to Motor Vehicles or Bicycles.

1.    No person while skating shall cling to a motor vehicle or bicycle in motion on public or private property.

2.    No person operating a motor vehicle or bicycle on public or private property shall pull a person skating or permit a person skating to cling to a motor vehicle or bicycle.

F.    Riding after Darkness Prohibited. No person shall skate upon a public roadway, sidewalk, bike path or pedestrian walkway after darkness as that term is defined in

California Vehicle Code  280, unless the person skating is wearing reflective clothing or a lighting safety device.

G.    Use of Incline Devices.

1.    No person shall erect, establish, maintain, use or place a ramp or other incline device to be used for skating upon any public property without the express written permission of the city.

2.    Incline devices illegally erected, established, maintained, used or placed on a public property are deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city. (Ord. 1014  1 (part), 2004)

10.25.040 Penalty.
1.    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a $50 fine for the first offense and $100 fine for subsequent offenses within 6 months of the first offense.

2.    This chapter may also be enforced as an administrative violation under FMC 1.09 and other civil remedies as authorized by law. Violations of this chapter shall be a level A violation with a minimal initial monetary sanction of $50. (Ord. 1014  1 (part), 2004)

Chapter 10.28
BRIDGES
Sections:

10.28.010    Purpose.

10.28.020    Definitions.

10.28.030    Unlawful activity.

10.28.040    Enforcement.

10.28.050    Penalties.

10.28.060    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

10.28.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and enforce vehicular and pedestrian traffic upon bridges, and to prohibit conduct on bridges located within the city that creates a hazard to the public health, safety and general welfare. Such regulation and enforcement is necessary to ensure the proper flow of traffic on public streets and bridges and to allow for the proper use of bridges within limits of the city. (Ord. 910  1 (part), 1999)

10.28.020 Definitions.
Within the context of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings as defined:

Bridge means a crossing, structure, or any part thereof, built over a lake, river, stream, railroad, highway or street for the passage of vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.

Rainbow Bridge means the bridge structure crossing the American River at Lake Natoma, linking the eastern terminus of Greenback Lane and the northern terminus of Riley Street.

Pedestrian means any person who is afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power, other than a bicycle. Pedestrian also includes any person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid tricycle or motorized quadricycle and, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian, as specified herein.

Responsible person has the meaning set forth in Section 1.08.020 of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 929  1, 2000: Ord. 910  1 (part), 1999)

10.28.030 Unlawful activity.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to climb on or leap, dive, or jump from any bridge located within the city.

B.    It is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk, stand, climb or remain on any portion of any bridge except for sidewalks or other areas of the bridge designed and open for pedestrian use.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to walk, stand, or climb on any portion of the Rainbow Bridge including sidewalks. (Ord. 929  2, 2000: Ord. 910  1 (part), 1999)

10.28.040 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, of this code.

B.    The police chief or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 910  1 (part), 1999)

10.28.050 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020 of this code. A violation of this chapter by a person under the age of 18 shall result in the issuance of a notice of administrative violation against the parent or legal guardian as provided for in Section 1.09.028 of this code. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, the violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 6 months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 of this code shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014 of this code, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a level E violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012 of this code. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(5). In determining the appropriate sanction amount, the enforcement authority shall take into account the cost of any rescue efforts that may be required as a result of the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 910  1 (part), 1999)

10.28.060 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the assessment of any fee, penalty, or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 to 1.09.048, inclusive, of this code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 to 1.09.059, inclusive, of Chapter 1.09 of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024A of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code, a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 910  1 (part), 1999)

Chapter 10.32
OFF-STREET OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Sections:

10.32.010    Motor vehicle defined.

10.32.020    Permit required.

10.32.030    Exemptions.

10.32.040    Operation by permit.

10.32.050    Application for permit.

10.32.060    Action on application.

10.32.070    PermitPossession required.

10.32.080    Revocation of permit.

10.32.090    Expiration and renewal.

10.32.100    Appeal.

10.32.110    Public nuisance prohibited.

10.32.120    Penalty for violation.

10.32.010 Motor vehicle defined.
As used in this chapter the term motor vehicle means any self-propelled device in or upon which any person or property may be moved, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. Motor vehicles include, but are not limited to, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, motor homes, motorcycles, motorbikes and dirt bikes. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.020 Permit required.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a motor vehicle except upon the streets, highways and thoroughfares specifically established and provided for the operation of such vehicles, except when authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.030 Exemptions.
This chapter does not apply to the following:

1.    Commercially Operated Areas. Any area commercially operated for the purpose of providing facilities wherein motor vehicles can be operated for recreational purposes, if such facilities are duly licensed and permitted under the applicable laws pertaining thereto;

2.    Public Recreation Area. Any area which is specifically established by the city or other governmental body or agency, for the purpose of allowing motor vehicles to be operated thereon for recreational purposes;

3.    Sanctioned Events. Any organized racing or competitive event upon a closed course which is conducted under the auspices of a recognized sanctioning body under permit issued by the city;

4.    Parking Areas. Any area, either publicly or privately owned, designated for the parking or storage of motor vehicles, when the operation of a vehicle on such area is solely for the purpose of ingress thereto and egress therefrom;

5.    Miscellaneous. Where the motor vehicle is:

a.    An implement of husbandry used in connection with farming activities for the purpose for which it was designed,

b.    A wheelchair,

c.    A golf cart, when used on a golf course,

d.    Used for any purpose relating to the conduct of a business where such business is conducted,

e.    Owned or leased by the city, or other governmental body or agency, and is operated by an employee of the city, or other governmental body or agency who is acting within the scope of employment,

f.    Operated by or under contract with a utility whether privately or publicly owned, or a governmental agency or,

g.    Used in connection with construction activities for the purposes for which it was designed. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.040 Operation by permit.
Any person possessing a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter may operate a motor vehicle other than upon the streets, highways and thoroughfares specifically established and provided therefor, provided such operation is in conformance with the terms and conditions of such permit. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.050 Application for permit.
A.    The owner or lessee of any real property within the city, or the agent of either, may apply for a permit to operate one or more motor vehicles on such property when the operation of such vehicles would otherwise be in violation of Section 10.32.020 by filing an application with the police department of the city.

B.    A nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the city council shall accompany each such application filed. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.060 Action on application.
A.    Upon receipt of the application for permit the police department shall grant or deny the permit and shall notify the applicant by mail of such action. A permit may be denied when it appears to the satisfaction of the police department that the issuance of the permit would:

1.    Create a condition annoying to adjacent residents; or

2.    Create law enforcement problems; or

3.    Endanger the health, safety or welfare of persons in the area; or

4.    Be injurious to the environment or wildlife inhabiting the same.

B.    A permit may be issued subject to conditions regulating one or more of the following:

1.    Duration of the permit;

2.    Hours of operation of motor vehicles;

3.    Maximum number of motor vehicles which may be operated at any one time;

4.    Type of motor vehicles which may be operated;

5.    Any other reasonable condition required to avoid those conditions which would justify denial of the permit. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.070 PermitPossession required.
A.    When a permit is issued pursuant hereto, the police department shall issue to the applicant sufficient copies of such permit to enable the applicant to deliver a copy of the permit to each person operating a motor vehicle on the premises for which the permit is issued.

B.    The maximum number of copies of the permit given the applicant shall not exceed the maximum number of motor vehicles which may be operated on the premises at any one time, if such number has been determined pursuant to subsection B of Section 10.32.060.

C.    No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the premises for which the permit is issued, unless the operator has possession of a copy of such permit and displays the same upon demand to any duly authorized law enforcement officer. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.080 Revocation of permit.
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked when it appears to the satisfaction of the police department that one or more of the following conditions exist:

A.    The person to whom the permit was issued has failed to abide by the conditions of such permit;

B.    Any person operating a motor vehicle on the premises by permission of the person to whom the permit was issued has failed to abide by the conditions of the permit;

C.    False or misleading statements were made by the applicant in securing a permit;

D.    Circumstances existing on or surrounding the premises for which the permit was issued have changed and the continued operation of motor vehicles on the premises would violate one or more provisions of Section 10.32.060. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.090 Expiration and renewal.
A.    Each permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable and shall expire one year after the date of issuance, unless a sooner termination date is contained in the permit.

B.    A permit may be renewed from time to time by filing an application for renewal prior to the expiration of the permit and upon payment of a fee established by resolution of the city council; provided, however, that the renewal may be granted, conditioned or denied in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.32.060. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.100 Appeal.
A.    Any person aggrieved by action of the police department in the granting, renewal or denial of a permit may within ten days of such action, appeal the same to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk.

B.    The city clerk shall calendar a hearing on the appeal and notify the person filing the appeal of the date, time and place of such hearing. If the appeal is filed by someone other than the applicant or permitholder, notice shall also be given to the applicant or permitholder.

C.    On the date and time for the hearing, the city council shall hear such testimony from the concerned parties as may be necessary and shall take such action with regard to the action of the police department as it may deem proper under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.110 Public nuisance prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize the maintenance of a public nuisance. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

10.32.120 Penalty for violation.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year. (Ord. 521  1 (part), 1984)

Chapter 10.36
ANTI-CRUISING
Sections:

10.36.010    CruisingProhibited.

10.36.020    CruisingDefined.

10.36.030    Congested trafficDefined.

10.36.040    Green light cycleDefined.

10.36.050    Traffic control pointDefined.

10.36.060    Warning against cruising.

10.36.070    Violation of this chapter.

10.36.080    Posting of no-cruising zones.

10.36.010 CruisingProhibited.
No person shall engage in the activity known as cruising, as defined in this chapter, on the public streets or highways of the incorporated areas of the City of Folsom in any area which has been posted as a no-cruising zone. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

10.36.020 CruisingDefined.
For the purpose of this chapter, cruising shall be defined as the repetitive driving of any motor vehicle past a traffic-control point in congested traffic at or near the traffic-control point. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

10.36.030 Congested trafficDefined.
For the purpose of this chapter, congested traffic means traffic on any public street or highway which is delayed to the point that:

A.    Motor vehicles cannot move through a one-hundred-yard approach corridor to an intersection controlled by a traffic light within two complete green light cycles where the delay in forward movement is due to the position of other motor vehicles; or

B.    Motor vehicles cannot move through a one-hundred-yard approach corridor to an intersection controlled by a traffic light within a five-minute period of time where the delay in forward movement is due to the position of other motor vehicles; or

C.    Motor vehicles cannot readily move forward on portions of public streets or highways between intersections because traffic speed has slowed to less than five miles per hour, and the delay in movement is due to the position of other motor vehicles.

The determination that a street or highway is congested shall be made by the ranking peace officer on duty in the affected area. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

10.36.040 Green light cycleDefined.
For the purpose of this chapter, a green light cycle shall mean the period commencing upon the switching of a red light to a green light through to the return of a red light. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

10.36.050 Traffic control pointDefined.
For the purposes of this chapter, traffic control point shall mean a location along a public street or highway utilized by a peace officer on duty in the affected area as an observation point in order to monitor traffic conditions for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

10.36.060 Warning against cruising.
A peace officer may issue a written notice to any person driving any motor vehicle passing a traffic control point that any subsequent passage past that traffic control point within the next succeeding four hours shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

10.36.070 Violation of this chapter.
Any person who, after having received a written notice as described in Section 10.36.060, subsequently drives past the same traffic control point within a four-hour period shall be in violation of this chapter.

The minimum penalty for a first conviction of cruising is a one hundred dollar fine; for a second conviction within one year, two hundred dollar fine; for a third or subsequent conviction within one year, two hundred fifty dollar fine. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

10.36.080 Posting of no-cruising zones.
A.    This chapter will be enforced in any area which has been posted as a no-cruising zone.

B.    No-cruising signs shall be posted at the beginning and end of any public street or highway which is a no-cruising zone. The signs shall reference California Vehicle Code Section 21100(k) and this chapter. (Ord. 607  1, 1987)

Chapter 10.40
USE OF ELECTRIC ASSIST MOBILITY DEVICES ON CLASS I BIKE TRAILS
Sections:

10.40.010    Purpose.

10.40.020    Definitions.

10.40.030    Authority to operate.

10.40.040    Use regulations.

10.40.050    Promulgation of rules and regulationsProhibition of electric assist mobility devices.

10.40.060    Enforcement.

10.40.010 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that the purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to regulate the safe use of certain electric assist mobility devices on the citys Class I bike trails in order to promote the public peace, health, welfare and safe enjoyment of the trails by all users. The city finds that reasonable time, place and manner regulations are necessary as permitted by California Vehicle Code Section 21282 in order to protect senior citizens, pedestrians, bicyclists and others using the citys bike trails. This chapter is not intended to apply to or otherwise restrict motorized quadricycle, motorized tricycle and electric wheelchairs, as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 407 and/or the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), utilized by persons who by reason of physical disability are otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian. (Ord. 1175  2 (part), 2013)

10.40.020 Definitions.
A.    Director shall mean the director of parks and recreation department of the city, or his/her designee.

B.    Electric assist mobility device means any electrically driven motor device which assists mobility for individuals to which one or more wheels are attached. This definition includes electric personal assistive mobility device (Segway and similar devices), electric bicycle, and electric scooter as defined herein.

C.    Electric personal assistive mobility device has the same definition as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 313.

D.    Electric bicycle (E-bike) has the same definition as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 406(b) as motorized bicycle.

E.    Electric scooter (E-scooter/motorized scooters) has the same definition as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 407.5 as motorized scooter that is powered by an electric motor or human propulsion. For purpose of this title, electric scooter does not include a device powered by gasoline. (Ord. 1175  2 (part), 2013)

10.40.030 Authority to operate.
A.    Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on a Class I bike trail within the citys boundaries.

B.    Electric bicycles with a license plate required under California Vehicle Code Section 5030 may be operated on a Class I bike trail within the citys boundaries, subject to the regulations, restrictions and prohibitions set forth in this chapter and Chapter 10.24.

C.    Electric scooters may be operated on a Class I bike trail within the citys boundaries, subject to the regulations set forth in Articles 5 and 6 of Chapter 1, Division 11 of the California Vehicle Code (Section 21220 et seq.) and the regulations, restrictions and prohibitions set forth in this chapter.

D.    Appropriate educational signage shall be posted on the Class I bike trail that notifies the public of the permissible use of electric assist mobility device pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1175  2 (part), 2013)

10.40.040 Use regulations.
A.    Electric personal assistive mobility devices shall be operated only on paved portions of the bike trail and shall not deviate, except in an emergency, onto unpaved areas of the trail.

B.    The operator of an electric scooter on the citys Class I bike trail shall not do any of the following:

1.    Operate an electric scooter unless it is equipped with a brake that will enable the operator to make a braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.

2.    Operate an electric scooter with a speed limit in excess of fifteen miles per hour.

3.    Operate an electric scooter without wearing, at a minimum, a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet that meets the standards described in California Vehicle Code Section 21212.

4.    Operate an electric scooter without a valid drivers license or instruction permit as required by California Vehicle Code Section 21235.

5.    Operate an electric scooter with any passengers in addition to the operator.

6.    Operate an electric scooter carrying any package, bundle, or article that prevents the operator from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.

7.    Operate an electric scooter upon a sidewalk, except as may be necessary to enter or leave adjacent property.

8.    Operate an electric scooter with the handlebars raised so that the operator must elevate his or her hands above the level of his or her shoulders in order to grasp the normal steering grip area.

9.    Leave an electric scooter lying on its side on the bike trail, or park an electric scooter on a bike trail in any other position, so that there is not an adequate path for pedestrian or bicycle traffic.

10.    Towing by any means or any person on a skateboard, skates, scooter, bicycle or other wheeled device, vehicle or another electric assist mobility device. (Ord. 1175  2 (part), 2013)

10.40.050 Promulgation of rules and regulationsProhibition of electric assist mobility devices.
A.    The director may promulgate reasonable rules and policies pertaining to the use of electric assist mobility devices on the citys Class I bike trail for purpose of maintaining the safe enjoyment of the bike trail by all users.

B.    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the director may restrict or prohibit the use of any electric assist mobility device anywhere on the citys Class I bike trails whenever it is determined in the directors discretion that such prohibition is necessary for the protection of public property, for public safety, or when such use is inconsistent with the safe use of the trails by pedestrians and/or bicyclists. Notice of prohibition or restriction, including the location and the duration, shall be posted as quickly as practicable at the affected location on the Class I bike trail within the citys boundaries. (Ord. 1175  2 (part), 2013)

10.40.060 Enforcement.
A.    Violations of this chapter shall constitute infractions. Violation not abated at the end of the day shall constitute a new violation on the following day. In addition to all other remedies at law or in equity, violations may be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year; and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same provision within one year.

B.    Violations of this chapter may also be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.09. Notwithstanding other provisions of Chapter 1.09, no notice to correct as provided therein shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of violation and imposition of administrative penalties.

C.    The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude any other remedy, and nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable law.

D.    In addition to the sanctions set forth herein, the chief of police or his/her designee, the director or his/her designee, or any other city employees authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to:

1.    Impound for a period not to exceed fourteen calendar days any electric assist mobility devices which are being used or operated while the operator is intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or if further operation of the device by the operator would pose a significant danger to the public.

2.    Any combination of allowed sanctions and penalties which the enforcement authority deems appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 1175  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 10.50
LIGHT RAIL TRANSPORTATION SERVICE FEE
Sections:

10.50.010    Findings and purpose.

10.50.020    Definitions.

10.50.030    Light rail transportation service fee.

10.50.040    Establishment and administration of light rail transportation service fund.

10.50.050    Payment of light rail transportation service fee.

10.50.060    Amount of light rail transportation service fee.

10.50.070    Exemptions.

10.50.080    Appeal procedure.

10.50.090    Inflationary adjustments.

10.50.100    Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.

10.50.010 Findings and purpose.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to implement the city General Plan, Urban Development Policy No. 17.20, which requires that the city develop a long service system to service Folsom residents and businesses. As required by the General Plan, a long range transit plan has been developed entitled City of Folsom Light Rail Transit Implementation Study, Final Report, dated February 1993" (hereafter the transit study), and includes an analysis of the feasibility and financing of:

1.    Continued city-operated intra-community bus service;

2.    Continued city-operated commuter bus service to downtown Sacramento and/or service to the nearest RT Metro Rail Station;

3.    Extending RT Metro service to Folsom and the preservation of future rights-of-way.

B.    Based upon the information contained in the transit study, the city council finds that existing transportation services will be inadequate to accommodate the needs generated by projected new residential, industrial and commercial growth in the city, and that additional transit facilities are needed to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of Folsom residents and businesses. This finding is based on the transit study, and on such other information provided to the city council at the public hearing concerning the adoption of this fee.

C.    The cumulative and growth inducing environmental impacts of the facilities described in the transit study have been identified in the Final Environmental Impact Report (EIR) prepared for the 1988 General Plan. Prior to action on site-specific projects, subsequent environmental review will be undertaken as necessary pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The city council finds that pursuant to Section 15162 of the CEQA Guidelines, no new effects would occur as a result of this action beyond those identified in the General Plan EIR, and no new mitigation measures are required. Therefore, the city council further finds that adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is within the scope of the Final EIR prepared for the citys General Plan project, and certified by the city council in Resolution No. 2522.

D.    Pursuant to General Plan Policies 11.5, 11.6, 11.7, 40.1, 41.3 and similar policies and goals throughout the General Plan, it is the citys policy to require new development to pay its fair share of the cost to expand public facilities and services that will be necessary to serve residential, industrial and commercial development. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the requirements of the General Plan requirements and, under the authority of Article XI, Section 7, of the California Constitution and the authority of Title 7 of the Government Code, to establish the appropriate method of ensuring that sufficient funding for light rail transportation services is available to serve residential, industrial and commercial growth in the city.

E.    The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to payment of the fee on building permits would jeopardize residents of the community, in that it would permit construction and development to proceed without adequate light rail transportation service facilities or means of financing such facilities.

F.    Analysis of the land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the general plan makes it possible to estimate the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the population generated by those dwelling units and the number of persons to be employed by commercial and industrial land users. It is therefore possible to arrive at a fee, based on population and jobs created which equitably spreads the burden of financing light rail transportation to those who create the need for such services. It is the intent of this chapter to create such a fee, spreading costs of light rail transportation service to those who create the need for such facilities, without generating any surplus to the general fund. It is a further purpose of this chapter to implement the general plan by assuring that adequate light rail transportation service is financed and provided to serve the future needs of the city.

G.    In order to determine the need for light rail transit service facilities created by new residents and jobholders and to spread the cost of such facilities among those who create the need for them, the city conducted various studies. The studies estimated the number and type of light rail transportation service facilities to meet the needs created by new development and the cost of such facilities. The fee established by this chapter has been calculated in the manner called for in the studies in order that the impact upon facilities is borne by the type of development causing the same.

H.    The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges or taxes, required by law or city code as a condition of development, including, but not limited to, the residential construction tax levied by Chapter 17.90, drainage fees levied by Chapter 17.95, major road fees levied by Chapter 12.04, capital improvement new construction fees levied by Chapter 17.92.

I.    The fee established by this chapter is necessary in order to assure compliance with the applicable general plan requirements that new development bear the cost for light rail transportation service infrastructure which is needed to serve such development.

J.    That the city council has considered the effect of the fee imposed by this chapter with respect to the housing needs of the city as a whole and of the region, particularly as required by the housing element of the general plan, and the city council finds that this chapter does not unduly adversely affect the citys ability to provide for such needs. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.020 Definitions.
The following words are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:

Building permit means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure pursuant to and as defined by the building code.

Capital improvement program means those proposed city-wide facilities identified in the transit study.

Commercial means those business activities which are permitted or allowed in the BP, C-1, C-2, C-3, CH or bed and breakfast zoning district as set forth in Title 17 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

Director means the finance director.

Dwelling, multiple-family or multiple-family dwelling means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by two or more families, living independently of each other; provided, that multiple-family dwelling also includes forms of congregate living, including, without mitigation, senior citizen homes, retirement homes or boarding homes.

Dwelling, single-family or single-family dwelling means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by one family.

Dwelling, mobilehome or mobilehome dwelling means a structure designed for occupancy as a residence by one family that is regulated by Chapter 17.74.

Dwelling unit means a building or part of a building designed for occupancy as a residence by a family.

Facilities means those light rail transportation service improvements, or infrastructure generally identified in the transit study, and more specifically determined from time to time by the city council.

Fee or light rail transportation service fee means the fee(s) established by this chapter.

General plan refers to the city General Plan adopted by the Folsom city council in 1988, including all subsequent updates and amendments.

Improvement funds means these special funds established pursuant to Section 17.92.030.

Industrial means those business activities which are permitted or allowed in the M-I, M-2, M-L or MF zoning districts as set forth in Title 17 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

Residential means those activities which are permitted or allowed in the R-1-L, R-1-ML, R-1-M, R-3, R-M or R4 zoning districts as set forth in Title 17 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

Studies means the following plans and studies:

1.    City General Plan of 1988; and

2.    City Light Rail Transit Implementation Study, Final Report, dated February 1993. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.030 Light rail transportation service fee.
There is established a light rail transportation service fee which shall be imposed on all residential, commercial and industrial property located in the city, unless such property is otherwise exempt as provided for in Section 10.50.070. The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges or taxes that are required by law or city code as a condition of development, including, but not limited to, the residential construction tax levied by Chapter 17.90, drainage fees levied by Chapter 17.95, and major road fees levied by Chapter 12.04. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.040 Establishment and administration of light rail transportation service fund.
The finance director is directed to establish a special fund entitled the light rail transportation service fund. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in this fund and shall be expended solely to finance the planning, construction and development of the facilities identified in the transit study. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.050 Payment of light rail transportation service fee.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter the fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a structure which is subject to this chapter. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.060 Amount of light rail transportation service fee.
The light rail transportation service fee shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council of the city, and shall be based upon the determination in the transit study of: (1) the use of the fee and the type of development on which the fee is imposed; (2) the need for the facilities and/or services created by new residential and commercial development; and (3) the reasonable cost of the facilities and/or services attributable to new development. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.070 Exemptions.
A.    No fee shall be charged for the following developments or projects:

1.    Completed structures;

2.    Structures under construction for which a valid building permit is in force upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless such building permit contains an express condition requiring the payment of this fee;

3.    Construction within a subdivision which is covered by a development agreement entered into between the developer and the city under Government Code Section 65864 et seq., which agreement is in full force and effect and expressly prohibits the imposition of additional fees pertaining to light rail transportation services;

4.    Building permits for projects with a vesting tentative map approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that the vesting tentative map did not require the payment of a fee to mitigate such impacts or include a condition for mitigation for impacts on police, fire and general governmental services or facilities.

B.    If any residential structure in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy to the extent of more than 1/2 the value thereof, any rebuilding after the date of such destruction shall not be subject to the fee imposed by the chapter provided the area of such structure is not increased by more than 10 percent. For the purposes of this chapter, the value shall be determined by the city building inspector based upon the cost of replacement.

C.    Additions to existing commercial or industrial structures shall be subject to the fee established by the chapter.

D.    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit these regulations from applying to such projects if existing entitlements expire and/or the applicant applies for a new approval subject to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager or his designee may issue regulatory guidelines to administratively implement this section.

E.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.080 Appeal procedure.
A.    The developer of any project subject to the fee established by this chapter may apply to the director for a reduction or adjustment to the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the project and either the amount of the fee or the facilities to be financed by the fee. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director not later than 20 calendar days after notification of the amount of the fee. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed reduction or adjustment. The director shall consider the application and render his/her decision in writing not later than 15 calendar days after the filing of the fee adjustment request. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director may, within 10 calendar days thereafter, appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall consider such appeals within 45 calendar days after filing. The decision of the city council shall be final, and shall be reviewable by the Superior Court under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. No building permit shall be issued for the project until the final decision pursuant to this section has been made. No application for a project shall be considered final or complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920, et seq.), or any other purpose, until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made.

B.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a project proponent or applicant may pay the fee under protest and receive a building permit. An application for reduction or adjustment pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be filed within 10 calendar days after payment under protest and if not so filed, any objection shall be deemed waived. If a reduction or adjustment is made after payment pursuant this subsection, the applicant shall be refunded the amount by which the fee is reduced or adjusted.

C.    The project proponent or applicant applying for a reduction or adjustment shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a reasonable relationship or nexus is lacking between the fee, or facilities to be financed by the fee, and the particular project.

D.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.090 Inflationary adjustments.
The fee established by this chapter shall automatically be adjusted each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the change in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost index. The determination shall be reported in writing to the city council by the director as soon as the information is available. The city council shall forthwith make such adjustment by resolution. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

10.50.100 Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.
When the moneys in the light rail transportation service fund are disbursed for use, the fees shall be used only to finance the planning, acquisition, construction and development of the facilities provided for in the transit study, and any improvement plan that may be adopted by the city council to implement the recommendations in the study. (Ord. 872  1 (part), 1997)

Title 11
(RESERVED)
Title 12
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapters:

12.04    Construction of Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters

12.08    Dedication of Streets

12.12    Closure of Streets

12.16    Tree Preservation

12.20    Use of City Property

Chapter 12.04
CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS
Sections:

12.04.010    City council authority.

12.04.020    Sidewalk width.

12.04.030    PermitIssuance.

12.04.040    PermitRequired.

12.04.050    Construction requirements.

12.04.060    Transportation improvement fee.

12.04.010 City council authority.
The city council shall establish plans and specifications for curbs and gutters within the city and shall make all curbs and gutters installed uniform in design. (Prior code  4800)

12.04.020 Sidewalk width.
The city council shall specify the width of all sidewalks to be installed in the city. (Prior code  4801)

12.04.030 PermitIssuance.
The superintendent of streets shall issue permits for the construction of curbs and gutters and sidewalks in the city upon application therefor, and shall only issue such permits for the construction of curbs and gutters and sidewalks to be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the city. (Prior code  4802)

12.04.040 PermitRequired.
No person shall construct curbs, gutters or sidewalks in the city without first procuring a permit from the superintendent of streets for the doing of such work. (Prior code  4803)

12.04.050 Construction requirements.
The street area in front of, and adjacent to, if a corner lot, and both street areas, if bordering on 2 streets, of all property having new construction, repairs or alterations, shall be improved with curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving and drainage facilities while the construction work is in progress on the property. This section is applicable only when the improvement of the property exceeds 5 times the cost of placing the necessary improvements in the street area. Driveways must be removed and curbs and sidewalks installed when buildings or other constructions are constructed causing the abandonment of driveways.

If the work of improvement is not performed by the owner within 90 days after the completion of the new construction, the city manager is authorized to install the curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving and drainage facilities or cause the same to be constructed. The cost of labor, materials, equipment rental and overhead as necessary to perform the work shall be charged against the owner of the real property and the charges shall become a lien upon the real property.

If the city manager deems installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks or paving inadvisable, he may waive this requirement. He may not waive this requirement if the construction is within 200 feet of other existing curbs, gutters, sidewalks or paving fronting on the same block. (Ord. 487  9, 1982: Ord. 323  1, 1975: prior code  4808)

12.04.060 Transportation improvement fee.
A.    Subject to the exemptions herein set forth, there is established a transportation improvement fee which shall be collected prior to issuance of building permits for the construction of new buildings or improvements in accordance with a schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. The fee shall not be collected in the following instances:

1.    Work is to be performed on an existing building or improvement, which does not increase the area of such building. If the number of square feet in the building or improvement is increased, then the fee shall be based upon the increase in square footage. No additional fee shall be charged for increasing the area of dwelling units as long as additional dwelling units are not created.

2.    Said fee shall not apply to any person who obtains a building permit for reconstruction or repair of any building or improvement which was damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood or other cause over which the owner had no control (provided that compliance with any statute or regulation or any building code or other ordinance required by city or by any other applicable law shall not be deemed a cause over which owner has no control), but only if:

a.    Such reconstruction or repair is done pursuant to a building permit issued within one year of such damage or destruction; and

b.    The number of square feet in the building or improvement is not increased. No additional fee shall be charged for increasing the area of dwelling units so long as additional dwelling units are not created.

If the number of square feet in the building or improvement is increased, then said fee shall be based upon the increase in square footage.

B.    The purpose of the fee is to establish a fund for financing transportation facilities as identified in the circulation element of the city general plan and those studies which identify specific transportation facility improvements called for in the circulation element and the estimated costs thereof. Improvements include construction of new transportation facilities where there are none and reconstruction of existing transportation facilities which are not sufficient to accommodate increased traffic caused by new development. Improvements include, where applicable, pavement, grading, drainage systems, sound attenuation facilities, landscaping, traffic signal systems, bridges, freeway interchanges, street lighting, design, inspection and contract administration, light rail transit facilities, park and ride lots, and appurtenances related to the specific improvements listed herein.

C.    The area of benefit of the transportation facilities is the entire corporate limits of the city.

D.    In the event a developer has constructed eligible transportation facilities, such developer shall be entitled to receive a credit against the transportation improvement fee or shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the cost of constructing transportation facilities, as determined by the director of public works. If credit is allowed, such credit shall be given at the building permit stage on a first-come, first-served basis until the credit has been exhausted. If reimbursement is allowed, the city and the developer shall enter into a reimbursement agreement which establishes the amount and method of reimbursement. For the purpose of determining the amount of credit or reimbursement, construction costs shall not include value of right-of-way dedicated as a part of the development, nor any improvements which are not supported by the transportation improvement fee. In no case shall the amount of credit or reimbursement for construction of any transportation facility or facilities exceed the estimated cost of the facility or facilities identified in the studies which support the resolution fixing the amount of the transportation improvement fee.

E.    The public works director (hereinafter referred to as director) shall have the responsibility for the administration of this section, the calculation of fees hereunder, and the determination as to whether a credit or reimbursement is to be allowed.

F.1. The developer of any project subject to the fee established by this section may apply to the director for a reduction or adjustment to the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the project and either the amount of the fee or the transportation facilities to be financed by the fee. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director not later than 20 calendar days after notification of the amount of the fee. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed reduction or adjustment. The director shall consider the application and render his/her decision in writing not later than 45 calendar days after the filing of the fee adjustment request. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director may, within 20 calendar days thereafter, appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall consider such appeals within 45 calendar days after filing. The decision of the city council shall be final. No building permit shall be issued for the project until the final decision pursuant to this section has been made. No application for a project shall be considered final or complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920, et seq.), or any other purpose, until a final decision pursuant to this section has been made.

2.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (F)(1) of this section, a project proponent or applicant may pay the fee under protest and receive a building permit. An application for reduction or adjustment pursuant to subsection (F)(1) of this section shall be filed within 90 calendar days after payment under protest and if not so filed, any objection shall be deemed waived. If a reduction or adjustment is received after payment pursuant to this subsection is made, a refund to the applicant shall be made of the amount by which the fee is reduced or adjusted.

3.    The project proponent or applicant applying for a reduction or adjustment shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a reasonable relationship or nexus is lacking between the fee, or the facilities to be financed by the fee, and the particular project.

4.    In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the then owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation, whether or not a building permit is required.

G.    The fee established by this section shall be adjusted each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the change in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost index. Said determination shall be reported in writing to the city council by the director as soon as the information is available. The city council shall forthwith make said adjustment by resolution, based upon findings that the revised costs are reasonable. (Ord. 780  1, 1993: Ord. 528  1, 1984: Ord. 357, 1977)

Chapter 12.08
DEDICATION OF STREETS
Sections:

12.08.010    Improvement required.

12.08.010 Improvement required.
All offers of real property to the city for dedication for street purposes shall be, prior to the acceptance by the city council, improved by the person offering the proposed streets to the city, to such minimum specifications as shall be established by the city council. (Prior code  4900)

Chapter 12.12
CLOSURE OF STREETS
Sections:

12.12.010    Public notification.

12.12.020    Barrier, sign requirements.

12.12.030    Chief of police authority.

12.12.010 Public notification.
The chief of police shall notify the public that a city street is temporarily closed or its use is restricted by the erection of suitable barriers upon such street, or by the posting of notices, signs or warning devices upon such public street. (Prior code  9900)

12.12.020 Barrier, sign requirements.
No public utility or department in this city shall erect or place any barrier or sign unless of a type first approved by the city council. The instructions of any barrier or sign approved erected or placed by a public utility, or by any department of this city shall be obeyed. (Prior code  9901)

12.12.030 Chief of police authority.
The chief of police may restrict the use of, or temporarily close any city street when he considers such restriction or temporary closing of such street, necessary for the protection of the public or for the protection of such street from damage during storms or during construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon. (Prior code  9904)

Chapter 12.16
TREE PRESERVATION
Sections:

12.16.010    Purpose and intent.

12.16.020    Definitions.

12.16.030    Regulated activity and exemptions.

12.16.040    Tree permit process.

12.16.050    Environmental review.

12.16.060    Conditions.

12.16.070    Mitigation.

12.16.080    Street tree planting.

12.16.090    Establishing landmark tree(s).

12.16.100    Appeals from action on issuance or denial of a permit.

12.16.110    Appeal fee for appeals from action on issuance or denial of a permit.

12.16.120    Appeal hearings concerning action on issuance or denial of a permit.

12.16.130    Actions on appeals concerning issuance or denial of a permit.

12.16.140    Enforcement.

12.16.143    Penalties.

12.16.145    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

12.16.150    Mitigation fees.

12.16.160    Delegation.

12.16.170    Application fees.

12.16.180    Amendment of project.

12.16.190    Notices.

12.16.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    In order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, to enhance the beauty of Folsom and to complement and strengthen zoning, subdivision and land use standards and regulations, while at the same time recognizing individual rights to develop private property, the city council finds it necessary to establish basic standards, measures and compliance for the preservation and protection of trees.

B.    The provisions of this chapter are enacted to:

1.    Establish and maintain the optimum amount of tree cover on public and private lands to enhance the natural scenic beauty, moderate climatic conditions, and sustain property values;

2.    Promote conservation of tree resources;

3.    Authorize the planning director to administer the tree ordinance;

4.    Implement the conservation goals of the General Plan. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.020 Definitions.
For purposes of the issuance of any permit required under this chapter, an appeal body means either the city council or the planning commission, as described in Section 12.16.100, whose responsibility is to hear appeals from decisions made by the approving authority.

Approving authority means any one of the following: city council, planning commission, or planning director or his/her designated person, or other body granted authority under this code to act on subject entitlement.

Arborist report means a report prepared by an arborist containing specific information on location, condition, potential impacts of development, recommended actions and mitigation measures relating to 1 or more trees on an individual lot or project site.

Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree measured at 4 1/2 feet above the ground while standing on the high side of the tree. The diameter shall be calculated by use of the following formula:

diameter = circumference/3.142

Discretionary projects means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the city council or planning commission decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity. Discretionary projects include, but are not limited to: conditional use permits, tentative parcel maps, changes in zoning districts, tentative subdivision maps, variances or planned development permits.

Dripline means the outermost edge of the trees canopy. When depicted on a map, the dripline will appear as an irregular-shaped circle that follows the contour of a trees outermost branches as seen from overhead.

Enforcement authority means the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting or his/her designee.

Heritage tree means a native oak tree over 19 inches in diameter at breast height or a multitrunked native oak tree having an aggregate diameter of 38 inches or more at breast height.

Landmark tree means a tree or group of trees determined by the city council to be a significant community benefit.

Master tree list means a list prepared by the planning director which identifies the species of trees which may be planted as replacement or as street trees.

Minor trimming means the cutting from protected trees of: (1) dead or diseased limbs or twigs; (2) parts which may result in damage to a dwelling; (3) parts which must be removed for safety or public utilities; or the pruning of protected trees to promote health and growth. Trimming which substantially reduces the overall size or density of the tree or destroys the existing symmetry or natural shape of the tree is not considered minor trimming.

Native oak tree means any tree over 6 inches (DBH) of the genus quercus and species lobata (valley oak), douglasii (blue oak), wislizenii (interior live oak), or hybrids, thereof; or a multitrunked native oak tree having an aggregate diameter of 20 inches (DBH) or more.

Owner-occupant means any owner residing in a constructed single-family residence.

Planning director means the director of planning, inspections and permitting.

Project means an activity which has the potential for resulting in a physical change in the environment.

Protected trees means native oak trees, heritage trees, street trees and landmark trees.

Protected zone means an irregular circle around a protected tree, equal to the protected trees dripline plus 1 foot.

Priming and trimming standards means those pruning standards established by the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture.

Regulated activity means any activity to be done to a protected tree or undertaken within the protected zone of a protected tree.

Street tree means any tree growing within the tree maintenance strip and contained on the master tree list.

Tree means a woody perennial plant with a trunk over 6 inches (DBH) or a multitrunked plant having an aggregate diameter of 20 inches (DBH) or more.

Tree maintenance strip means a strip of land parallel and adjacent to a public street thereto and which is twelve and one-half feet wide, measured from the property line. (Ord. 851  2(1), 1996)

12.16.030 Regulated activity and exemptions.
A.    Tree Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to perform any regulated activity without a tree permit.

B.    Tree Permit Exemptions. The following activities may be undertaken without a tree permit:

1.    Paving for streets and/or driveways under the supervision of an arborist to guarantee appropriate measures are taken to ensure tree survival;

2.    Parking or operation of motor vehicles within the protected zone on existing paved areas;

3.    Placement or storage of equipment or construction material within the protected zone on existing paved areas;

4.    Maintenance of under-canopy landscaping for nonoak species;

5.    Activities in subsection B(1) through (4) of this section within improved parking lots approved by the city;

6.    Removal of limbs or trees damaged by acts of God;

7.    Removal of a tree certified as being dead which poses a health and/or safety risk to the public;

8.    Removal of a tree certified by an arborist to be in poor health, and a risk or hazard to the general public as determined by the planning director;

9.    Minor trimming as defined in Section 12.16.020;

10.    Activity which does not disturb the soil or result in physical contact to the protected tree;

11.    Activity performed by a public utility necessary to comply with safety regulations or to repair or avoid the interruption of services, provided such activity is done under the supervision of a certified arborist. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.040 Tree permit process.
A.    Applications for a tree permit shall be submitted to the planning director. The application shall be acted upon by the planning director, unless other project entitlements will be necessary in order to develop the property, in which case, the application will be acted upon by the appropriate approving authority. Said application shall contain:

1.    Application Form. Application shall be made on a form supplied by the planning director. The signature of the property owner is required on the application.

2.    Justification Statement. A written statement stating the justification for the tree permit.

3.    Site Map. The requirement for a site map may be waived by the planning director if the application is for removal of dead or hazardous trees. A site map, if required, shall include the following information, and any other information determined by the planning director to be necessary:

a.    Physical Characteristics (Existing and Proposed).

i.    Property lines;

ii.    Streets, access easements and/or public or private driveways and other paved areas;

iii.    Buildings or structures;

iv.    Setbacks of all buildings and structures from property lines;

v.    Parking and other paved areas;

vi.    Land uses on parcel (existing and proposed as applicable);

vii.    Proposed grading and construction, including utilities, if available.

b.    Tree Locations. All trees located on the property must be depicted on the site plan map. Identify those protected trees which are to be preserved and which will be subject to regulated activity. Additionally, the site plan map shall indicate the exact location of the base and protected zone for all such trees within the project boundary. Except for applications filed by owner-occupants, a survey of the exact location(s) of such tree(s), both horizontally and vertically, shall be conducted by a professional engineer or a licensed land surveyor. Owner-occupants shall submit information concerning tree locations in a form acceptable to the planning director. The tree number(s) shall be shown on both the site plan and grading plan and on the trees themselves (attached by nonharmful methods). The base elevation of each protected tree shall be shown on the grading plan.

c.    Protected Zone of Protected Tree(s). The exact location of the protected zone of protected trees.

4.    Preservation Program. A program for the preservation of protected trees during and after completion of the project (including avoidance of activity within the protected zone of protected trees), which shall include the following:

a.    Each tree or group of trees to be preserved shall be enclosed with high-visibility fencing prior to any grading, movement of heavy equipment, approval of improvement plans, or the issuance of any grading or construction permits. Such fence shall be removed following construction but prior to installation of landscaping material. Fencing shall enclose the entire protected zone.

b.    Parking of vehicles, equipment, or storage of material within the protected zone of trees is prohibited at all times, except that parking shall be permitted within the protected zone of street trees as outlined in subsections (B)(2) and (3) of Section 12.16.030.

c.    Signs shall be posted on all sides of fences surrounding each tree or trees stating that enclosed tree(s) are to be preserved. The signs shall state the penalty for damage to, or removal of, the protected tree. The number of posted signs required for the site shall be determined by the planning director.

5.    Arborists Report. Except for applications filed by owner-occupants, an arborists report shall be submitted and shall contain such information as the planning director determines is required to evaluate tree conditions, identify measures to protect trees for preservation and to evaluate areas in which to plant replacement trees. Owner-occupants shall submit information concerning tree condition in a form acceptable to the planning director. The contents of the arborists report and site plan shall include but is not limited to the following information:

a.    Botanical and common name of tree(s) by tree number;

b.    Location of tree(s) by tree number;

c.    Diameter at breast height (DBH) by tree number, identifying whether single or multitrunked trees;

d.    Protected zone radius by tree number (measure longest radius);

e.    Condition by tree number based upon the following tree rating system:

i.    Excellent,

ii.    Good,

iii.    Fair to good,

iv.    Fair,

v.    Fair to poor,

vi.    Poor.

Tree ratings shall be based on: (1) the condition and environment of the trees root crown; (2) the condition of the trunk, including decay, injury, callusing or presence of fungus sporophore; (3) the condition of the limbs, including strength of crotches, amount of dead wood, hollow areas, and whether there is excessive weight borne by them; (4) the condition and growth rate history of the twigs, including pest damage and diseases; (5) the leaf appearance, including abnormal size and density as well as pest and disease damage; (6) the protected zone environment, including evidence of grade changes and presence of water courses or ponding.

Using an averaging of the above factors together with the arborists best judgment, the tree shall then be described using the above rating categories. Based upon the conditions and findings, recommendations should be made that logically follow the report conditions. Recommended mitigative measures to improve the trees condition ratings shall be included in the report. The report should also include information regarding the trees life expectancy under existing and planned-for conditions.

B.    Application Evaluation Criteria. The approving authority shall review and approve, conditionally approve or deny applications in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The following criteria will be considered in the evaluation of applications for tree permits:

1.    The gross floor area of any proposed structures in relation to the size of the site and the amount of area on the parcel which does not require the removal of protected trees;

2.    Design features of any proposed structures, as compared to other structures in the same vicinity which have or had protected trees on the parcel;

3.    Topographic constraints, lot configuration and other physical limitations;

4.    The health and structural condition of the protected trees;

5.    Whether the encroachment is likely to result in the decline of the protected tree or create a risk to persons or property;

6.    The approximate age of the protected tree compared with the average life span for that species;

7.    Whether removal of the protected tree would encourage healthier, more vigorous growth of younger similar trees in the area;

8.    The number of existing protected trees in the area;

9.    The number of healthy protected trees that a given parcel of land will support with and without the proposed development;

10.    The effect of removal on soil stability/erosion, particularly near watercourses or on steep slopes;

11.    The potential for the protected tree to be a public nuisance or interfere with utility service, as well as its proximity to existing structures;

12.    Present and future shade potential with regard to solar heating and cooling and other climatic conditions;

13.    Whether there are any alternatives that would allow for the preservation of the protected tree;

14.    Accepted tree management practices to ensure long-term survival of the tree;

15.    Whether the tree exhibits one of the following attributes: (1) historical value; (2) excellent health rating; (3) outstanding habitat value; (4) unusual species; or (5) superior beauty;

16.    Whether other discretionary entitlements are contemplated within one year;

17.    Any other information which may impact the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

C.    Tree Permit Provisions.

1.    The approving authoritys decision to approve or deny the application, including reasons for any denial shall be provided to the applicant in writing. The approving authoritys decision is final upon such filing and notification pursuant to Sections 12.16.100 and 12.16.190.

2.    A tree permit shall not be effective until the time in which an appeal may be filed has elapsed without an appeal having been filed. A tree permit shall be valid for 1 year or for the life of other associated project entitlements (i.e., tentative maps, conditional use permits, etc.), whichever is longer. Any changes to the project not in substantial compliance with the original approval shall require reapplication to the approving authority.

3.    It shall be the responsibility of the person undertaking a regulated activity to have the tree permit at the site. The property owner shall be ultimately responsible for complying with the requirements of the tree permit.

4.    The permit shall entitle the applicant to perform only the regulated activities described in the tree permit. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.050 Environmental review.
Review by the approving authority is subject to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The approving authority shall not approve an application prior to considering the applicable environmental document and complying with the requirements of CEQA and any city procedures for preparation and processing of environmental documents. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.060 Conditions.
The approving authority shall at the time of approval impose such conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, state or federal laws. Such conditions shall be reasonably related to the public needs created by the proposed project. Conditions to mitigate environmental impacts of the activity shall also be imposed by the approving authority. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.070 Mitigation.
Except for owner-occupants of single-family residential homes, applicants who are granted permits to remove protected trees shall be required to prepare and implement a tree mitigation and preservation plan. Mitigation plans shall include provisions for planting the same species of the regulated tree, temporary or permanent irrigation, and monitoring for a 2-year period.

A.    On-Site Mitigation Plan. The on-site mitigation plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

1.    A site plan depicting all living protected trees to remain and all living protected trees to be removed, utilizing clear and concise graphics.

2.    A table indicating each protected tree to be removed by tree number, the DBH, condition, and any other information pertinent to the trees being removed.

3.    The plan shall include tree planting locations, size and species of trees to be planted, and planting and irrigation methods.

B.    Off-Site Mitigation Plan. The applicant may request that the approving authority approve 1 of the following methods for off-site mitigation within the city:

1.    Payment of an inch-for-diameter-inch replacement in-lieu fee, as set by city council resolution, to cover the cost of purchasing, planting and initial care of the off-site tree plantings. Such fee shall be placed into the tree planting and maintenance fund to purchase property for tree mitigation sites, to provide for tree planting and maintenance on public projects or for a community forestry program, if established.

2.    Dedication of property for the purpose of planting trees based on the following ratio:

1 diameter inch = .004 acres of land (175 square feet)

The minimum area of dedication for such property shall be five acres of land, unless the property is contiguous to existing or planned open space, in which case the minimum dedication is one acre of land. Off-site mitigation of this type must be approved by the city council.

3.    Planting of trees on either public property, property with a conservation easement, or on property with an irrevocable offer of dedication to the city, pursuant to the ratios set forth in subsection C of this section.

C.    Mitigation Tree Planting and Tree Preserve Replacement Ratios.

1.    Mitigation for approved removal of each protected tree, including protected trees outside of the designated building envelope within the setback envelope of a custom single-family lot, as determined by the planning director, shall be based on the diameter inch measured at breast height. Replacement ratios shall be based on the size of each protected tree falling within one of the following eight categories:

a.    A six- to ten-inch protected tree measured at diameter breast height equals eight fifteen-gallon native oak trees, or four twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by city council resolution.

b.    Above ten- to fifteen-inch protected tree measured at diameter breast height equals fifteen fifteen-gallon native oak trees, or six twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by city council resolution.

c.    Above fifteen- to twenty-inch protected trees measured at diameter breast height equals twenty fifteen-gallon native oak trees, or ten twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by city council resolution.

d.    Above twenty- to twenty-five-inch protected tree measured at diameter breast height equals thirty fifteen-gallon native oak trees, or fifteen twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by city council resolution.

e.    Above twenty-five- to thirty-inch protected tree measured at diameter breast height equals thirty-five fifteen-gallon native oak trees, or seventeen twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by city council resolution.

f.    Above thirty- to thirty-five-inch protected tree measured at diameter breast height equals forty fifteen-gallon native oak trees, or twenty twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by the city council resolution.

g.    Above thirty-five- to forty-inch protected tree measured at diameter breast height equals fifty fifteen-gallon native oak trees, or twenty-five twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by the city council resolution.

h.    Above forty-inch protected tree measured at diameter breast height equals thirty-five twenty-four-inch box native oak trees, or fee set by the city council resolution.

i.    Mitigation for regulated activities for protected trees within the designated building envelope within the setback envelope of a custom single-family lot, as determined by the planning director, shall be one fifteen-gallon tree per protected tree.

2.    Mitigation for the removal of protected trees may be in the form of preserving an existing, and sustainable preserve of oaks, subject to approval of the approving authority. At minimum, the preserved area must contain diameter inches and tree species equivalent to the inches and species of the protected trees to be removed. The preservation area must be either dedicated to the city, placed in a conservation easement, or some other method accepted by the city council to ensure preservation of the oak woodland habitat.

3.    Mitigation requirements for approved removal of each protected tree that is within the easement area of overhead electrical transmission lines, as confirmed by the appropriate utility, shall be reduced by fifty percent. Applicant must provide written confirmation from the appropriate utility, to the satisfaction of the community development director, that the protected trees are within the easement area of the overhead electrical transmission lines and the utility has requested that the tree be removed.

D.    Project Compliance. In order to ensure compliance with specific conditions of a tree permit, the applicant shall submit to the planning director, at the time of mitigation plan submittal, and prior to the issuance of a grading permit, a minimum one-thousand-dollar deposit (or amount deemed necessary by the approving authority on a case-by-case basis) which shall be posted and maintained to ensure the preservation of protected trees during construction. The deposit shall be posted in a form approved by the city attorney prior to any grading or movement of heavy equipment onto the site or issuance of any permits. (Ord. 1053  3, 2006; Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.080 Street tree planting.
A.    Planting Within the Tree Maintenance Strip. Each applicant for a parcel map, subdivision map or planned development permit which seeks, in whole or in part, the improvement of real property shall be responsible for the planting of street trees. The species of trees to be planted shall be on the master tree list. As part of the application process, the planning director shall recommend to the approving authority the size of the tree to be planted, the location within the tree maintenance strip of the planting and the stage of the development at which the tree is to be planted. There shall be no fewer than one street tree for each single-family lot and two trees on corner lots for residential lots and not less than one tree per fifty feet of street frontage planted on center for commercial and industrial parcels. In multifamily developments, the number of trees shall be determined by the planning director, provided not more than one tree for each dwelling unit may be required.

B.    Responsibility. The cost of the tree stock, the planting thereof and the maintenance of such tree pending occupancy of the property shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning director that adequate provision has been made for the planting and initial maintenance of the street trees, the applicant shall be required to furnish security which, at the option of and subject to the approval of the planning director, shall be in the form of those alternatives authorized under Government Code Section 66499 et seq. Adequate provision may take the form of covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) which require the planting and maintenance of street trees and which, in the opinion of the city attorney, are enforceable by property owners or an association of owners created by such CC&Rs. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.090 Establishing landmark tree(s).
A.    Request for Establishing a Landmark Tree. A private property owner, or interested party, may submit an application to the planning department, requesting that the city council establish by resolution a tree or group of trees as a landmark tree(s). Applications shall be made on a form supplied by the planning director and be subject to an application fee pursuant to Section 12.16.170. The city council may also, on its own motion and without the payment of a fee, commence the process of designating a landmark tree. The planning department shall notify, by first-class mail, the owner of the proposed landmark tree(s) thirty days prior to the hearing on the application. Once an application has been submitted, and prior to city council action, the tree shall have the same status as a protected tree under this chapter.

B.    Designation of Landmark Trees. In order to designate a tree as a landmark tree, the city council must find that the tree is a significant community benefit because it possesses one or more of the following attributes: (1) historical value; (2) excellent health rating; (3) outstanding habitat value; (4) unusual species; or (5) superior beauty.

If the city council designates a tree as landmark tree, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution to the owner of the tree, and direct the planning director to add the tree to the list of landmark trees.

C.    Declassification of Landmark Trees. An owner of a landmark tree may submit an application to the planning department, requesting that the city council declassify by resolution a tree or group of trees previously designated as a landmark tree(s). Applications shall be made on a form supplied by the planning director and be subject to an application fee pursuant to Section 12.16.170. The city council may also, on its own motion and without the payment of such a fee, commence the process of declassifying a landmark tree. The planning department shall notify, by first-class mail, the owner of the landmark tree(s) thirty days prior to the city council meeting scheduled for the proposed action. The city council may declassify a landmark tree upon a finding that the tree(s) is no longer a significant community benefit because: (1) it has deteriorated in health or appearance; (2) it no longer has habitat value; or (3) it prevents reasonable use of the property.

D.    Maintenance of Landmark Trees. After obtaining the consent of the property owner, the planning director shall cause each landmark tree to be inspected by a certified arborist annually. A report on the health of each tree and recommended maintenance shall be prepared. Copies of the report shall be provided to the city council and owners of the landmark trees. If the property owner refuses to grant such consent, the planning director shall have no further obligations under either subsection.

E.    Documenting the Established Landmark Trees. The planning department shall map the location of landmark trees. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.100 Appeals from action on issuance or denial of a permit.
A.    If the applicant for a tree permit, or other interested parties, are dissatisfied with any determination made by the planning director, such person may appeal to the planning commission. If the applicant for a tree permit, or other interested parties, are dissatisfied with any determination made by the planning commission, such person(s) may appeal to the city council. Decisions of the planning commission, when sitting as an appeal body, may not be appealed to the city council.

B.    Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the specific reasons therefor and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the planning director not later than ten calendar days after the date of the action being appealed. If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of the action against which the complaint is made shall be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 851  2(2), 1996)

12.16.110 Appeal fee for appeals from action on issuance or denial of a permit.
The city council shall by resolution adopt and, from time to time, amend a fee for the filing of appeals. Such fee shall be for the sole purpose of defraying costs incurred for the administration and processing of appeals. The fee for an appeal shall be paid at the time of and with the filing of an appeal request. No appeal request shall be deemed valid unless the prescribed fee has been paid. (Ord. 851  2(3), 1996)

12.16.120 Appeal hearings concerning action on issuance or denial of a permit.
After the filing of an appeal within the time and in the manner prescribed by Section 12.16.100, the appeal body shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the appeal should be granted. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be served upon the appellant not later than ten days preceding the date of the hearing. (Ord. 851  2(4), 1996)

12.16.130 Actions on appeals concerning issuance or denial of a permit.
A.    The appeal body shall review the entire proceeding or proceedings relating to the act or decision being appealed, de novo, and may make any order it deems just and equitable, including the approval of the application. Any hearing may be continued from time to time.

B.    At the conclusion of the hearing, the appeal body shall prepare a written decision which either grants or denies the appeal, and contains findings of fact and conclusions. The written decision, including a copy thereof, shall be filed with the city clerk. The clerk shall serve such decision on the applicant. The decision of the appeal body shall become final upon the date of filing and service with respect to any appeal. (Ord. 851  2(5), 1996)

12.16.140 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 851  2(6), 1996)

12.16.143 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level E violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A). The monetary sanction shall be determined by reference to the criteria set forth in Section 1.09.014, but shall be in an amount no less than two times what would have been charged as an in-lieu fee under Section 12.16.070(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 851  2(7) (part), 1996)

12.16.145 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.052, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    Unless a tree has been removed in violation of this chapter, a notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be no more than thirty days. If a notice to correct is not served, pursuant to Section 1.09.024(A), a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 851  2(7) (part), 1996)

12.16.150 Mitigation fees.
Tree Planting and Replacement Fund. A tree planting and replacement fund shall be established in which mitigation fees and penalty assessments shall be deposited. The tree planting and replacement fund shall be utilized for city tree planting and revegetation projects such as parkways, parks and beautification projects, to purchase property for tree mitigation sites, to construct multi-use Class I public trails in conjunction with tree planting, revegetation projects or beautification projects, for the retention of a city arborist, or for a community forestry program, if established. Funds shall not be made available for mitigation or planting on private property, with the exception of maintenance of landmark trees and at the recommendation of the community development director, on property subject to a conservation easement. This fund shall be administered by the community development department. (Ord. 1053  2, 2006: Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.160 Delegation.
Whenever in this chapter an authority or power is vested in or a duty is imposed upon an officer or official, an employee subordinate to the officer or official to whom an appropriate delegation has been made shall be entitled to exercise the power or authority and perform the duty. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.170 Application fees.
The city council may establish a fee for the processing of an application under the provisions of this chapter by resolution, which may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.180 Amendment of project.
Any proposed changes in the project after approval shall be submitted to the approving authority for review. No person shall undertake activity which does not conform with the plans or conditions of the original approval, unless approved by the approving authority. The approving authority shall review any proposed changes in the same manner and pursuant to the same standards as the original application. (Ord. 826  1 (part), 1995)

12.16.190 Notices.
A.    Except as may be required by Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code, any notice authorized or required by this chapter shall be deemed to have been filed, served and effective for all purposes on the date when it is personally delivered in writing to the party to whom it is directed or deposited in the United States Mail, first-class postage prepaid, and addressed to the party to whom it is directed.

B.    Whenever a provision in this chapter requires a public hearing to be conducted, notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published at least once not later than ten calendar days in advance of the date of commencement of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation which is published within the county and posted at City Hall. The same type of notice shall also be served on the property owner and upon each permittee whose permit may be affected by the action taken at the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. 851  2(8), 1996)

Chapter 12.20
USE OF CITY PROPERTY
Sections:

12.20.010    Short title.

12.20.020    Definitions.

12.20.030    Purpose and intent.

12.20.040    Encroachment permit required.

12.20.050    Encroachment permit required related to swimming pool construction.

12.20.060    Encroachment permit required related to building construction.

12.20.070    Utility permits.

12.20.080    Relocation or removal of encroachments.

12.20.090    Application.

12.20.100    Permit fees.

12.20.110    Work requirements.

12.20.120    Liability.

12.20.130    Performance deposits.

12.20.140    Protection measures and routing of traffic.

12.20.150    Clearance for vital structures.

12.20.160    Relocation and protection of utilities.

12.20.170    Abandonment of facilities.

12.20.180    Care of excavated material.

12.20.190    Clean-up.

12.20.200    Protection of water courses.

12.20.210    Prompt completion of work.

12.20.220    Urgent work.

12.20.230    Emergency action.

12.20.240    Preservation of monuments.

12.20.250    Inspections, rules and regulations.

12.20.260    Revoking of permit.

12.20.270    Appeal.

12.20.280    Action after expiration of permit unlawful.

12.20.290    Removal required whenNotice.

12.20.300    Enforcement.

12.20.310    Penalties.

12.20.320    Enforcement proceduresNotice to abate/correct.

12.20.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Encroachment Ordinance as Pertaining to Public Property of the City of Folsom. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:

Administrative authority means the city manager of the city or his duly delegated representative.

Construction standards means the most current edition of the Standard Construction Specifications of the City of Folsom.

Encroachment means going upon, over, or under public property, or placing any facility upon, along, across, over, or under public property, or using any public property in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct or interfere with the use of that public property. Encroachments include, but are not limited to buildings, fences, sports equipment not in use, signs, trees, plants, underground facilities and construction and landscape material or any excavations on public property.

Excavation means any opening under, in, or across the surface of public property made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of public property, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the public property.

Facility means any pipe, pipeline, tube, hose, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable, junction box, transformer, or any other material, structure, public improvement, or object of any kind or character, including a building, portion of a building, or any other structure, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, used, operated, left, placed, or maintained in, upon, along, across, under, or over any public property.

Permit means encroachment/excavation permit as referred to in this chapter.

Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

Plans means those drawings prepared by an appropriately licensed professional engineer.

Public property means any public street, roadway, place, alley, sidewalk, parkway, square, plaza, easement, right-of-way, or any other similar public property dedicated to public use.

Sketch means a drawing that shows a concept or location of facilities.

Substructure means any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, buried cable or wire, or any other similar structure located below the surface of any public property.

Utility means a private company and/or corporation operating under regulation of the Public Utilities Commission, or municipal/county department or other governmental agency engaged in providing a particular service to the general public. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.030 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations to control encroachments into public property by requiring encroachment permits and to establish measures for the protection of life and property, including traffic and pedestrian safeguards. Additionally, this chapter defines construction standards, prescribes application procedures for encroachment permit issuance, establishes bonding and liability requirements and prescribes penalties for violations of its provisions. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.040 Encroachment permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to place, erect or maintain, or to permit the placement, erection, maintenance or existence of any encroachment upon, over or under any public property without an encroachment permit with the following exceptions:

A.    Existing cornices, eaves, porticos and overhangs within the historic district, as defined in Chapter 17.52 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    Any existing encroachments in the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, until such time as repairs/refurbishments effecting fifty percent or more of the encroaching structures value and/or size are accomplished. At that time an encroachment permit shall be obtained.

Encroachments maintained in the public right-of-way prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may remain in the public right-of-way until such time as the administrative authority determines that the encroachment presents a hazard, public nuisance or restriction to access or use of administrative authority owned property. At such time the city shall direct removal of such encroachment at the sole expense of the current owner of said encroachment. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.050 Encroachment permit required related to swimming pool construction.
Prior to the commencement of any excavation associated with construction of a swimming pool, where excavation or other equipment, including but not limited to high lifts, front end loaders, dump trucks, forklifts, bobcats, skip loaders, and tractors, will traverse existing sidewalks or other public improvements, an encroachment permit shall be obtained. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.060 Encroachment permit required related to building construction.
Prior to the commencement of construction of a new building or for additions to existing buildings, where construction or other equipment, including but not limited to high lifts, front end loaders, dump trucks, forklifts, bobcats, skip loaders, and tractors, will traverse existing sidewalks or other public improvements, an encroachment permit shall be obtained. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.070 Utility permits.
The administrative authority may issue utility permits to a utility to make excavations for the location of trouble in conduits or pipes, for making repairs thereto, or for emergency purposes. Utility permits shall be issued on a yearly basis only, and will authorize excavation only as stated above. Utility permits shall not be issued for installation of new facilities. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.080 Relocation or removal of encroachment.
When any encroachment authorized hereunder is found to be in conflict with the use of public property or existing or proposed facilities owned, maintained, or operated by the city, such encroachment shall, upon written notice by the city, be relocated in such a way as to eliminate the conflict, said relocation to be at the sole expense of the permittee. If the permittee fails to comply with said written notice within a reasonable period of time, the city may cause such relocation of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.090 Application.
A.    An application form, provided by the administrative authority, shall be submitted before any encroachment permit is issued. The application shall contain the following information:

1.    The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

2.    The purpose of the proposed encroachment;

3.    The location and dimensions of the proposed encroachment;

4.    The approximate date on which construction is proposed to begin, if applicable;

5.    The approximate duration of the construction;

6.    The name and contractors license number of the person performing the construction;

7.    Plans or sketches necessary to describe the construction;

8.    The disposal site for material to be removed from the site;

9.    The signature of the applicant;

10.    Acknowledgment by the applicant that insurance, indemnification and performance security requirements must be satisfied prior to a Permit being issued.

B.    Upon review of the application, the administrative authority may impose conditions on the permit, in order to insure the safety of the public and to protect and preserve the public property. If the administrative authority denies the application, written notice shall be provided to the applicant.

C.    The permit, if issued, will be prepared and issued when fees have been paid, insurance documents and performance security have been reviewed and accepted, and the applicant has signed the permit.

D.    Each permit shall state a time when all the work to be done thereunder shall be completed. The administrative authority may grant extensions of time, provided satisfactory reasons therefor are presented by the applicant. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.100 Permit fees.
The administrative authority shall collect a permit fee to cover the cost incurred by the city. Recoverable costs include administrative expenses involved in the issuance of an encroachment permit, checking plans for compliance with this and other ordinances, and field inspections conducted to insure compliance with the terms and conditions under which the encroachment permit was issued. Fee schedules shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.110 Work requirements.
All encroachment work shall be performed in accordance with conditions specified in the encroachment permit, the standard construction specifications of the city of Folsom, and according to the plans and specifications referred to in the permit. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.120 Liability.
A.    Permittee shall defend, indemnify and save harmless city (including their officers, agents, employees, and representatives) and each of them, of and from any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, damages, costs, expenses, losses or liability, in law or in equity, of every kind and nature whatsoever (claims) arising out of or in connection with permittees work to be performed under the encroachment permit.

B.    The information contained in subsection A of this section shall be stated on all encroachment permits.

C.    The administrative authority may require in all circumstances where he/she deems it appropriate that the permittee procure and maintain in force insurance covering the city. The amounts and terms of such insurance coverage shall be consistent with the provisions set forth in the Standard Construction Specifications. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.130 Performance deposits.
Permittees shall provide a cash deposit, surety bond, or other security acceptable to the city in the amount determined by the administrative authority as sufficient to reimburse the city for the costs of restoring the public property to its original condition in the event permittee fails to do so. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.140 Protection measures and routing of traffic.
A.    It shall be the duty of every person undertaking any encroachment, to place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for safety of the general public.

B.    For excavations over 5 feet in depth, blasting operations, and tunneling work, the permittee shall, when required by law, obtain a permit from the California Division of Industrial Safety and/or any other permit required by state or federal safety regulations.

C.    Barriers, signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the requirements of the Manual of Warning Signs, Lights, and Devices for Use in Performance of Work Upon Highways, issued by the State of California, Department of Transportation, and to any additional requirements specified by the administrative authority.

D.    Permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of construction work on streets, traffic conditions as near normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. Permittee shall conform to the requirements of the Standard Construction Specifications.

E.    When traffic conditions permit, the administrative authority may by written approval, permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him or her. The written approval of the administrative authority may require that the permittee provide approved detours and give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, the written approval shall not be valid until notice is given. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.150 Clearance for vital structures.
The encroachment shall be performed and conducted so as to not unreasonably interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures and all other vital equipment designated by the administrative authority. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.160 Relocation and protection of utilities.
A.    Permittee shall inform themselves as to the existence and location of all facilities likely to be encountered by their operations.

B.    Unless the law otherwise provides, relocation of an existing facility shall be performed in accordance with a plan approved by the owner. No facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee and is approved by the city.

C.    All facilities affected by any excavation or other construction work shall be supported and protected by the permittee with methods approved by the owner of the facility. Should an existing facility be damaged by the permittees operations, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a facility, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner of the damaged facility. All facilities damaged by permittees operations shall be repaired as directed by the owner and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.170 Abandonment of facilities.
A.    Whenever a facility is abandoned, except the abandonment of service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein, shall file with the administrative authority a drawing or written statement indicating, in detail, the location of the facility so abandoned. At the time of such abandonment, the administrative authority may determine what portion, if any, of the abandoned facility shall be removed or otherwise treated.

B.    Whenever a driveway approach is abandoned, or can no longer be justified by the use made of the abutting property, the administrative authority may require removal of any associated driveway, apron, or curb depression, and restoration of any existing curb, gutter, or sidewalk across the driveway width. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.180 Care of excavated material.
A.    The administrative authority may require the permittee to haul away an excavated material and the permittee shall be responsible for securing any necessary disposal sites. In addition, the permittee shall anticipate, and make provisions for abatement of, dust and dirt nuisances resulting from its operations. All excavated material shall be stockpiled, disposed of, and all clean-up performed in a way that conforms to local, state, and national pollution control regulations.

B.    Whenever permittee is hauling away material from the encroachment site, proof of proper disposal shall be required by the administrative authority prior to final inspection or return of security. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.190 Clean-up.
As the permitted work progresses, all public properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, earth, rock and other debris resulting from the work. All clean-up operations at the location of the encroachment shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee to the satisfaction of the administrative authority. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.200 Protection of water courses.
The permittee shall provide and maintain adequate waterways for all surplus water, including stormwater, run-off pumped from excavations, flushings, or other water resulting from permittees operations. All water leaving the site shall conform to National Pollution Discharge Elimination System and local, state and federal laws and regulations regarding pollution prevention. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.210 Prompt completion of work.
After a project is commenced, the permittee shall diligently pursue all work covered by the encroachment permit, promptly complete all work, and restore the public property, as near as practicable, to its original condition to avoid obstructing the public property more than is reasonably necessary. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.220 Urgent work.
When, in the judgement of the administrative authority, the safety or convenience of the public or the public interest requires that encroachment work be performed as emergency work, the administrative authority shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that an adequate size crew and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such work may be completed as soon as practicable. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.230 Emergency action.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the making of excavations or the performance of work necessary for the preservation of life or property, or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided that the person undertaking such work shall apply to the administrative authority for a permit on the first working day after the work is commenced. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.240 Preservation of monuments.
No monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street, property or subdivision, including precise survey reference points or permanent survey bench marks within the city, shall be removed or disturbed by any person who has not first obtained written permission from the administrative authority. Permission to remove, disturb, or replace monuments shall only be granted upon the condition that the removal, disturbance or replacement of any monument be done under the supervision of a registered engineer or licensed land surveyor. Any expenses incurred by the administrative authority for the proper replacement of monuments shall be paid by the permittee. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.250 Inspections, rules and regulations.
The administrative authority shall make inspections and shall establish rules and regulations reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.260 Revoking of permit.
This chapter empowers the administrative authority with the right to cancel any permit for good and sufficient cause, including violation of any provision of the Folsom Municipal Code or noncompliance with any encroachment permit condition. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.270 Appeal.
A.    In the event the application for the permit is denied in whole or in part or the conditions imposed by the administrative authority are unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant may appeal his decision to the city council within 10 days of receiving notice of the decision.

B.    Appeals shall be in writing, shall state the specific reasons therefor and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the city clerk within 10 calendar days after the date of the action being appealed. If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of the action against which the complaint is made shall be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.280 Action after expiration of permit unlawful.
It is unlawful for a person to place, erect or maintain or to permit the placement, erection, maintenance or existence of any encroachment after his or her permit has expired or after his or her permit has been revoked and the time specified in the notice from the city clerk for removal of the same has expired. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.290 Removal required whenNotice.
Any person whose property encroaches in any manner upon, over or under any public property who has not obtained a permit for the placing, erection and/or maintenance of such encroachment, shall remove the same after written notice by the city demanding removal. Notice of removal shall be by certified mail addressed to the post office address of the owner or occupant of the premises where the encroachment exists, by personal service of such notice upon the owner or occupant, or by posting the notice on the premises. The time required for the removal of the encroachment shall be specified in the notice, and shall be a reasonable time considering danger, risk and size of job. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.300 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The administrative authority shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.310 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020 of Chapter 1.08, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level D violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(4). (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

12.20.320 Enforcement proceduresNotice to abate/correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty, or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, administrative authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 to 1.09.048, inclusive, of Chapter 1.09 of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 to 1.09.059, inclusive, of Chapter 1.09 of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to abate/correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1.09.023 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be a reasonable time as specified by the administrative authority, depending upon the type of encroachment, risk to the public property, and risk to the general public. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024A of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code, a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 905  2 (part), 1999)

Title 13
WATER AND SEWAGE
Chapters:

13.03    Regulations to Prohibit and Control the Discharge of Fat, Oil and Grease into the Sanitary Sewer Collection System

13.04    Municipal Sewer SystemDefinitions

13.08    Municipal Sewer SystemRegulations

13.12    Municipal Sewer SystemRental Regulations

13.16    Septic Tanks, Cesspools and PriviesDefinitions

13.20    Septic Tanks, Cesspools and PriviesRegulations

13.22    Water System Cross-Connection Control

13.24    Utilities Connections

13.25    Sewer Connection Service Charges

13.26    Water Conservation

13.30    Water Impact Fee

Chapter 13.03
REGULATIONS TO PROHIBIT AND CONTROL THE DISCHARGE OF FAT, OIL AND GREASE INTO THE SANITARY SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM
Sections:

13.03.010    Definitions.

13.03.020    Applicability.

13.03.030    Regulatory consistency.

13.03.040    Compliance disclaimer.

13.03.050    Administration.

13.03.060    Disclaimer of liability.

13.03.070    Permitted discharges.

13.03.080    Prohibited discharges.

13.03.090    Grease control devices.

13.03.100    Conditional waiver.

13.03.110    Exception to allow alternative grease control device.

13.03.120    Maintenance of grease control devices.

13.03.130    Prohibition of food grinders.

13.03.140    Scope of inspections and monitoring.

13.03.150    Enforcement.

13.03.160    Penalties.

13.03.170    Enforcement procedures, notice to correct.

13.03.180    Abatement.

13.03.190    Regulatory actions.

13.03.200    Discontinuance of service.

13.03.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

A.    City means the city of Folsom.

B.    City council means the city council of the city of Folsom.

C.    County means the county of Sacramento.

D.    Discharge means the release or placement of any wastewater into the city sanitary sewer collection system.

E.    Discharger means any person or facility that discharges, or causes to discharge, either directly or indirectly, wastewater into the citys sanitary sewer collection system.

F.    Environmental and water resources director means the director of the environmental and water resources department of the city of Folsom or as otherwise directed by the city manager or his or her designee.

G.    Fats, oils, and greases or FOG means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as grease or greases.

H.    Food grinder means any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by-products for the purpose of disposing it in the citys sanitary sewer collection system.

I.    Food service establishments or FSEs means facilities that are dischargers and that prepare and/or package food or beverages for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences. FSEs include those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making food available for consumption by the public such as food packagers, grocery stores, bakeries, restaurants, commercial kitchens, caterers, hotels, schools, hospitals, prisons, correctional facilities, and care institutions. Examples of food preparation activities utilized by FSEs include the following: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauting, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. FSEs also include any establishment using infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.

J.    Garbage means solid wastes from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from handling, storage and sale of food products.

K.    Grease control device means a grease interceptor, grease trap or mechanical grease removal equipment approved by the environmental and water resources director.

L.    Grease interceptor means a large containment tank installed underground and designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease particles from the wastewater prior to discharge into the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease interceptors primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment of the interceptor to the next.

M.    Grease trap means a device for separating and retaining grease prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Such traps are typically compact under-the-sink units that are near food preparation areas.

N.    Grease waste means waste removed from a grease control device.

O.    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or NPDES permit means a permit issued by either the Regional Board or the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 13370) of Division 7 of the Water Code to control discharges from point sources to waters of the United States.

P.    New construction means construction of a new structure that will include an FSE or modification of an existing structure or portion of an existing structure to accommodate an FSE or change in type of FSE that will significantly increase the potential for FOG production.

Q.    Person means any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, public agency, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

R.    Plumbing official means the building official or city employee designated by the city manager and who administers and enforces the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code. The plumbing official shall enforce the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code within the boundaries of the city of Folsom.

S.    Regional Board means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region.

T.    Renovation or remodeling means a physical change to an existing FSE that requires a building permit and involves any one or a combination of the following:

1.    Plumbing;

2.    Ventilation system;

3.    Electrical system;

4.    Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment; and/or

5.    To the cooking or restaurant facility.

U.    Sanitary sewer collection system means the city-owned network of pipes, manholes, and pump stations that convey wastewater to SRCSD facilities.

V.    Sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) means a condition whereby untreated sewage is discharged to the environment, escaping wastewater treatment.

W.    SRCSD means the Sacramento Regional County Sanitation District. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.020 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all FSEs and other FOG-producing commercial/industrial businesses located within the incorporated area of the city that discharge either directly or indirectly into the citys sanitary sewer collection system. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.030 Regulatory consistency.
The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over and are controlling with respect to any conflicting or inconsistent provisions in this code. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.040 Compliance disclaimer.
Compliance by any person with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements related to sanitary sewers or industrial/commercial/retail waste discharge. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.050 Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the environmental and water resources director or designee shall be responsible for the administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.060 Disclaimer of liability.
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.070 Permitted discharges.
Wastewater may be discharged to the sanitary sewer collection system; provided, that such discharge is not prohibited by this chapter and conforms to all other requirements of this code, the current SRCSD sewer use ordinance, and all other applicable statutes, regulations, ordinances or other governmental requirements; and further provided, that all applicable city and SRCSD fees and sewer use charges are paid. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.080 Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any FSE to discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following to the sanitary sewer collection system except as specifically authorized by other provisions of this code:

A.    FOG in amounts, either alone or in combination with other discharges, that cause:

1.    Any visible sheen on the surface of the discharged wastewater;

2.    Any build-up of grease in any portion of the sanitary sewer collection system; or

3.    Any obstruction of the sanitary sewer collection system.

B.    Any discharge from a food grinder for a new or remodeled FSE.

C.    Any water or waste having a pH lower than five or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, personnel and sewer pipes.

The foregoing discharge prohibitions are not exclusive and shall be in addition to any prohibitions or requirements specified in any other provision of this code or by any other applicable statute, regulation, ordinance, law, or other governmental requirement. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.090 Grease control devices.
All FSEs must install, operate, and maintain a grease control device if they meet any of the following provisions:

A.    New construction.

B.    Renovation or remodeling that alters the existing plumbing at or below grade of the existing finished floor or alters the use, occupancy or function of the space, which would contribute to the production of fats, oils and grease.

C.    When deemed necessary by the environmental and water resources director to protect public health or safety or reduce/eliminate FOG.

D.    If the FSE has a prohibited discharge.

E.    If the FSE is deemed by the environmental and water resources director to contribute to or have reasonable potential to be the cause of an SSO.

F.    If there is a change in land use which change has the potential to significantly increase FOG production and/or make a prohibited discharge of FOG reasonably foreseeable without a grease interceptor.

Grease control devices shall meet minimum design and performance requirements of the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the California Plumbing Code as well as satisfying all requirements as designated by the environmental and water resources director. Grease control devices must be approved by the environmental and water resources director, in writing, prior to construction and installation. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.100 Conditional waiver.
An FSE may apply to the environmental and water resources director, in writing, for a conditional waiver of the requirement to install an approved grease control device.

A.    The environmental and water resources director may approve such conditional waiver if the FSE demonstrates to the environmental and water resources directors satisfaction that the FSE does not generate FOG, and/or causes FOG deposition in the sanitary sewer collection system. The conditional waiver shall include the following information:

1.    An independent study by an engineering firm recommending that a grease control device is not necessary.

2.    A description of the FSEs best management practices (BMPs) which include:

a.    BMPs based on a set menu that is not subject to change.

b.    Employee training on proper food preparation, handling, serving and cleaning.

c.    BMP signage posted throughout the restaurant for employees to refer to.

d.    BMP training log, maintenance logs, and records available for city staff to review.

B.    If the content of the menu changes or the operation and/or maintenance of the restaurant changes, the FSE shall notify the city. Changes in the menu or operations and/or maintenance of the restaurant may require the installation of a grease control device.

C.    Cooperation with the city of Folsoms inspector and wastewater division to perform restaurant inspections and closed circuit television inspection of the FSEs sewer lateral.

D.    The environmental and water resources director may revoke this conditional waiver and require that an approved grease control device be installed at any time:

1.    If the FSE discharges FOG or causes the discharge of FOG into the sanitary sewer collection system;

2.    If the environmental and water resources director determines that any SSO, stoppage, interruption, or reduction of flow in the sanitary sewer collection system has resulted in whole or in part from discharge(s) by the FSE; or

3.    If the environmental and water resources director determines that the conditional waiver should be revoked to protect public health and safety. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.110 Exception to allow alternative grease control device.
An FSE may apply for an exception to allow installation of a grease control device other than a grease interceptor, and the environmental and water resources director may approve such exception if the FSE demonstrates to the environmental and water resources directors satisfaction that installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible due to space constraints, utility interferences, inadequate slope of wastewater drainage lines, or other considerations. Alternative grease removal devices must be approved by the environmental and water resources director and include, but are not limited to, features that trap, separate and hold grease and be of a design that is equal to or more effective than an acceptable grease control device. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.120 Maintenance of grease control devices.
A.    All FSEs are required to utilize a grease waste hauler to pump grease waste from the grease interceptor and to lawfully dispose of the grease waste. Grease waste shall not be disposed of in the sanitary sewer collection system or storm drains.

B.    The FSE, at its sole cost and expense, shall properly utilize, clean and maintain the grease control device in good and efficient working order at all times.

C.    The FSE shall immediately correct any problem with a grease control device including, but not limited to, plugging, overflow or spillage from the device, improper operation, noncompliance with cleaning schedule, damaged or nonfunctioning features of the device, excessive accumulation of grease or solids, or other problems that resulted in or could result in a prohibited discharge or SSO. The manager or owner of an FSE shall notify the environmental and water resources director in writing of the problem and corrective action within five days of the discovery of the problem.

D.    The FSE shall keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than three years. The FSE shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to environmental and water resources director, or any authorized inspector that has jurisdiction under any local, state or federal water quality statutes, ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.130 Prohibition of food grinders.
Food grinders are prohibited in new or remodeled FSEs. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.140 Scope of inspections and monitoring.
A.    In the event of an emergency situation that poses an immediate threat to life, health, safety, or general welfare occurring at an FSE relating to activities covered by this chapter, the environmental and water resources director may enter upon private property to eliminate, abate, clean up and dispose of a prohibited discharge or grease waste.

B.    The environmental and water resources director may enter upon private property during regular business hours to investigate the source of any prohibited discharge to the sanitary sewer collection system or to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:

1.    Operation and maintenance of grease control devices.

2.    Prohibition of the use of food grinders.

3.    Inspection of any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment that may have the ability to discharge to the municipal sewer system.

4.    Erection and maintenance of monitoring and sampling devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge to the city sanitary sewer collection system.

5.    Inspection, review and copying of all records of the FSE relating to preventing prohibited discharges to the sanitary sewer collection system. This may include, but is not limited to, operation, inspection, maintenance and cleaning records related to grease control devices and grease waste pumping manifests.

6.    Inspection, sampling and testing of any discharge to the city sanitary sewer collection system for the purpose of determining the potential for a prohibited discharge. The investigation of the integrity of all grease control devices. The taking of photographs or videotape, measurements or drawing, and creation of any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the premises. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.150 Enforcement.
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced within the city by the environmental and water resources director or other staff and enforcement officials designated by the environmental and water resources director. The remedies set forth herein are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Nothing contained herein shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy under this code or any other applicable law. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.160 Penalties.
A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed Level E violations, as defined in Section 1.09.012. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.170 Enforcement procedures, notice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty, or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement authority shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.09. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 to 1.09.052, inclusive, shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall not be required to commence the administrative hearing procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive. Pursuant to Section 1.09.024, a notice of administrative violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.180 Abatement.
A.    Any person engaged in activities which cause, allow, facilitate or result in a prohibited discharge shall bear all costs incurred by the city as a result of such prohibited discharge including but not limited to the cost of abatement, cleanup and disposal.

B.    The environmental and water resources director will keep an account of the administrative, labor, equipment and other costs of abatement, cleanup and recovery. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.190 Regulatory actions.
Any person determined to be in violation of this chapter shall bear all costs incurred by the city resulting from, or related to any correction and/or enforcement of a violation of this chapter or the payment of monetary sanctions, or both. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

13.03.200 Discontinuance of service.
A.    In addition to all of the remedies provided in this chapter, violations of the provisions of this chapter may result in disconnection of the premises from the water or the sanitary sewer collection system by the environmental and water resources director.

B.    Prior to such discontinuance of service the owner of the real property to which the service was rendered shall be served with written notice from the environmental and water resources director stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.

C.    When service has been disconnected as provided in this section, the environmental and water resources director may require that the person requesting that such service be reestablished furnish a bond or deposit equal to five times the citys cost to cause the disconnection, rectify problems caused by the prohibited discharge, and complete the reconnection, payable to the city and conditional upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter, before granting permission to make such connection.

D.    The person making application for such reestablishment of service shall pay all expenses incurred by the city in causing such disconnection and reconnection before such permission may be granted. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 1071  2 (part), 2007)

Chapter 13.04
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEMDEFINITIONS
Sections:

13.04.010    City defined.

13.04.020    Dwelling unit defined.

13.04.030    Premises defined.

13.04.040    Sewage defined.

13.04.050    Superintendent defined.

13.04.010 City defined.
City means the city of Folsom. (Prior code  9022)

13.04.020 Dwelling unit defined.
Dwelling unit means the habitat of any individual or family. (Prior code  9024)

13.04.030 Premises defined.
Premises refers to a lot, parcel of land, building or establishment. (Prior code  9023)

13.04.040 Sewage defined.
Sewage as used in this chapter means a combination of liquid or water carried human waste conducted away from residences, business buildings, and institutions which is known as domestic sewage, together with the liquid or water carried waste resulting from a manufacturing process employed in industrial establishments, including the washing, cleaning or drain water from such process, which is known as industrial waste. (Prior code  9020)

13.04.050 Superintendent defined.
Superintendent refers to anyone delegated by the city council to the performance of duties as specified in this chapter. (Prior code  9021)

Chapter 13.08
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEMREGULATIONS
Sections:

13.08.010    Definitions.

13.08.020    Permit required.

13.08.030    Domestic sewage screening.

13.08.040    Industrial waste screening.

13.08.050    Sewage measurement deviceInstallation.

13.08.060    Sewage measurement deviceTypeResponsibility.

13.08.070    Outside cityConnection.

13.08.080    Cleanout plug required.

13.08.090    Backflow prevention device.

13.08.100    Nonpermanent discharges.

13.08.110    Prohibited activities.

13.08.120    Prohibited discharges.

13.08.130    Prohibited discharge locations.

13.08.140    Maintenance responsibilities.

13.08.150    Easement access.

13.08.160    Private sewer laterals.

13.08.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

A.    City means the city of Folsom.

B.    City council means the city council of the city of Folsom.

C.    Cleanout means a pipe fitting and associated piping connected to a sewer lateral that provides access to the sewer lateral for purposes of flushing, rodding, cleaning, and other maintenance and diagnostic purposes.

D.    County means the county of Sacramento.

E.    Environmental and water resources director means the director of the environmental and water resources department of the city of Folsom or as otherwise directed by the city manager or his or her designee.

F.    Lower lateral means the portion of a sewer lateral lying within a public street connecting an upper lateral to the sewer main. The lower lateral extends from the cleanout near the property line or easement (as identified in Standard Construction Specification SS-07) to the sewer main or within five feet of the property line or easement (as identified in Standard Construction Specification SS-07) to the sewer main if there is no cleanout near the property line or easement. The lower lateral includes the connection to the sewer main. A lower lateral is associated with a parcel if it or any portion of it is located upon the parcel or conveys sewage and liquid waste from any structure located on that parcel.

G.    New construction means construction of a new structure or modification of an existing structure or portion of an existing structure.

H.    Private sewer lateral means a pipe or pipes and appurtenances that carry sewage and liquid waste from the structure served to the lower lateral.

I.    Property owner means a person that owns a parcel of real property, or that persons authorized representative including a tenant or contractor. As used in this subsection, person means an individual, trust, corporation, nonprofit organization, homeowners association, partnership, firm, joint venture, limited liability company, or association.

J.    Remodeling means any significant improvement, addition, construction, reconstruction, remodeling, modification or alteration of or to an existing or previously existing structure.

K.    Repair means construction activities performed to bring a private sewer lateral into compliance with this chapter consisting of correction of less than the private sewer lateral.

L.    Replacement means construction activities performed to bring a private sewer lateral into compliance with this chapter consisting of the replacement or lining of the complete length of the private sewer lateral.

M.    Sanitary sewer collection system means the city-owned network of pipes, manholes, and pump stations that convey wastewater to SRCSD facilities.

N.    Sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) means a condition whereby untreated sewage is discharged to the environment, escaping wastewater treatment.

O.    Sewer main means a publicly owned sanitary sewer that receives flows from private sewer laterals. The sewer main does not include any portion of a private sewer lateral.

P.    SRCSD means the Sacramento Regional County Sanitation District.

Q.    Upper lateral means a pipe or pipes and appurtenances that carry sewage and liquid from the structure served to the lower lateral. If the parcel contains a sewer pipe system or multiple private sewer laterals, the entire sewer pipe system, including manholes and other appurtenances, and all private sewer laterals are part of the upper sewer lateral to the extent they are located on that parcel.

R.    Waste hauler means transporters of waste trap grease and grease from interceptors from facilities that collect, store, process or dispose of waste grease. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.020 Permit required.
No person shall tap or make connection to the sanitary sewers in the city, without a permit and the payment of the fees established for the privilege of making such tap or connection. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: prior code  9000. Formerly 13.08.010)

13.08.030 Domestic sewage screening.
Domestic sewage, consisting essentially of human waste, may be passed into sewers without screening. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: prior code  9025. Formerly 13.08.020)

13.08.040 Industrial waste screening.
Industrial waste must be screened through the equivalent of a twenty-mesh screen. No peach, plum, prune, cherry, apricot or other food particles or solids larger than what would pass through a twenty-mesh screen shall be discharged or permitted to enter the sewage system. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: prior code  9026. Formerly 13.08.030)

13.08.050 Sewage measurement deviceInstallation.
The environmental and water resources director shall determine what commercial businesses and industries shall be required to install the means of measurement of sewage discharged and to report his recommendations to the environmental and water resources director; and, upon a finding that said installation is reasonably required to determine the amount of the service charge, the city council shall direct the person owning said business or industry to install means for measurement of sewage. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: prior code  9028. Formerly 13.08.040)

13.08.060 Sewage measurement deviceTypeResponsibility.
Every person who is required to install a means for measurement of sewage discharge shall install an approved flume and an automatic recording device or other approved means for measurement of sewage discharge at his own expense. The environmental and water resources director or other person designated by the city manager shall enforce the provisions and he shall have the right at all times to check the operation of the screening mechanism, the operation of the measuring recording mechanism, and to make a record of the readings. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: prior code  9029. Formerly 13.08.050)

13.08.070 Outside cityConnection.
Persons owning premises situated outside the corporate limits may, upon issuance of a permit by the city council, connect to the sewerage system of the city by paying all costs thereof and an annual rental to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: Ord. 692  1, 1990: prior code  9031)

13.08.080 Cleanout plug required.
On all new construction within the city, and on all new connections within the city sewer system, there shall be provided, at the property line, a cleanout plug which shall consist of a single or double wye branch with end or side cleanout, closed with a waterproof cap. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015: prior code  9042. Formerly 13.08.090)

13.08.090 Backflow prevention device.
A.    On all new construction within the city, and all new connections within the city sewer system, the property owner shall be required to install, operate and maintain a backflow prevention device if they meet any of the following provisions:

1.    The lowest dwelling plumbing fixture is twelve inches or less above the rim of the nearest upstream manhole.

2.    When deemed necessary by the environmental and water resources director to protect public health or safety.

B.    All existing property owners shall be required to install, operate and maintain a backflow prevention device if they meet any of the following provisions:

1.    When deemed necessary during the application process when applying for a construction, remodel or sewer replacement permit.

2.    When deemed necessary by the environmental and water resources director to protect public health or safety. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.100 Nonpermanent discharges.
Discharges that do not require a separate permanent connection, and do not require a sewer impact permit or temporary discharge permit, are considered nonpermanent discharges. Nonpermanent discharges can be discharged into the citys sewer collection system, subject to the following conditions:

A.    Discharge must be to a plumbing fixture, utility sink, private cleanout, or sanitary sewer manhole.

B.    Discharge must not adversely impact flow of the citys sewer collection system; otherwise, the nonpermanent discharge must immediately be disconnected.

C.    Discharge must not be from a waste hauler. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.110 Prohibited activities.
The city hereby prohibits the following activities:

A.    Access or discharge into manholes, cleanouts, or other openings in the citys sewer collection system unless specifically authorized by the city.

B.    Damaging, breaking, destroying, defacing, or tampering with the citys sewer collection system.

C.    Obstructing flow in the citys sewer facilities. This provision includes but is not limited to obstruction originating from the cleaning of a private sewer that results in an obstruction in the citys sewer collection system.

D.    Creating a condition that pressurizes the lower lateral.

E.    Creating conditions in the citys sewer collection system that endanger the health and safety of any person.

F.    Interfering or impairing the operation or maintenance of the citys sewer collection system.

G.    Removal or failing to maintain a required backflow prevention device. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.120 Prohibited discharges.
The following are hereby prohibited to be discharged to the citys sewer collection system:

A.    Flows exceeding the capacity of city facilities or exceeding the quantity normally or customarily anticipated for the permitted use.

B.    Discharge of water that does not meet the water quality standards of acceptability for discharge into the storm drain, such as stormwater, surface water, pool water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage.

C.    Fats, oils, and grease in amounts, either alone or in combination with other discharges, that cause:

1.    Any visible sheen on the surface of the discharged wastewater;

2.    Any build-up of grease in any portion of the sanitary sewer collection system; or

3.    Any obstruction of the sanitary sewer collection system.

D.    Trucked and hauled wastes.

E.    Substances that may cause excessive foaming in any portion of the citys sewer collection system.

F.    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit.

G.    Any substance, either by itself or combined with other wastewater discharge, that is capable of obstructing flow or impairing the performance of the citys sewer collection system.

H.    Cementitious materials.

I.    Any substance that may cause damage, including corrosive structural damage, to any part of the citys sewer collection system.

J.    Chemicals of any kind that are not specifically authorized for disposal in a sewer system.

K.    Garbage, including food wastes, that is greater than one-quarter inch in any dimension.

L.    The foregoing discharge prohibitions are not exclusive and are in addition to any prohibitions or requirements specified in any provision of this chapter or by any other applicable statute, regulation, prohibition, or ordinance.

If a person owning or occupying a premises has knowledge that a discharge prohibited by this chapter has entered or will enter the citys sewer collection system, such person shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and abate the discharge and must notify the city immediately of knowledge of the discharge. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.130 Prohibited discharge locations.
No person shall discharge any wastewater or any other substance directly into a manhole or other opening in the citys sewer collection system except according to the requirements established by this chapter. The environmental and water resources director, however, may grant permission and establish requirements and policies for other such direct discharges. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.140 Maintenance responsibilities.
A.    Lower Laterals (City) and Upper Laterals (Private). The owner has the sole responsibility for clearing stoppages, inspecting, maintaining, and repairing the upper lateral, including backflow prevention devices, so as to maintain the upper lateral in a condition that avoids negative impacts to the operation and maintenance of the citys system. This may include the following:

1.    The upper lateral should be kept free from roots, grease deposits, and other solids that may impede the flow or obstruct the transmission of waste.

2.    All joints should be tight, and all pipes should be sound and free from structural defects, including cracks, breaks, and missing portions, to prevent ex-filtration by waste or infiltration by groundwater or stormwater.

3.    No drains or other appurtenances that collect stormwater or surface water should be connected to the upper lateral.

4.    All cleanouts shall be securely sealed with a proper cap or approved overflow device at all times.

Typically, the responsibility delineation between the upper and lower lateral is at the citys sewer cleanout or, in the absence of a cleanout, it shall be understood that the delineation from the upper sewer lateral to the lower sewer lateral shall be a maximum of five feet from the property line or easement as identified in the citys Standard Construction Specification SS-07 and as shown in the figure below:

Upper Lateral and Lower Lateral Location

Maintenance Responsibilities for Upper and Lower Laterals Where Cleanout Exists

The purpose of this drawing is to delineate maintenance responsibility only. Refer to city of Folsom standards and specifications for design and construction details.

The gray color indicates the portion of the service lateral for which the property owner is responsible for maintaining and repairing. The green color indicates the portion of the service lateral that the city is responsible for maintaining and repairing.

If the city owns the mainline, the city is responsible for clearing stoppages and for inspecting, maintaining, and repairing the lower lateral, city cleanouts, manholes and mainline. If the city does not own the mainline or manhole, the city has no responsibility for clearing stoppages or for inspecting, maintaining, or repairing the mainline, cleanouts, or lower laterals.

B.    City and Private Mainlines. The city is responsible for the maintenance of mainlines within the public right-of-way or easement unless the mainline is privately owned, or a specific agreement delineating ownership exists, or the city has expressly accepted the maintenance and repair obligation in writing. In cases where parcels or structures are served by a private sewer, the owner has the sole responsibility for ownership, operation, and maintenance of the private sewer. Where the city is to be responsible for any element of a private sewer system, it shall be expressly so provided in writing and the responsibility must be accepted by the city council. The owners responsibilities include clearing stoppages, inspecting, maintaining, and repairing the private system so as to maintain the private system in a condition that avoids negative impacts to the operation and maintenance of the citys system. This may include the following:

1.    The private system should be kept free from roots, grease deposits, and other solids that may impede the flow or obstruct the transmission of waste.

2.    All joints should be tight, and all pipes should be sound and free from structural defects, including cracks, breaks, and missing portions, to prevent ex-filtration by waste or infiltration by groundwater or stormwater.

3.    No drains or other appurtenances that collect stormwater or surface water should be connected to the private system.

Typically, the responsibility delineation between the city and private mainlines is at the citys sewer cleanout or, in the absence of a cleanout, to the limits of the public right-of-way or easement.

Maintenance Responsibilities for City and Private Mainline and Manholes

The purpose of this drawing is to delineate maintenance responsibility only. Refer to the citys standards and specifications for design and construction details.

The gray color indicates the portion of the system that the owner is responsible for maintaining and repairing. The green color indicates the portion of the system that the city is responsible for maintaining and repairing. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.150 Easement access.
A.    The city requires permanent easements for all city-owned sewer facilities that are located outside of the public right-of-way.

B.    Any use of an easement by the owner or occupants (herein after referred to as owner) that is not compatible with or interferes with the construction, operation, maintenance, reconstruction, or repair of city facilities is not allowed. No permanent structure (such as garages, patios, concrete slabs, tool sheds, fences, retaining walls, trees and similar structures) is to be constructed on top of the citys sewer collection system facilities or anywhere within any associated sewer or public utility easements.

C.    The owner must allow for an unobstructed pathway access to all easement areas, with the access having the following dimensions:

1.    A minimum width of fifteen feet.

2.    A minimum height of six feet, eight inches.

If access to an easement area is required at any time, city personnel will at their discretion obtain access. The parcel owner may be held financially responsible for any additional costs incurred by the city if the owner has not provided city staff adequate access to its assets in a timely manner. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

13.08.160 Private sewer laterals.
A.    Each property owner shall, at the property owners expense, inspect, maintain in good working order, repair and replace, as necessary, the private sewer lateral so that it does not cause or contribute to any sewage overflow from either the private sewer lateral or the public sewer. The private sewer lateral shall be free of displaced joints, open joints, roots, cracks, leaks, inflow, infiltration of water, fats, oils and grease, defects or obstructions likely to cause or contribute to blockage of the private sewer lateral or the public sewer.

B.    A property owner shall have the private sewer lateral inspected by a licensed plumber upon the receipt of written notice from the city that an inspection is required. The city may issue a written notice that an inspection is required whenever it determines from its operation, maintenance or inspection of the public sewer, or through any other means, that the private sewer lateral is defective or otherwise in a condition that might cause a blockage in the private sewer lateral or the public sewer. Conditions that render the private sewer lateral defective or in a condition that might cause a blockage include, but are not limited to, displaced joints, open joints, roots, cracks, leaks, inflow, infiltration of water, fats, oils and grease, defects or obstructions likely to cause or contribute to blockage of the private sewer lateral or the public sewer. The citys written notice shall set forth a reasonable time in which the inspection must occur and shall require the property owner to submit an inspection report meeting the requirements of this chapter to the city within a reasonable time, to be specified in the citys written notice, after completion of the inspection. The property owner shall be responsible for obtaining any required city permits prior to any construction.

C.    All inspections and inspection reports required by this chapter shall be completed in accordance with the following requirements:

1.    The inspection and inspection report shall be completed by a licensed plumber.

2.    The inspection shall include, at a minimum, a closed-circuit television (CCTV) inspection of the private sewer lateral.

3.    The inspection and inspection report shall identify, as applicable, the severity and location of all of the following:

a.    Displaced joints, open joints, roots, cracks, leaks, inflow, infiltration of water, fats, oils and grease, defects or obstructions likely to cause or contribute to blockage of the private sewer lateral or the public sewer.

b.    Any connection by pipe or otherwise that allows rainwater or groundwater to enter the private lateral or public sewer.

c.    Any backflow device installed in the private sewer lateral and the condition of the backwater device.

d.    All corrective actions that must be taken to maintain, repair or replace the private sewer lateral and the estimated time and cost associated with such maintenance, repair or replacement.

4.    The inspection report shall contain either a printed image, DVD, or other suitable electronic recording of the CCTV inspection of the private sewer lateral in a format acceptable to the city. (Ord. 1233  2 (part), 2015)

Chapter 13.12
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEMRENTAL REGULATIONS*
Sections:

13.12.010    ChargesLien.

13.12.020    ViolationDisconnection authority.

13.12.030    ReconnectionBond.

13.12.040    Delinquent chargesCollection method.

13.12.050    Delinquent chargesComputation report.

13.12.060    Delinquent chargesNoticeHearing.

13.12.070    Delinquent chargesProperty owner notice.

*    See also Chapter 3.20, Municipal Service Charges.

13.12.010 ChargesLien.
Each charge or rental levied is a lien upon the premises served by a connection to the city sewerage system. In the event charges are not paid for sewage service, the superintendent is authorized and directed to disconnect such property from the city sewerage system. (Prior code  9034)

13.12.020 ViolationDisconnection authority.
In the event of a violation of any of the laws of the state, the ordinances of the city, or the rules and regulations so established referring to the discharge of sewage, the superintendent shall notify the person or persons causing, committing such violation, specifying the violation, and upon the failure of such person or persons to cease or prevent further violation within five days after the receipt of such notice, the superintendent shall have authority to disconnect the property served from the city sewerage system. (Prior code  9035)

13.12.030 ReconnectionBond.
When service has been disconnected the superintendent may require that the person requesting that such service be reestablished furnish a bond in the sum of five hundred dollars payable to the city and conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this code before granting permission to make such connection. The person making application for such reestablishment of service shall pay all expenses incurred and to be incurred by the city in causing such disconnection and reconnection before such permission may be granted. (Prior code  9036)

13.12.040 Delinquent chargesCollection method.
All delinquent charges for sewer service in the city shall be collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as general taxes are collected. (Prior code  9038)

13.12.050 Delinquent chargesComputation report.
The city clerk shall compute such charges in accordance with established rates and shall prepare a written report of delinquent charges for each fiscal year. Such report shall contain a description of each parcel of real property receiving sewer service and the amount of delinquent charge, with penalties, for each parcel for said fiscal year. The report shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. (Prior code  9039)

13.12.060 Delinquent chargesNoticeHearing.
Upon the filing of the report, the city clerk shall publish notice of the filing in the Folsom Telegraph, a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city, once a week for two successive weeks. The notice shall set a date for hearing on the report not sooner than two weeks after completion of the publication. The report shall be filed in time for publication, hearing, adoption and/or modification, and submission to the auditor not later than August 10th of each year. (Prior code  9040)

13.12.070 Delinquent chargesProperty owner notice.
The city clerk shall give notice of the report to the owners of property described in the report at the address shown on the latest equalized assessment roll at the time of preparation of the report. (Prior code  9041)

Chapter 13.16
SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS AND PRIVIESDEFINITIONS
Sections:

13.16.010    Cesspool defined.

13.16.020    City health officer defined.

13.16.030    Construction defined.

13.16.040    Department defined.

13.16.050    Drainage system defined.

13.16.060    Duplex defined.

13.16.070    Lot defined.

13.16.080    Permit defined.

13.16.090    Privy defined.

13.16.100    Public sanitary sewer defined.

13.16.110    Seepage pit or vertical drain defined.

13.16.120    Septic tank defined.

13.16.130    Sewage defined.

13.16.140    Sewage disposal defined.

13.16.150    Sewer well defined.

13.16.160    Single family residence defined.

13.16.010 Cesspool defined.
Cesspool means an excavation into the earth which is used for the reception of sewage or drainage from plumbing fixtures, effluent from septic tanks, together with water used in carriage of said sewage or drainage, but which does not have watertight walls or bottom. (Prior code  9068)

13.16.020 City health officer defined.
City health officer means the health officer of the city or such other officers or employees of the city to whom the city council delegates the function of the city health officer. (Prior code  9063)

13.16.030 Construction defined.
Construction means construction, repair, alteration or relocation of sewage disposal system. (Prior code  9071)

13.16.040 Department defined.
Department means the department of health of the city or to such other official or employee of the city to whom the city council delegates such functions. (Prior code  9060)

13.16.050 Drainage system defined.
Drainage system means and includes all the piping within public or private premises which conveys sewage or other liquid waste to a point of disposal, but does not include the mains or laterals of a public sewer system. (Prior code  9065)

13.16.060 Duplex defined.
Duplex means a detached building occupied, intended or designed for occupancy by two families living independently of each other, but under one roof. (Prior code  9062)

13.16.070 Lot defined.
Lot means a parcel of land shown upon a subdivision map or a record of survey map or described by metes and bounds. (Prior code  9074)

13.16.080 Permit defined.
Permit means a sanitation permit issued by the city. (Prior code  9075)

13.16.090 Privy defined.
Privy is a structure used as a toilet under a part or all of which is a vault or pit intended or used for the reception of human waste matter. (Prior code  9069)

13.16.100 Public sanitary sewer defined.
Public sanitary sewer is any sewage disposal system operated and maintained by the city. (Prior code  9070)

13.16.110 Seepage pit or vertical drain defined.
Seepage pit or vertical drain, as used in this chapter, means one or more pits extending into the porous stratum but not into a subterranean water bearing stratum, lined with open jointed walls, and capped. (Prior code  9072)

13.16.120 Septic tank defined.
Septic tank means a water tight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or a part thereof which is designed and constructed so as to retain solids, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allows the liquids to discharge into the soil outside the tank through a subsurface drainage system or into a cesspool. (Prior code  9067)

13.16.130 Sewage defined.
Sewage means any and all waste substance, liquid, or solid, associated with human habitation, or which contains or may be contaminated with human or animal excreta or excrement, offal, or any feculent matter. (Prior code  9064)

13.16.140 Sewage disposal defined.
Sewage disposal means any septic tank, privy, structure vault or pit for disposal or treatment of sewage and any drainage system or other type system used for the disposal of sewage. (Prior code  9066)

13.16.150 Sewer well defined.
Sewer well means any hole dug or drilled into the ground, and intended for use as a water supply, which has been abandoned as a source of water supply and is being used for the disposal of sewage, or any hole dug or drilled into the ground and used or intended to be used for the disposal of sewage and extended to or into a subterranean water bearing stratum which is used, or intended to be used as, or is suitable for, a source of water supply for domestic purposes. (Prior code  9073)

13.16.160 Single family residence defined.
Single family residence means any structure occupied, intended or designed for occupancy by one family for living or sleeping purposes as its principal use. (Prior code  9061)

Chapter 13.20
SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS AND PRIVIESREGULATIONS
Sections:

13.20.010    Minimum lot area.

13.20.020    Connection requirements.

13.20.030    Sewage disposal system required.

13.20.040    Permit required.

13.20.050    PermitNew construction.

13.20.060    Sewage disposal system businessBond required.

13.20.070    Septic tank minimum capacity.

13.20.080    Uniform rules and regulations.

13.20.090    Sewer wellsDeclared nuisance.

13.20.100    Sewer wellProhibited.

13.20.110    Construction requirements.

13.20.120    PrivyPermitGranting conditions.

13.20.130    PrivyRemoval.

13.20.140    PrivyApplication.

13.20.150    PrivyException.

13.20.160    PermitDenial conditions.

13.20.170    City health officer authority.

13.20.180    PermitApplicationFee.

13.20.190    Investigation.

13.20.200    PermitAction required.

13.20.210    PermitDenialAppeal.

13.20.220    Completion notice required.

13.20.230    Certificate of completion.

13.20.240    Variances.

13.20.250    Enforcement authority.

13.20.010 Minimum lot area.
No single family residence or duplex residence shall hereafter be constructed, built or moved on any lot, for such residential purpose, where the sewage disposal will be located on the same lot as the building unless and except where such lot contains the minimum lot area for each such type residence as indicated:

1.    Single family residence. The lot shall contain a minimum of twenty thousand square feet for each such residence when both sewage disposal and the source of domestic water supply are located on the lot. When only sewage disposal is located on the lot, the lot shall contain a minimum of ten thousand square feet for such residence;

2.    Duplex residence. The lot shall contain a minimum of twenty-five thousand square feet for each such residence when both the sewage disposal and the source or domestic water supply will be located on the same lot. When only the sewage disposal is located on the lot, the lot shall contain a minimum of fifteen thousand square feet for each such residence. (Prior code  9076)

13.20.020 Connection requirements.
The drainage system in every building where persons reside, congregate or are employed, which building is within two hundred feet of public sanitary sewer to which the owner of the building may lawfully connect upon proper application and the payment of the required fees shall, when there is an existing violation of any provision of this chapter, connect to such sewer in the most direct manner possible. (Prior code  9077)

13.20.030 Sewage disposal system required.
No person shall maintain or use any residence, place of business or other building or place where persons reside, congregate or are employed which is not provided with a means for the disposal of sewage which complies with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code  9078)

13.20.040 Permit required.
No person shall hereafter construct, alter or relocate a sewage disposal system without first having obtained a permit from the department. (Prior code  9079)

13.20.050 PermitNew construction.
If a disposal system is to be constructed in connection with a new building, the permit therefor shall be obtained prior to the commencement of construction of the new building. (Prior code  9080)

13.20.060 Sewage disposal system businessBond required.
No person, shall carry on, contract to perform or engage in the business of constructing, altering, relocating, or repairing sewage disposal systems for places of business or human habitation, where the reasonable cost of the labor and materials exceeds two hundred fifty dollars without first posting a bond equal to twenty-five percent of the cost of constructing, altering, relocating or repairing the sewage disposal system. The bond may be in the form of cash, or a surety bond issued by a surety company acceptable to the city, that is willing and able to guarantee faithful performance on the part of the applicant by the issuance of a corporate surety bond. The cash or surety bond must name the city as obligee and must guarantee performance of the sewer system to the satisfaction of the city for one year after completion of the job as a whole, or such severable unit thereof as is expressly approved by the city. (Prior code  9081)

13.20.070 Septic tank minimum capacity.
All septic tanks, disposing of sewage from single family residences shall have minimum capacity of eight hundred liquid gallons. (Prior code  9082)

13.20.080 Uniform rules and regulations.
In order that privies, septic tanks and drains for the disposal of the tank effluent shall not be offensive, injurious or dangerous to health, the city health officer shall make and establish reasonable and uniform rules and regulations regarding the size, materials used, location and manner of construction of all privies, septic tanks and drains for the disposal of the tank effluent hereafter constructed. (Prior code  9083)

13.20.090 Sewer wellsDeclared nuisance.
All sewer wells are declared a public nuisance. (Prior code  9084)

13.20.100 Sewer wellProhibited.
No person shall drill, construct, maintain in or operate a sewer well. (Prior code  9085)

13.20.110 Construction requirements.
No person shall construct, excavate or maintain any privy, vault, cesspool, septic tank, sewage treatment works, sewer pipes or conduits for the treatment and discharge of sewage or impure waters or substances offensive, injurious or dangerous to health whereby they shall overflow lands except where the person is complying with established requirements of the Central Valley Regional Pollution Control Board of the state. (Prior code  9086)

13.20.120 PrivyPermitGranting conditions.
No privies shall be permitted and no permit therefor shall be granted, except under the following conditions:

1.    The enforcement agency, in every case, may determine whether or not it is practicable to provide running water and proper means of sewage disposal and, if it decides that it is not practicable to provide running water, shall issue a special permit in writing authorizing the noninstallation of plumbing fixtures. The permit shall be made in duplicate, and a copy shall remain on file with the enforcement agency;

2.    When a permit authorizing the noninstallation of a water closet is issued, a privy or toilet other than a water closet for the deposit of fecal matter, urine, or sewage may be installed. A privy shall consist of a pit at least three feet deep covered by a shelter sufficient to afford privacy and protection from the elements. Openings in the shelter shall be closed by metal mosquito screening, and the door to the shelter shall close automatically by means of a spring or other device;

3.    The privy pit shall not be allowed to become filled with excreta to a point within one foot from the surface of the ground. The excreta in the pit shall be covered with earth, ashes, lime or other similar substance at regular intervals. The pit shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. (Prior code  9087)

13.20.130 PrivyRemoval.
When running water becomes available and proper sewage disposal becomes practicable, any privy installed pursuant to this chapter shall be completely removed; the place where it was located shall be properly disinfected; and it shall be replaced by one or more individual water closets meeting the requirements of this part relating to water closets in buildings. (Prior code  9088)

13.20.140 PrivyApplication.
The provisions of this chapter apply to privies existing within the city. No person shall maintain a privy which fails to conform to the standards set forth herein. (Prior code  9089)

13.20.150 PrivyException.
When running water becomes available and proper sewage disposal becomes practicable any existing privy shall be completely removed, unless such privy is more than two hundred feet distant from any building which is owned or occupied by any other person. (Prior code  9090)

13.20.160 PermitDenial conditions.
No permit shall be issued for the construction, addition to, alteration or modification of any privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewage treatment works, excavation, sewer pipes or conduits or other means for the disposal, common treatment or discharge of sewage if the means or proposed means will permit any of the following conditions:

1.    The escape of any unpleasant or noxious odors, vapors or gasses;

2.    The ingress and egress of flies, other insects, rodents or animals;

3.    The discharge of sewage or the discharge or drainage of effluent from the sewage disposal system to empty, flow, seep, drain or condense into or otherwise pollute any stream, river, lake, tributary or subterranean or other waters;

4.    A condition which will be offensive, dangerous or injurious to health. (Prior code  9091)

13.20.170 City health officer authority.
The city health officer may order reasonable changes in the method, means, manner and place for the disposal treatment or discharge of sewage in order that the same shall not constitute a menace to health of human beings, animals, or a public nuisance. The orders of the city health officer shall designate the period within which such changes are to be made. (Prior code  9092)

13.20.180 PermitApplicationFee.
Any person desiring to secure a permit or approval shall file an application therefor with the department, on such forms as the department shall require. A fee of four dollars shall be paid to the department on filing an application for a permit, to defray costs of administration and inspection. No fee shall be required for a permit to repair a sewage disposal system. The application shall contain a detailed plan and description of the existing or proposed means for the disposal of sewage and/or proposed addition or alteration. The application shall also contain such other information as the city health officer shall prescribe. (Prior code  9093)

13.20.190 Investigation.
The department may investigate the proposed sewage disposal system and the conditions effecting it to determine whether the construction as proposed will be offensive, injurious or dangerous to health. (Prior code  9094)

13.20.200 PermitAction required.
The department must grant, conditionally grant, or deny an application for a permit within seven days after the application is filed. (Prior code  9095)

13.20.210 PermitDenialAppeal.
Any person whose application for a permit has been denied by the department may within thirty days after the date of such denial appeal therefrom in writing to the city council. Such appeal shall be heard by the council within ten days after the date appeal is filed. (Prior code  9096)

13.20.220 Completion notice required.
Upon the completion of a sewage disposal system by an applicant to whom a permit has been issued, he shall forthwith notify the department of such fact by transmitting to the department a notice of completion on a form supplied by the department. (Prior code  9097)

13.20.230 Certificate of completion.
The department may make such investigation and inspection after completion as may be necessary to determine that the plans and specifications approved in the permit have been complied with. It shall issue to the applicant a certificate of completion prior to the time that the work is covered, concealed or put in use. Failure to issue such certificate within ten days after the receipt of the notice of completion shall constitute approval of the sewage disposal unless the person has been notified in writing to the contrary within the period. (Prior code  9098)

13.20.240 Variances.
The city health officer may grant special permits allowing for variances from the provisions of this chapter when practicable difficulties and unnecessary hardships exist in the way of strict enforcement, and when the general purpose and intent of this chapter can be carried out by the variance. (Prior code  9099)

13.20.250 Enforcement authority.
The city health officer shall enforce all of the provisions of this chapter relative to sewage disposal, treatment or discharge and other matters regulated by this chapter. (Prior code  9100)

Chapter 13.22
WATER SYSTEM CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Sections:

13.22.010    Definitions.

13.22.020    Application.

13.22.030    City responsibility.

13.22.040    Cross-connection control program.

13.22.050    Evaluation of hazard.

13.22.060    Level of cross-connection protection required.

13.22.070    Approval of backflow prevention devices.

13.22.080    Location of backflow prevention devices.

13.22.090    Backflow prevention device testing, maintenance, and inspection.

13.22.100    Responsible customer representative.

13.22.110    Temporary backflow protection devices.

13.22.120    Backflow prevention device repair, replacement and relocation.

13.22.130    Discontinuance of water service.

13.22.140    Unauthorized activity.

13.22.150    Violation declared a nuisance.

13.22.160    Enforcement.

13.22.170    Penalties.

13.22.180    Remedies cumulative.

13.22.010 Definitions.
A.    Air-gap separation (AG) means a physical break between the supply line and a receiving vessel or drain. The air-gap shall be at least two diameters of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel or drain and in no case less than one inch.

B.    Approved backflow prevention device (ABPD) means an effective assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system which has passed laboratory and field tests by a testing organization recognized by the CDPH and is listed on the approved and published list maintained by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR).

C.    Approved water supply means the citys potable water supply or any other water supply that is regulated by CDPH.

D.    Auxiliary supply means any water supply other than a potable supply regulated by CDPH that is available to the customer.

E.    Backflow means the reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources.

F.    CDPH means the California Department of Public Health.

G.    CA-NV Section AWWA means the California-Nevada Section of the American Water Works Association (AWWA).

H.    Certified backflow prevention assembly tester means an individual who holds a current certificate as a backflow prevention assembly tester as issued by CA-NV Section AWWA, or equivalent organization as recognized by CDPH and is certified by Sacramento Countys health officer.

I.    City means the city of Folsom.

J.    City water system means those facilities within and without the city of Folsom that the city uses to deliver potable water as the CDPH recognized water purveyor.

K.    Contamination means degradation of the quality of the potable water by any substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of water.

L.    Cross-connection means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a public or customers potable water system and any source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, contaminant or other substance other than the potable water with which the system is supplied.

M.    Cross-connection control specialist means an individual who holds a valid certificate as a cross-connection control specialist as issued by CA-NV Section AWWA, or equivalent organization as recognized by CDPH and has been designated as the citys cross-connection control specialist by the department.

N.    Customer means any person or entity including the city using water supplied by the city water system. Customer includes tenants of single-family dwellings or duplexes, owners of real property and management companies responsible for property management of real property.

O.    Department means the city of Folsom utilities department.

P.    Director means the city of Folsom director of utilities or his or her designee unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.

Q.    Discontinued service means having the water service turned off by the department.

R.    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC) means an assembly composed of two independently acting check valves, including shut-off valves and test cocks, that is an ABPD.

S.    Fire chief means the fire chief of the city of Folsom, or designee unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.

T.    Premises means any and all areas on a customers property which are served or have the potential to be served by the city water system.

U.    Private fire service means a private fire service main and appurtenances installed in accordance with NFPA 24 on private property and maintained by the property owner for the explicit intent of providing fire flows either through fire hydrants, fire sprinkler systems, or other water-based fire protection systems.

V.    Reclaimed water shall mean wastewater or other water which as a result of treatment is suitable for nonpotable use.

W.    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP) means a device incorporating two check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing, that is an ABPD.

X.    Service connection shall refer to the point of connection of the customers piping to the citys water system.

Y.    Single-family dwelling unit means a building designed for one family and containing one kitchen.

Z.    Water distribution supervisor means the water distribution supervisor in the department or his or her designee unless otherwise stated or indicated by context. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.020 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all customers of the city water system. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.030 City responsibility.
The city, and its duly authorized employees, shall operate the public water system and implement a cross-connection control program. The purpose of this chapter is: (A) protect the city water system against actual or potential cross-connections by isolating within the premises contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; (B) eliminate existing connections between potable water systems and nonpotable systems that create a hazard to public health; (C) eliminate existing cross-connections between potable water systems and sources of contamination; and (D) prevent the making of cross-connections in the future. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.040 Cross-connection control program.
A.    The director is authorized to develop a cross-connection control program that is consistent with the intent of this chapter, CDPH regulations, California Code of Regulations, and any applicable laws. At a minimum, the program shall have the following elements:

1.    Conducting surveys as required identifying those water users where cross-connections are likely to occur;

2.    Require the provision of backflow protection by the water user at the water users service connection(s) or within the users premises or both if required based on the potential for a cross-connection;

3.    Establishment of procedures for testing backflow prevention devices, and maintenance of records of locations, tests, and repairs of these devices; and

4.    Maintain a list of certified backflow prevention assembly testers based on Sacramento County health departments list.

B.    The director shall oversee this chapters implementation, compliance with CDPH Regulations, and any laws regulating cross-connection control. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.050 Evaluation of hazard.
The department is authorized to evaluate the degree of potential health hazard to the city water system which may be created either as a result of conditions existing or potential created by a customer on their premises. The department shall not be responsible for abatement of cross-connections which may exist on the customers premises. Evaluation of the potential for health hazard, as a minimum, shall consider: (1) existence of cross-connections; (2) nature of materials on the premises and method of handling; (3) probability of backflow occurring; and (4) complexity and potential for modifications of piping system.

A.    In the evaluation of the degree of potential hazard, consideration shall be given to premises with the following conditions:

1.    Substances harmful to health handled in a manner which could permit their entry into the city water system. This includes chemical and biological process waters, water from an approved water supply which has been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality, and water from an auxiliary supply.

2.    Internal cross-connections that are not corrected or abated to the satisfaction of the cross-connection control administrator.

3.    Cross-connections are likely to occur and entry is restricted so that cross-connection inspections cannot be made on short notice or with the frequency given in Section 13.22.090 to assure that cross-connections do not occur.

4.    Repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.

B.    Periodic inspections of the customers premises may be required either to evaluate the potential for cross-connections or adequacy of backflow prevention devices or practices. These inspections may be in response to activities such as changes in use or ownership of the premises. The city shall provide twenty-four hours notice prior to inspection of the premises, unless conditions dictate that a longer or shorter notice period is more reasonable. Failure to provide the city with access to conduct an inspection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

C.    Cross-connection control requirements in this chapter shall be included as a condition of approval for water service for any new development or redevelopment project, with the exception of single-family dwelling units. Plans and specifications for any project other than single-family dwelling units requiring a building permit shall be subject to review and approval by the cross-connection control specialist for conformance with this chapter. Any single-family dwelling unit that includes an on-site domestic water or wastewater pump station shall also be subject to review and approval by the cross-connection control specialist for conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.060 Level of cross-connection protection required.
The level of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of potential public health hazard that exists or potentially exists on the customers premises.

The minimum level of protection for all applications shall be a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP) with the exception that the retrofit of fire protection systems, private and public, without access to an auxiliary supply or other cross-connection shall be subject to the conditions of the permit from the fire department required for modifications to the fire system in accordance with Chapter 8.36. The customer may choose a higher level of protection than that required by the cross-connection control program; however, the customer shall be responsible for installation in accordance with Section 13.22.080. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.070 Approval of backflow prevention devices.
The cross-connection control specialist, after determining the level of protection required per the requirements of Sections 13.22.050 and 13.22.060, shall approve the backflow prevention device to be installed. The proposed device shall be an approved backflow prevention device as defined in this chapter and shall be located per the requirements of Section 13.22.080. Any interior or exterior coating of the backflow prevention device shall be American National Standards Institute/National Sanitation Foundation (ANSI/NSF) Standard 61 approved coating, in accordance with AWWA specification. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.080 Location of backflow prevention devices.
A.    Backflow prevention devices shall be located as close as practical to the customers connection and shall be a minimum of twelve inches and a maximum of thirty-six inches above finished grade as measured from the bottom of the device. Alternative locations shall be subject to review and approval in writing by the cross-connection control specialist. There shall be a minimum of twelve inches of side clearance on the side with the test cocks.

B.    Air-gap separation device (AG) shall be located as close as practical to the customers connection and all piping between the customers connection and the receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless impractical based on existing conditions and as otherwise approved in writing by the cross-connection control specialist. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.090 Backflow prevention device testing, maintenance, and inspection.
Backflow prevention device testing shall be in accordance with the field test procedures as outlined in the latest edition of Manual of Cross-Connection Control, University of Southern California, Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. All tests shall be performed by a certified tester, from the list of certified testers; results of the test shall be submitted to the department on the forms supplied by the department. No new, repaired, or relocated device that fails the test shall be placed in service.

A.    Customers with a backflow prevention device on their premises shall have the device inspected and tested on an annual basis by a certified tester. The department may require a more frequent testing schedule if is determined to be necessary based on the criteria presented in Section 13.22.050. When devices are determined to be defective they shall be repaired or replaced by the customer within fourteen calendar days or a shorter time period based on any hazardous condition that might impact the city water system or other customer connections, or service will be discontinued. If service is discontinued, the customer shall pay the citys turn on/off service fee, as set by ordinance or resolution of the city council.

B.    The department will notify the customer annually that the backflow prevention device needs to be tested. This notice shall contain the date when the testing must be completed, at least thirty days from the date of mailing. If, forty-five calendar days after the date of mailing, the customer has not submitted the required test report, the department will test the backflow prevention device and the customer will be charged a fee for this service as set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. In the event the backflow prevention device fails to pass the test, the customer shall, within fourteen calendar days, either repair or replace the backflow prevention device as provided in this section, or service will be discontinued. The customer shall pay the citys fee for testing the backflow prevention device and the turn on/off service fee if required.

C.    Upon completion of a successful test of the backflow prevention device, the customer shall place a department supplied tag on the device that indicates it has been tested and passed, and any other information as directed by the department. Failure to attach a completed tag to the backflow prevention device within fifteen days of submitting the test result shall constitute a violation of this chapter. In the event the tag is removed prior to the next annual inspection, the customer shall pay a tag replacement fee. Tag fees, initial issue and replacement, shall be as set by ordinance or resolution of the city council.

D.    Discontinuance of service shall be cause for retesting of the backflow device on the service in accordance with the procedures outlined above. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.100 Responsible customer representative.
All customers required to submit a backflow prevention device inspection report per the requirements of Section 13.22.090 shall designate an individual responsible for monitoring the backflow prevention device and avoidance of cross-connections during operation and maintenance of the customers on-site pipelines and equipment, or any modifications thereto. In addition, this representative shall be responsible for notifying the cross-connection control specialist of any potential contamination or pollution of the city water system due to a cross-connection on the customers premises. Current contact information shall be supplied annually if not more frequently on the inspection report. In the event the department is unable to contact a responsible customer representative after a cross-connection is discovered, service may be temporarily discontinued at the discretion of the director until such testing occurs. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.110 Temporary backflow protection devices.
A.    Temporary backflow protection devices of all types shall be subject to the approval of the cross-connection control specialist. An inspection report for the device shall be submitted for review and the device shall have a current inspection tag per Section 13.22.090.

B.    Temporary connections for construction water or other approved uses shall be subject to the conditions and fees identified on the utilities department temporary water use application. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.120 Backflow prevention device repair, replacement and relocation.
The customer shall obtain approval from the cross-connection control specialist before a backflow prevention device is replaced or relocated.

A.    Repair. A backflow prevention device may be removed for repair; provided, that the water use is discontinued until the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with a temporary backflow prevention device that is approved by the cross-connection control specialist. A device returned to service must be tested and pass before being placed in service in accordance with Section 13.22.090.

B.    Replacement. A backflow prevention device may be removed and replaced; provided, that the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed, tested, and passes before being placed in service in accordance with Section 13.22.090.

C.    Relocation. A backflow prevention device may be relocated upon approval by the cross-connection control specialist. The relocated device shall continue to provide the current level of protection or higher as determined by the cross-connection control specialist and shall satisfy installation requirements as given in Section 13.22.080. The device shall be tested and pass before being placed in service in accordance with Section 13.22.090. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.130 Discontinuance of water service.
A.    The director may discontinue service to a customers nonfire connection to the city water system at the time the director issues to the customer a second notice of violation of any provision of this chapter or determines that immediate discontinuance is necessary for the protection of the citys water system. If the customers water service is discontinued due to violations of this chapter, the customer shall be subject to penalties specified in Section 13.22.170. Upon seeking renewed service from the city, the backflow prevention device being returned to service must be tested in accordance with Section 13.22.090. The customer shall pay the citys water turn off/on service fee and any other appropriate fees as set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. Any decision by the director to discontinue service may be appealed as specified in Section 13.22.170(C).

B.    Property owners with private fire services, upon being issued a notice of violation by the director of any provision of this chapter, shall have thirty calendar days to submit a plan of correction to the director. Prior to making any modifications or alterations to the on-site fire service, a permit shall be obtained from the fire department in accordance with Chapter 8.36. Failure to comply with this section shall subject the property owner to the penalties specified in Section 13.22.170, and the service may be discontinued at the discretion of the director and the fire chief when discontinuance is required to protect the city water system or other customer connections. Devices used on fire services shall be approved by the CDPH and listed for fire service use and maintained in accordance with State Fire Marshall regulations. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.140 Unauthorized activity.
A.    Any temporary or permanent connection to the city water system made without review by the department, whether it needs a backflow prevention device or not, shall subject the customer to the penalties specified in Section 13.22.170.

B.    Any person who makes, maintains, or causes to be maintained a temporary or permanent cross-connection shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section 13.22.170.

C.    Any customer who maintains any plumbing fixture as defined by the California Plumbing Code, or other appurtenance that discharges to a sanitary sewer, which by reason of its construction may or potentially may cause contamination of the city water system shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section 13.22.170. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.150 Violation declared a nuisance.
Any activity in violation of this chapter will adversely and seriously affect the public health, safety and welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be remedied as provided in this chapter, any other applicable portion of the Folsom Municipal Code or applicable state law. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.160 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, and any other enforcement mechanism available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code and/or applicable law.

B.    Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.170 Penalties.
A.    The goal of the provisions of this chapter is to achieve voluntary compliance from the customer, and the city will take reasonable measures to assure the customer has information available to promptly and efficiently address cross-connection control issues. Where voluntary compliance cannot be achieved through initial contacts and warnings, then appropriate administrative penalties and further action are required. Except as otherwise provided herein, violations of any provision of this chapter shall be addressed as follows:

Violation

Penalty

First

Written notification and issuance of a notice to correct.

Second

Issuance of an administrative penalty, discontinued water service and/or other penalties as provided in the notice of violation and as determined by the utilities director.

B.    Penalties.

1.    A violation of this chapter shall also be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

2.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Based on the criteria for imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, each day a violation of this chapter continues it shall be deemed a Level A violation as that term is described in Section 1.09.012 with an initial penalty of up to one hundred dollars.

3.    Violations of this chapter which are deemed to be willful noncompliance or unlawful connections may be subject up to a Level E violation as determined by the director.

C.    Appeal. There shall be no appeal of the level of protection required as identified in Section 13.22.060 and any appeal of administrative penalties shall follow the request for hearing procedures provided in Chapter 1.09. Any order to discontinue water service or any other orders or decisions of the director shall be appealable to the city manager pursuant to Section 2.08.060; provided, however, that the city managers decision shall be final and there shall be no right of appeal to the city council. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

13.22.180 Remedies cumulative.
The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude any other remedy, and nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable law. (Ord. 1136  2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 13.24
UTILITIES CONNECTIONS
Sections:

13.24.010    Water main service connection pipeSize requirements.

13.24.020    Water main service connection pipeCover requirement.

13.24.030    Street constructionPermit required.

13.24.040    PermitIssuance regulationFees.

13.24.050    Water connection charges.

13.24.060    Collection of connection charges.

13.24.010 Water main service connection pipeSize requirements.
No person shall install pipe from a water main service connection to the property line of the property to be served from the water main of a diameter of less than one and one-half inches or one inch copper pipe and a shutoff valve shall be installed ahead of any take-off. (Prior code  4200)

13.24.020 Water main service connection pipeCover requirement.
No person shall install water service pipes from water mains in the streets and alleys of the city to the property line with a covering of earth and/or surfacing material over the top of such water service pipes of less than one foot. (Prior code  4201)

13.24.030 Street constructionPermit required.
No person shall make any excavations, install any water pipes, gas pipes, sewer pipes, drain pipes or do any other construction in or upon the streets, without first obtaining a permit from the city council. (Prior code  4202)

13.24.040 PermitIssuance regulationFees.
The city council shall establish rules for the issuance of permits for the doing of such work and may fix a fee for such permits. (Prior code  4203)

13.24.050 Water connection charges.
A.    The fee for the connection of water pipes to the city water system shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council of the city.

B.    Fees are payable at the time the permit for connection to the water system is issued.

C.    The city council may enter into agreements for waiver of fees or reimbursements for major water facilities installed by developers. Major water facilities include treatment capacity, storage, pumping, water transmission mains over twelve inches in diameter, and associated appurtenances.

D.    Fire service standby pipes shall not be subject to a connection charge.

E.    The water connection fee shall be evaluated periodically and adjusted as necessary to insure an adequate level of funding major water project costs. (Ord. 503, 1983: Ord. 451, 1982; Ord. 365  1, 1978: Ord. 329  1, 1975: Ord. 326  1, 1975: Ord. 321  1, 1951)

13.24.060 Collection of connection charges.
Charges shall be collected prior to issuance of a permit to connect to the city water system. The funds collected from this charge shall be deposited in the water fund of the city, to be expended therefrom for water system purposes only, as directed by the city council. (Ord. 427, 1981)

Chapter 13.25
SEWER CONNECTION SERVICE CHARGES*
Sections:

13.25.010    Sewer connection charges.

13.25.020    Collection of connection charges.

13.25.030    County defined.

*    Effective March 1, 1989 pursuant to emergency measure adopted by Ordinance No. 631-A.

13.25.010 Sewer connection charges.
A.    There is hereby established a sewer connection charge which shall be collected prior to the issuance of building permits for commercial/industrial development and dwelling units as established by resolution of the city council.

B.    Purpose. The purpose of the fee is to establish a fund for financing equipment and capital improvement projects required to maintain municipal services at adequate levels as service requirements increase with the construction of commercial/industrial developments and dwelling units.

C.    Inflationary Adjustment. The sewer connection charges established by this section shall automatically be adjusted on July 1st of each fiscal year by a percentage equal to the increase, if any, in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost indices. The determination shall be reported to the city council by the director on or about June 30th each year or as soon as the information is available. (Ord. 988  2, 2003: Ord. 631-A  1, 1989: Ord. 612  1, 1988: Ord. 588  1 (part), 1987: Ord. 569  1, 1986: Ord. 367 (part), 1978)

13.25.020 Collection of connection charges.
Charges shall be collected prior to issuance of permit to connect to city sewer system. The funds collected from this charge shall be credited to the sewer system capital improvement fund of the city, to be expended therefrom as directed by the city council. These fees do not include fees that are applicable to developer benefit districts, or the regional sanitation district. (Ord. 631-A  2, 1989: Ord. 612  2, 1988: Ord. 588  2, 1987: Ord. 569  2, 1986: Ord. 367 (part), 1978)

13.25.030 County defined.
As used in this chapter, the term county means Sacramento Regional County Sanitation District of Sacramento County and the County portion refers to the connection fee established by county. (Ord. 631-A  3, 1989: Ord. 612  3, 1988: Ord. 588  3, 1987: Ord. 569  3, 1986: Ord. 367 (part), 1978)

Chapter 13.26
WATER CONSERVATION
Sections:

13.26.005    Definitions.

13.26.010    Application.

13.26.020    City responsibility.

13.26.030    Water conservation program and landscape guidelines.

13.26.040    Base allocation of water.

13.26.050    Wasteful use of water.

13.26.060    Determination of water conservation stages.

13.26.070    Water conservation stages.

13.26.080    Water use restrictions.

13.26.090    Construction water.

13.26.100    Sustainable landscaping.

13.26.110    Irrigation system inspections.

13.26.120    Discontinuance of water service.

13.26.130    Unauthorized water use.

13.26.140    Cross-connection control devices.

13.26.150    Violation declared a nuisance.

13.26.160    Enforcement.

13.26.170    Penalties.

13.26.180    Remedies cumulative.

13.26.190    Variances.

13.26.200    Fire and other emergencies.

13.26.005 Definitions.
A.    Base allocation means the amount of water allocated to each customer class for both interior and exterior use on a monthly or billing cycle basis.

B.    Best management practice (BMP) means a policy, program, practice, rule, regulation ordinance or the use of devices, equipment or facilities that result in more efficient use or conservation of water.

C.    Certified landscape irrigation auditor means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by a professional trade organization or other educational organization.

D.    CDPH means the California Department of Public Health.

E.    City means the city of Folsom.

F.    City manager means the city manager of the city of Folsom or his or her designee unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.

G.    City water system means those facilities within and without the city of Folsom that the city uses to deliver water as the water purveyor recognized by the California Department of Public Health.

H.    Customer means any person or entity using water supplied by the city water system. Customer includes tenants of single-family dwellings or duplexes, owners of real property and management companies responsible for property management of real property.

I.    CUWCC means the California Urban Water Conservation Council.

J.    Department means the city of Folsom utilities department.

K.    Director means the city of Folsom director of utilities or his or her designee unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.

L.    Discontinued service means having the water service turned off by the department.

M.    Fire chief means the fire chief of the city of Folsom or designee unless otherwise stated or indicated by context.

N.    Irrigation service means a water service that is exclusively for landscape irrigation purposes.

O.    Nonresidential customer means a customer of the city water system on whose property a residence is not situated.

P.    Person means any person, business, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

Q.    Private fire service means a private fire service main and appurtenances installed in accordance with NFPA 24 on private property and maintained by the property owner for the explicit intent of providing fire flows either through fire hydrants, fire sprinkler systems, or other water-based fire protection systems.

R.    Residential customer means a customer of the city water system on whose property, whether owned or rented, at least one person resides.

S.    Sustainable landscaping practice means the use of best management practices in the planning and maintenance of water efficient landscaping, as discussed in Section 13.26.100, Sustainable landscaping.

T.    Water conservation means the best management practices for the reasonable and efficient use of water for both indoor and outdoor water demands.

U.    Water conservation program guidelines means the program guidelines developed, maintained, and managed by the director pursuant to this chapter.

V.    Water management coordinator means the water management coordinator in the utilities department.

W.    Wasteful use of water is as defined in Section 13.26.050. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.010 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all customers of the city water system. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.020 City responsibility.
The city, and its duly authorized agents, servants and employees, shall have the exclusive right to deliver water within the citys water service area. The city shall also have the right to manage water demand within the citys water service area. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.030 Water conservation program and landscape guidelines.
A.    The director is authorized to develop sustainable landscape practices consistent with the water conservation intent of this chapter, CUWCC best management practices and any applicable laws. The sustainable landscape practices shall be included as a condition of approval for any development project with new or rehabilitated landscaping for which the city has discretionary approval authority where such landscape area is greater than two thousand five hundred square feet or as otherwise determined by the director to achieve the citys water conservation goals.

B.    The director shall oversee this chapters implementation, compliance with the CUWCC best management practices and any laws mandating water conservation. The director shall, from time to time, but at least annually, review the sustainable landscape practices and determine if such practices are reasonable and achieve the level of conservation required under this chapter for the declared water conservation stage, taking into account the burden imposed on property owners. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.040 Base allocation of water.
The director may develop a base allocation for each class of customer account taking into account the needs and characteristics of each customer class. This base allocation may be used to evaluate compliance with the conservation stage in effect and to encourage the reasonable and efficient use of water. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.050 Wasteful use of water.
Any of the following acts or omissions, whether intentional, unintentional, willful or negligent, shall constitute the wasteful use of water:

A.    Water flowing away from a property caused by excessive application(s) of water beyond reasonable or practical irrigation rates, duration of application, or other than incidental applications to impervious surfaces.

B.    Causing or permitting an amount of water to discharge, flow, run to waste into or flood any gutter, sanitary sewer, water course or storm drain, or to any adjacent lot, from any tap, hose, faucet, pipe, sprinkler, or nozzle. In the case of irrigation, discharge, flow or run to waste means that water is applied to the point that the earth intended to be irrigated has been saturated with water so that additional applied water then flows over the earth. In the case of washing, discharge, flow or run to waste means that water in excess of that necessary is applied to wash, wet or clean the dirty or dusty object, such as an automobile, sidewalk, or parking area.

C.    Allowing water fixtures or heating or cooling devices to leak or discharge water.

D.    Maintaining ponds, waterways, decorative basins or swimming pools without water recirculation devices or with known leaks, both seen and unseen.

E.    Discharging water from, and refilling, swimming pools, decorative basins or ponds in excess of the frequency reasonably necessary to maintain the health, maintenance or structural considerations of the pool, basin or pond, as determined by the director.

F.    Continued operation of an irrigation system that applies water to an impervious surface or that is in disrepair.

G.    Use of a water hose not equipped with a control nozzle capable of completely shutting off the flow of water except when positive pressure is applied.

H.    Irrigation of lawns or landscaping when it is raining.

I.    Overfilling of any pond, pool or fountain which results in water discharging from the pond, pool or fountain.

J.    Failure to repair customer pipes, faulty sprinklers or other water-related fixtures that leak water within five working days, unless the director informs the customer that the leak must be repaired more quickly, in which case the customer shall repair the leak in the time specified by the director.

K.    Irrigating lawns or landscaping between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., with the exception of drip irrigation as otherwise authorized pursuant to this chapter, unless a variance is granted by the director.

L.    Using potable water from the city water system for compaction, dust control or other construction purposes without first obtaining approval from the director as provided in Section 13.26.090 and a meter from the city.

M.    Installing a single-pass cooling system, such as water cooled air compressor, in any property that is newly connected to the city water system. This does not apply to evaporative cooling systems.

N.    Installing a nonrecirculating system in any new automatic car wash or new commercial laundry system or failure to utilize current best management practices for water conservation that are industry standards. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.060 Determination of water conservation stages.
In determining the city water systems water conservation stage, the city manager shall determine whether that systems water supplies available for potable use are sufficient to meet the current customer demands on that system and shall consider, unless otherwise excluded by this section, all relevant factors. The city manager shall consider, among other things: (A) any variations in the reliability of the water supplies available to the city water system; (B) any declarations by the Bureau of Reclamation concerning its ability to deliver water under Central Valley Project water-service contracts; (C) availability of nonpotable water to meet nonpotable demands on the city water system; (D) the success, or lack thereof, of previous declarations of a less stringent water conservation stage in causing the water-use reductions sought by the city; and (E) any agreements between the city and local water purveyors for deliveries of additional water supplies to the city. The city manager will select the necessary stage for conservation under Section 13.26.070. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.070 Water conservation stages.
The city manager is authorized to implement and enforce whatever conservation measures are deemed necessary to achieve the water reduction requirements of the declared conservation stage. For each stage, the water use reduction for customers shall be as follows:

A.    Stage one (basic stage) shall be in effect at all times unless the city manager determines that a more restrictive conservation stage is appropriate. Base allocation of water may be used to determine allowable water use for each customer in this stage and compliance with the following conservation stages.

B.    Stage two (water alert) shall achieve a reduction of up to twelve percent relative to the base allocation of water.

C.    Stage three (water warning) shall achieve a reduction of up to twenty percent relative to the base allocation of water.

D.    Stage four (water crisis) shall achieve a reduction of up to thirty-five percent relative to the base allocation of water.

E.    Stage five (water emergency) shall achieve a reduction of up to fifty percent relative to the base allocation of water, or any other reduction the city manager determines, in writing, is necessary to protect public health and safety in the city during the actual situation presented by a stage five water emergency. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.080 Water use restrictions.
Water use restrictions during the various conservation stages shall, at a minimum, be as listed below and may be augmented by other restrictions as determined necessary by the city manager.

A.    During the stage one (basic stage) conservation stage, the following restrictions shall be enforced:

1.    Water will be used for beneficial uses; all wasteful use of water is prohibited.

2.    Water shall be confined to the customers property and shall not be allowed to run off to adjoining property or to the roadside ditch or gutter. Care shall be taken not to water past the point of saturation.

3.    Free flowing hoses are prohibited for all uses including landscape watering, vehicle and equipment washing, ponds, evaporative coolers and livestock watering troughs. Automatic shut-off devices shall be installed on any hose or filling apparatus in use.

4.    All pools, spas and ornamental fountains/ponds shall be equipped with a recirculation pump and shall be constructed to be leak proof. Pool draining and refilling shall be allowed only to the extent required for health, maintenance, or structural considerations, and must otherwise comply with all applicable federal, state and local stormwater management requirements, including but not limited to Chapter 8.70, Stormwater Management and Discharge Control.

B.    During the stage two (water alert) conservation stage, the following restrictions shall be enforced:

1.    All stage one (basic stage) restrictions shall continue to be enforced, except to the extent they are replaced by more restrictive requirements imposed by this section.

2.    Landscape and pasture irrigation shall be limited to a maximum of three days per week based on the following odd-even schedule, with the exception of drip irrigation, which may be conducted on any day.

a.    Customers with street addresses that end with an odd number may irrigate only on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.

b.    Customers with street addresses that end with an even number may irrigate only on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.

c.    No irrigation is permitted on Mondays.

3.    Hand and manual watering follows the same odd/even day schedule and may be done anytime during the day.

4.    Washing of streets, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks, buildings or other hardscape surfaces is prohibited, except as necessary for health, sanitation or fire protection purposes.

5.    Restaurants shall serve water only upon specific request.

6.    Public and private streetscape landscaping (medians and frontage) may be watered only on the same schedule as customers with street addresses that end with an even number.

C.    During the stage three (water warning) conservation stage, the following restrictions shall be enforced:

1.    All stage two restrictions shall continue to be enforced, except to the extent they are replaced by more restrictive requirements imposed by this section.

2.    Landscape and pasture irrigation shall be limited to a maximum of two days per week based on the following odd-even schedule, with the exception of drip irrigation, which may be conducted on any day.

a.    Customers with street addresses that end with an odd number may irrigate only on Tuesdays and Saturdays.

b.    Customers with street addresses that end with an even number may irrigate only on Wednesdays and Sundays.

c.    No irrigation is permitted on Mondays, Thursdays and Fridays.

d.    Irrigation for public parks and other public grounds, including landscaping and lighting district property, shall only be allowed with an irrigation plan and irrigation system audit that has been approved by the director in accordance with Section 13.26.110, irrespective of size.

3.    No water from the city water system shall be used for construction purposes such as dust control, compaction, or trench jetting, unless the use is approved by the director consistent with the provisions of Section 13.26.090.

D.    During the stage four (water crisis) conservation stage, the following restrictions shall be enforced:

1.    All stage three restrictions shall continue to be enforced, except to the extent they are replaced by more restrictive requirements imposed by this section.

2.    Landscape and pasture irrigation, including drip irrigation, shall be limited to a maximum of one day per week based on the following odd-even schedule.

a.    Customers with street addresses that end with an odd number may irrigate only on Tuesdays.

b.    Customers with street addresses that end with an even number may irrigate only on Wednesdays.

c.    No irrigation is permitted on Mondays, Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays.

3.    Public and private streetscape landscaping (medians and frontage) may be watered only on the same schedule as customers with street addresses that end with an even number.

4.    No water from the city water system shall be used to drain and refill swimming pools, artificial lakes, ponds or streams and no new permits for swimming pools, artificial lakes, ponds or streams shall be issued until the water conservation stage has been declared to be stage one.

5.    Water use for ornamental ponds and fountains is prohibited unless required to maintain existing vegetation or to sustain existing fish/animal life.

6.    New or expanded landscaping on properties is limited to drought-tolerant trees, shrubs, and ground cover and no new turf or grass shall be planted, hydro-seeded or laid.

7.    Washing of automobiles or equipment shall be done on the lawn or at a commercial establishment that uses recycled or reclaimed water.

8.    All water leaks shall be repaired within twenty-four hours of notification by the utilities department or service may be discontinued.

E.    During the stage five (water emergency) conservation stage, the following restrictions shall be enforced:

1.    All stage four restrictions shall continue to be enforced, except to the extent they are replaced by more restrictive requirements imposed by this section.

2.    No landscape and/or pasture irrigation shall be allowed.

3.     Flushing of sewers or fire hydrants is prohibited, except in case of an emergency and for essential operations.

4.    Flushing of fire protection systems is prohibited, except during required maintenance or servicing of the system.

5.    Water use for ornamental ponds and fountains is prohibited.

6.    Washing of automobiles or equipment shall be done at a commercial establishment that uses recycled or reclaimed water.

7.    Installation of any new lawns or landscaping is prohibited.

8.    No water from the city water system shall be used for construction purposes such as dust control, compaction, or trench jetting, unless the use is necessary for fire protection system testing, maintenance, or acceptance by the fire chief. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.090 Construction water.
Water for construction purposes obtained from the citys water supply may only be used in the citys water service area. Water for dust control, compaction and other construction activities shall be subject to the following conditions:

A.    Use of water from the city water system for construction purposes shall require a city-issued construction water meter and a refundable security deposit that includes a monthly meter rental fee as established by the department. Prior to such water use, the construction water customer must obtain approval from the director to use the water for construction and agree to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. The director may impose such additional conditions on the use of such water, including, but limited to, conditions regulating the purpose for the use of the water, rate of use, location, frequency and quantity of use, and such other conditions as deemed reasonably necessary by the director to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. The construction meter shall be located by the department and shall only be relocated or removed by the department. Unauthorized relocation or removal of a construction meter shall be deemed theft and the offender shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 13.26.170.

B.    Construction water shall only be drawn through a construction water meter. Construction water drawn through an unmetered connection shall be deemed theft of water and shall be grounds for the deposit on the construction meter to be forfeited. The offender shall also be subject to the penalties specified in Section 13.26.170. In the event the person identified as drawing water without a metered connection does not have a meter, the action shall be deemed theft and the offender shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section 13.26.170.

C.    These requirements for construction water use may be modified or supplemented by other conservation measures as determined appropriate by the director for the declared conservation stage. The director may terminate the approval granted to use the construction water based on water use restriction stages, violation of the terms and conditions of use, and/or for conduct that amounts to wasteful use of water. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.100 Sustainable landscaping.
Where this chapter permits or prohibits acts based upon whether or not a planting, tree, shrub, or groundcover is drought-tolerant or sustainable the determination shall be made based upon: (A) Sunsets The Western Garden Book (February 2007), Sunset Books Publishing; (B) Robert Perry, Trees and Shrubs for Dry California Landscapes; (C) EBMUD, Water Wise Gardening; (D) UC Davis Arboretums All Stars plant database (www.arboretum.ucdavis.edu) or as determined by the director. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.110 Irrigation system inspections.
All customers, public and private, with a parcel over five acres and with a separate irrigation service shall conduct an annual irrigation system inspection prior to the start of the irrigation season on April 1st. This inspection shall be performed by certified landscape irrigation auditor or licensed landscape or irrigation contractor and the results forwarded to the department in accordance with the procedure outlined in the water conservation program guidelines. This requirement will be waived for one full year if a full landscape water audit has been performed in the previous year by the departments water management staff, who are available on a limited basis. Single-family residences are exempt unless the director determines there has been wasteful use of water on a customers premises and the conditions have not been corrected within five days after the city provides written notification to discontinue such practice.

Customers that have a current irrigation system check-up on file with the department will be allowed one courtesy water waste warning before being deemed in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.120 Discontinuance of water service.
The director may discontinue service to a customers connection to the city water system at the time that the director issues to the customer: (A) a notice of a third violation of this chapter during the stage one (basic stage), or stage two (water alert) within two months; (B) a notice of a second violation of this chapter during a stage three (water warning) or a stage four (water crisis) within one month; or (C) a notice of a second violation during a stage five (water emergency), irrespective of time. If the customers water service is discontinued due to violations of this chapter, the customer shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section 13.26.170. Upon seeking renewed service from the city, the customer shall pay the citys water turn off/on service fee as set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.130 Unauthorized water use.
A.    An illegal connection to the city water system shall either be metered by the property owner within the time specified by the department or disconnected at the discretion and direction of the director, and the offender shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section 13.26.170.

B.    Unauthorized use of a fire hydrant, public or private, for anything other than fire flows or permitted and metered construction water shall subject the offender to the penalties specified in Section 13.26.170 and Chapter 8.36, Folsom Fire Code.

C.    Private fire services with an observed demand that is deemed not to be fire flow by the department shall have a meter and appropriate cross-connection control device installed by the property owner, upon approval by the director and the fire chief. Prior to making any modifications or alteration to the on-site fire service, a permit shall be obtained from the fire department in accordance with Chapter 8.36. Upon written notification of the requirement to install a meter and cross-connection control device, the property owner shall have thirty calendar days to submit a plan of correction to the director. Failure to comply with this section shall subject the property owner to the penalties specified in Section 13.26.170, Penalties, and the service may be disconnected at the discretion of the director and the fire chief. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.140 Cross-connection control devices.
All connections to the citys water system shall have the appropriate cross-connection control device as required by CDPH regulations and enforced by the department in accordance with Chapter 13.22, Water System Cross-Connection Control. These devices shall be from the approved and published list maintained by the University of Southern California (USC) or other list as approved by the director and shall be tested annually in accordance with the departments policies and procedures. Devices used on private fire services shall be listed for fire service use and maintained in accordance with State Fire Marshall regulations. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.150 Violation declared a nuisance.
Any activity in violation of this chapter will adversely and seriously affect the public health, safety and welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be remedied as provided in this chapter, any other applicable portion of the Folsom Municipal Code or applicable state law. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.160 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code and any other enforcement mechanism available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code and/or applicable law.

B.    Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.170 Penalties.
A.    The goal of the provisions of this chapter are to achieve voluntary compliance from the customer, and the city will take reasonable measures to assure the customer has information available to promptly and efficiently address water use issues. Where voluntary compliance cannot be achieved through initial contacts and warnings, then appropriate administrative penalties and further action are required. Except as otherwise provided herein, violations of any provision of this chapter shall be addressed as follows:

Violation

Penalty

First

Personal or written notification of the violation.

Second

(Within three months of first violation)

Written notification and issuance of a notice to correct.

Third

(Within six months of first violation)

Issuance of an administrative penalty, mandatory installation of a water meter, discontinued water service and/or other penalties as provided in the notice of violation and as determined by the utilities director.

B.    Penalties.

1.    A violation of this chapter shall also be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

2.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Based on the criteria for imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, each day a violation of this chapter continues it shall be deemed a Level A violation as that term is described in Section 1.09.012 with an initial penalty of up to one hundred dollars.

3.    In addition to any other penalties provided by this chapter, if a customer of the city water system violates any of the water use restrictions during a stage two, three, four, or five water conservation stage as set forth in Section 13.26.080, and such conditions are not corrected within five days after the customer is given written notice, the city is authorized to do any or all of the following:

a.    Meter any flat rate service connection and apply the regularly established metered rates. If the parcel has over two thousand five hundred square feet of landscaping a separate landscape meter may be installed. Costs for the water meters and installation shall be paid by the property owner.

b.    If the service is metered, the customer shall be billed at twice the metered rate during the time that the violation continues. If more than two thousand five hundred square feet are irrigated and the parcel does not have a separate irrigation meter, then an irrigation meter may be installed. The customer shall be billed at twice the metered rate during the time the violation continues. Costs for the water meter, and for any required cross-connection controls and installation, shall be paid by the property owner.

C.    Appeal. There shall be no appeal of the water use restriction identified in Section 13.26.080 and any appeal of administrative penalties shall follow the request for hearing procedures provided in Chapter 1.09. Any order to install a mandatory water meter, discontinue water service or any other orders or decisions of the director shall be appealable to the city manager pursuant to Section 2.08.060; provided, however, that the city managers decision shall be final and there shall be no right of appeal to the city council. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.180 Remedies cumulative.
The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude any other remedy, and nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy available to the city under the Folsom Municipal Code or other applicable law. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.190 Variances.
In unusual circumstances, application of this chapter may cause unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with this chapters purposes and intent. Therefore, variances to some of the requirements of this chapter may be appropriate as delineated below.

A.    Authority to Grant Variances. The director may grant variances from this chapters provisions during a stage one, two, or three conservation stage as specified in Section 13.26.080, Water use restrictions. During stage four or five conservation stage as specified in that section, any previously granted variances shall be suspended without notice, unless they are based on a critical health need as determined by a licensed medical professional, with such determination being provided to the director.

B.    Landscape Variances. Applications for landscape variances shall be obtained from, and filed with, the utilities department. The director may grant any such applications in his or her discretion in light of the condition of the water supply for the city water system. Any such variance shall be subject to the conditions presented in the water conservation program and landscape guidelines.

C.    Other Variances. Customers who seek a variance from this chapter for any reason other than the needs of new landscaping shall submit to the utilities department a written request for variance, setting forth, in detail, the extraordinary circumstances that support the application. The director may approve the application in his or her discretion; provided, that the variance allows the applicant to use only the minimum amount of water in addition to that allowed by this chapter that the director reasonably believes is necessary to satisfy the circumstances that support the application. Any such variance shall terminate one year after its issuance, subject to an application for its renewal. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

13.26.200 Fire and other emergencies.
Nothing in this chapter limits, or may be construed as limiting the availability of water for extinguishing fires, meeting the demands of any other similar emergency, or routine inspection and maintenance of fire hydrants. (Ord. 1118  2 (part), 2009)

Chapter 13.30
WATER IMPACT FEE
Sections:

13.30.010    Findings and purpose.

13.30.020    Definitions.

13.30.030    Water impact fee.

13.30.040    Administration of water impact fund.

13.30.050    Payment of water impact fee.

13.30.060    Amount of water impact fee.

13.30.070    Exemptions.

13.30.080    Annual fee review.

13.30.090    Inflationary adjustments.

13.30.100    Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.

13.30.110    Authorization of credits.

13.30.120    Amount of credits.

13.30.130    Procedure for credits.

13.30.140    Apportionment of credits.

13.30.150    Criteria for reimbursement.

13.30.160    Procedure for reimbursement.

13.30.170    Reimbursement agreements.

13.30.180    Audit.

13.30.190    Refund.

13.30.010 Findings and purpose.
A.    On October 31, 1988, the city council of the city of Folsom approved and adopted its General Plan (the General Plan) identifying proposed growth within the city limits and further identifying the impacts of such growth upon public facilities within the city including the impacts on water supply and the water supply system.

B.    City of Folsom General Plan, Urban Development Policy No. 11.6, Policy on Municipal Services and Facilities states in part that:

[i]t is the policy of the City of Folsom to require new development to bear the cost of its increased demand/effect on municipal services and facilities so as [to] not create a greater burden on existing residents.  . . .[i]t is the policy of the City of Folsom to require certain necessary improvements as a part of the development and/or the payment of municipal services and facilities fees consistent with the proportional effect of the development on such services. The City will periodically update its fees to reflect the cost of providing municipal services and facilities.

C.    General Plan Policies 40.1, 40.2, 40.5 further provide that it is the citys policy to require new development to pay its fair share of the cost to expand public facilities and services that will be necessary to serve residential, industrial and commercial development.

D.    The city of Folsom water master plan dated December 1998 (Water Plan) was adopted by the city council on May 25, 1999 by Resolution No. 6028. The water plan analyzed the citys present and projected water supply and facilities demands, and the costs of water conservation efforts within developed areas of the city.

E.    In order to further determine the need for water supplies and facilities created by new residents and businesses and to spread the cost of such facilities among those who create the need for them, the city prepared the water impact fee study dated November 1, 1999. This study, utilizing information contained in the water plan, estimated the amount and type of water supplies and facilities needed to meet the needs created by new development and the cost of such supplies and facilities.

F.    Existing water supplies will be inadequate to accommodate the needs generated by projected new residential, industrial and commercial growth in the city and, additional water supplies are needed to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of Folsom residents and businesses. This finding is based on the water plan, the water impact fee study and on such other information provided to the city council at the public hearing concerning the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The water plan further provides that an additional supplemental water supply is needed to meet demands in dry years when surface water is limited and/or unavailable.

G.    The city intends to enter into a subcontract with the Sacramento County water agency for an additional water supply needed to meet the demands of new residential, industrial and commercial growth (Fazio Water). The Fazio Water is part of the Central Valley Project (CVP) water and has been obtained under Public Law 101- 514 (Section 206). The primary contract and the subcontract further require that the city install water meters throughout the city.

H.    Specific mitigation measures in the Final Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report for the CVP Water Supply Contracts Under Public Law 101-514 (Section 206) dated November 1998 (CVP FEIS/EIR) mandate that the city of Folsom and the Sacramento County water agency shall only execute the subcontract for the Fazio Water after the city notifies the agency that funding has been provided for the acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and for 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting.

I.    The city further desires to participate in the regional effort to protect the lower American River, which requires that in critically dry years, the city limit the amount of surface water obtained from the American River and fill the balance of city needs with alternate water supplies.

J.    Analysis of the land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the General Plan makes it possible to estimate the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the population generated by those dwelling units and the number of persons to be employed by commercial and industrial land users. It is therefore possible to arrive at a fee, based on population and jobs created which equitably spreads the burden of financing water supplies and facilities to those who create the need for such facilities. It is the intent of this chapter to create such a fee, spreading costs of water supplies and facilities to those who create the need for such supplies and facilities, without generating any surplus to the general fund. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the requirements of the General Plan requirements and, under the authority of Article XI, Section 7, of the California Constitution and the authority of Title 7 of the Government Code, to establish the appropriate method of ensuring that sufficient funding for water supply facilities is available to serve residential, industrial and commercial growth in the city.

K.    The water impact fee will create a financing mechanism for the acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and for 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting, thereby allowing the city to fulfill the purposes set forth above. In particular, the fee established by this chapter is further necessary in order to assure compliance with the applicable General Plan requirements that new development bear the cost for water supplies and related facilities which is needed to serve such development.

L.    The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to payment of the fee on building permits would jeopardize residents of the community, in that it would permit construction and development to proceed without adequate water supplies and related facilities or means of financing such facilities.

M.    The cost estimates set forth in the water impact fee study are reasonable cost estimates for constructing the facilities and providing the water supplies specified therein, and the fees which may be generated by new development will not exceed the total of these construction costs made necessary by such new development. The fee established by this chapter has been calculated in the manner called for in this study in order that the impact upon supplies and facilities is borne by the type of development causing the same.

N.    Based upon all evidence and testimony presented, including the water impact fee study, the city council finds that there is a clear and demonstrated relationship between the use of the fee provided for herein, namely the acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and for 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting, and the types of projects upon which the fee is to be imposed, namely new residential, industrial and commercial development. New residential, industrial and commercial development will generate a need for additional water supplies and infrastructure as described in the water impact fee study.

O.    Based upon all evidence and testimony presented, including the water impact fee study, the city council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and for 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting, and the type of development projects upon which the fee is to be imposed, namely new residential, industrial and commercial construction. From careful consideration of the matter, the city council finds that: (1) new development will adversely impact existing water supplies and facilities; (2) will create a need for additional water supplies and related facilities for new development; and (3) the acquisition of water supplies and construction of related facilities set forth in the water impact fee study are appropriate to serve such new development in light of these impacts.

P.    Based upon all evidence and testimony presented, including the water impact fee study, the city council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee as provided for in this chapter and the cost of the acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and for 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting, made necessary by new development. Further, the city council finds that the manner in which the fee is allocated upon each unit of new development is fair and does not exceed the cost of providing facilities generated by the construction of each unit of new development.

Q.    The establishment of this water impact fee is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Sections 15061(b)(3) and 15273, in that there is no possibility that the establishment of this fee may have a significant effect on the environment, and further because the purpose of establishing this fee is to assist the city in maintaining services within its jurisdictional boundaries. This exemption is specifically based upon the following facts:

1.    The environmental impacts of the facilities described in the water impact fee study, including cumulative and growth-inducing impacts, have been identified in the final environmental impact report (the EIR) prepared for the 1988 General Plan and certified by the city council in Resolution No. 2522, and in the final Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report for the CVP Water Supply Contracts Under Public Law 101-514 (Section 206) dated November 1998 and certified by the city council in Resolution No. 5854.

2.    The establishment of this fee will not create a need for additional water supplies and infrastructure, nor is the construction of water supply facilities entirely dependent upon the establishment of this fee.

3.    Prior to action on site-specific projects, subsequent environmental review will be undertaken as necessary pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.

4.    Development already is taking place in the jurisdictional boundaries of the city and additional water supplies will have to be acquired and infrastructure will have to be constructed to accommodate the new population and businesses regardless of whether this fee is established.

5.    The establishment of this fee does not commit the city to any definite course of action and does not dictate how funds will be spent, or in any way narrow the field of options and alternatives available to the city.

R.    The city council has considered the effect of the fee imposed by this chapter with respect to the housing needs of the city as a whole and of the region, particularly as required by the housing element of the General Plan, and the city council finds that this chapter does not unduly adversely affect the citys ability to provide for such needs.

S.    The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges or taxes, required by law or city code or as a condition of development. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.020 Definitions.
The following words are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:

Building permit means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure pursuant to Title 14 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

Director means the public works director.

Dwelling unit means a building or part of a building designed for occupancy as a residence by a family.

Facilities means the water supplies, improvements, or infrastructure generally identified in the water plan and the water impact fee study, and more specifically determined from time to time by the city council.

Fee or water impact fee means the fee(s) established by this chapter.

General Plan refers to the city of Folsom General Plan adopted by the Folsom city council in 1988, including all subsequent updates and amendments.

Improvement funds means these special funds established pursuant to Section 17.92.030.

Studies mean the following plans and studies:

1.    City of Folsom General Plan of 1988; and

2.    City of Folsom water master plan dated December 1998; and

3.    City of Folsom water impact fee study dated November 1, 1999. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.030 Water impact fee.
There is established a water impact fee which shall be imposed on the construction of all new commercial, industrial and residential buildings that are to be served with water supplies owned and treated by the city. This fee shall be imposed on all new construction within the city, unless such property is otherwise exempt as provided for in Section 13.30.070 of this chapter. The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges or taxes that are required by law or city code as a condition of development. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.040 Administration of water impact fund.
The finance director is directed to establish a special fund entitled the water supply fund. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in this fund and shall be expended solely to finance the planning, construction, development and acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and related facilities, and to finance 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.050 Payment of water impact fee.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter the fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a building subject to this chapter. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.060 Amount of water impact fee.
The water impact fee is established in the rate and amount set forth below for each specified type of construction:

A.

Single-family residential (rate per unit):

$831.00

B.

Multi-family residential (rate per unit):

447.00

C.

Commercial (rate per acre):

1,119.00

D.

Industrial/office (rate per acre):

1,119.00

(Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.070 Exemptions.
A.    No fee shall be charged for the construction of the following buildings:

1.    Buildings under construction for which a valid building permit is in force upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless such building permit contains an express condition requiring the payment of this fee;

2.    Construction of buildings within a subdivision subject to a development agreement entered into between the developer and the city under Government Code Section 65864 et seq., which agreement is in full force and effect and expressly prohibits the imposition of additional fees pertaining to water supply costs and facilities, unless amended;

3.    Construction of buildings within a subdivision subject to a vested tentative subdivision map under Government Code Section 66498.1 which prohibits the imposition of the fee imposed by this chapter;

4.    Additions or modifications to residential buildings;

5.    Buildings that will receive water treated by an entity other than the city of Folsom.

B.    If any building in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy to the extent of more than 1/2 the value thereof, any rebuilding after the date of such destruction shall not be subject to the fee imposed by the chapter provided the area of such building is not increased by more than 10 percent. For the purposes of this chapter, the value shall be determined by the city building inspector based upon the cost of replacement.

C.    Additions to existing commercial or industrial buildings shall be subject to the fee established by the chapter. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.080 Annual fee review.
A.    On or about January 1 of each year, commencing in 2001, the city council shall review the estimated cost of and the continued need for additional water supplies and facilities as set forth in the water impact fee study, and the relationship between such need and the impacts of the various types of development pending or anticipated for which this fee is charged. Such review shall consider input from city staff and any other public input before determining whether an adjustment in the current water impact fee is appropriate for the subsequent calendar year. The city may also consider the recommendation of a committee composed of representatives of the city and developers in the community.

B.    The city council recognizes that the city may receive additional funding for the acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and for 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting, identified in the water impact fee study. To the extent the city receives such additional funding, staff shall present a report to the city council within 60 days of the receipt of such funding identifying: (1) the amount of such funding; and (2) whether such funding has resulted in a net increase in the available funds for the acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and for 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting, identified in the water impact fee study. In the event that there is a net increase, the city council shall thereafter determine an appropriate credit against the water impact fee for new development and the fee shall be adjusted in that amount. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.090 Inflationary adjustments.
The fee established by this chapter shall automatically be adjusted on July 1st of each year by a percentage equal to the change in construction costs since the prior fiscal year as determined by the director based upon Engineering News Record (or similar publication) construction cost index. The determination shall be reported in writing to the city council by the director on or about June 30th of each year or as soon as the information is available. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.100 Adoption in compliance with improvement plan.
When the monies in the water impact fund are disbursed for use, the fees shall be used only to finance the planning, construction, development and acquisition of alternative dry-year water supplies and related facilities, and to finance 10 years of water conservation implementation in the form of water meter retrofitting. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.110 Authorization of credits.
Whenever a person constructs facilities authorized by this chapter, in accordance with improvement plans approved by the Director, then such person may be entitled to a credit against any fees or charges due pursuant to Chapter 13.30 of this code, subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.120 Amount of credits.
Unless otherwise set forth in this chapter, the amount of credits authorized for the construction of facilities shall be determined by the Director based on recent competitive bids, but shall not exceed the actual cost of construction. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.130 Procedure for credits.
A.    Any person desiring credits for the construction of facilities shall, prior to approval of improvement plans for the facilities, execute an agreement with the city authorizing credits. Agreements for credits in an amount of $25,000 or greater must be approved by the city council. Agreements for credits in an amount less than $25,000 may be approved by the city manager or his/her designee.

B.    Tentative credits shall be allocated prior to the acceptance of facilities, so that they may be subtracted from fees at the time fees are paid. Credits shall be adjusted as necessary at the time the facilities are accepted by the city. The person receiving tentative credits shall agree that if the facilities are not accepted by the city, all tentative credits allocated shall be reimbursed to the city within 60 days of notice of non- acceptance of the facilities. The person receiving tentative credits shall further agree that if tentative credits allocated exceed the final credits, the excess amount shall be reimbursed to the city within 60 days of notice of such amount. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.140 Apportionment of credits.
A.    Except as set forth in this section, credits shall only be applied against fees and charges due as a result of new construction within the subdivision for which the construction of facilities was required or authorized, and credits shall be equally apportioned to all lots within the subdivision. Credit agreements may not otherwise be assigned without the consent of the city council.

B.    Credits may only be apportioned to parcels not within the subdivision if within 30 days from the date that credits are authorized the director determines:

1.    The parcel or parcels on which credit is sought are contiguous holdings of an individual or firm at the time construction of facilities is begun;

2.    Only credits in excess of the amount of the fees which would have been due on such subdivision or parcel and each subsequent unit thereof within such contiguous holding may be apportioned to other contiguous parcels;

3.    The parcel or parcels to which such credits are to be apportioned must be served by the facilities for which credits are authorized;

4.    An agreement has been executed between the owner of the contiguous parcels and the city establishing the amount to be credited to each parcel prior to improvement plan approval for the initial parcel.

C.    When credits are apportioned, the credit amounts shall be based on the rates in effect on the date improvement plans are approved for the parcel to which credits have been apportioned. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.150 Criteria for reimbursement.
Except where specifically excluded, whenever credits are authorized for the construction of facilities pursuant to Chapter 13.30, and the credit amount exceeds the amount of the fees due pursuant to Chapter 13.30, the city shall reimburse the person entitled to such credits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.160 Procedure for reimbursement.
Excess credits shall only be reimbursed pursuant to the terms of a reimbursement agreement executed by the city and the person entitled to such credits. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.170 Reimbursement agreements.
A.    The reimbursement agreement shall include the following terms and conditions:

1.    The amount of excess credit to be reimbursed;

2.    The schedule for such reimbursement. Such schedule shall not exceed 5 years from the date of acceptance of the facilities by the city, unless funds are not available, as determined by the finance director. If funds are not available when reimbursement is due, payment shall be postponed to the following year;

3.    Reimbursement of excess credits of $10,000 or less shall be made within 45 days of the acceptance of the facilities by the city;

4.    No prepayment penalties are allowed;

5.    Interest on the unpaid balance shall be paid annually in December at the net city treasury pool rate for the prior fiscal year. Interest shall not begin to accrue, however, until 90 days after the facilities are accepted by the city;

6.    The reimbursement agreement may only be assigned by a written amendment to the agreement executed by the finance director, the assignor(s) and the assignee(s);

7.    Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, excess credit shall not be reimbursed unless and until the facilities are accepted by the city;

8.    Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, excess credits shall not be reimbursed until all fees and charges required by Chapter 13.30 have been paid for all parcels on which credit is sought and for all contiguous lots, parcels or real property owned by or recorded as the property of the same person at the time construction of facilities is begun.

B.    Except as authorized by this section, reimbursement agreements must be approved by the city council. If the city council has previously approved a credit agreement with a party, the city manager may approve a reimbursement agreement with the same party if the amount of the reimbursement does not vary from the amount of the credit agreement by more than 10 percent. Reimbursement agreements for amounts less than $25,000 may be approved by the city manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.180 Audit.
Whenever an audit is requested to determine whether a fee or charge levied by the city exceeds the amount reasonably necessary to cover the cost of any product or service provided, the city manager shall estimate the cost of the audit and require a deposit in the full amount estimated. If the actual cost is less than estimated, the difference shall be refunded to the person requesting the audit. If the actual amount is greater than the deposit, the person requesting the audit shall pay the full cost and the difference shall be due and payable upon notice to the person requesting the audit. This shall apply to any audit requested pursuant to Government Code sections 54985, 66023, and any other authority for an audit of the citys fee program. (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

13.30.190 Refund.
A.    If 5 years after collection any portion of a fee collected pursuant to this chapter is unexpended or uncommitted, the city shall review the fee and the purpose for which it was charged, and make a determination and finding as to the continued need for the fee and the reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it is intended. This review and findings shall be made once each fiscal year in any year that there are unexpended or uncommitted fees, beginning with the 5th year after the effective date of this chapter.

B.    If the appropriate finding cannot be made, the city shall cause the fees to be refunded to the then current owner of record of the project on which the fee was imposed pursuant to Government Code Sections 66001(d) and 66001(e). (Ord. 912  1 (part), 1999)

Title 14
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters:

14.02    Building Code

14.04    Residential Code

14.08    Electrical Code

14.12    Plumbing Code

14.16    Mechanical Code

14.19    Energy Code

14.20    Green Building Standards Code

14.22    Historical Building Code

14.23    Existing Building Code

14.24    Property Maintenance Code

14.26    Referenced Standards Code

14.28    Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code

14.29    Grading

14.30    Residential Units in Impacted School Areas

14.32    Flood Damage Prevention

14.33    Hillside Development Standards

14.34    Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System

14.35    Electric Vehicle Charging Stations

Chapter 14.02
BUILDING CODE
Sections:

14.02.010    Title.

14.02.015    Definitions.

14.02.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.02.030    Purpose.

14.02.040    Adoption by reference.

14.02.045    Right of entry.

14.02.050    Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Building Code.

14.02.055    ViolationsNuisance.

14.02.060    Enforcement.

14.02.070    Penalties.

14.02.080    Enforcement procedures.

14.02.085    Conflicts.

14.02.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Building Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.015 Definitions.
For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section:

Building codes or code shall mean the Folsom construction codes and each and every ordinance codified therein as adopted by the city council of the city of Folsom by ordinance, including, but not limited to, the Folsom Building Code, the Folsom Residential Code, the Folsom Electrical Code, the Folsom Mechanical Code, the Folsom Plumbing Code, the Folsom Energy Code, the Folsom Fire Code, the Folsom Green Standards Building Code (CALGreen), the Folsom Referenced Standards Code, the Folsom Property Maintenance Code, the Folsom Historical Building Code, Folsom Existing Building Code and the Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. This shall also apply to references to the Uniform Codes found within the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom construction codes. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of this code and the referenced technical codes. The terms code official, administrative authority, authority having jurisdiction, and city are to be considered synonymous with the terms chief building official, building official, department of building safety and building department as they appear in the code or the technical codes. The city council shall budget and appropriate such city funds for the division of building safety as it may deem necessary for the proper operation of the division. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Building Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within this jurisdiction, and certain equipment specifically regulated herein, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.040 Adoption by reference.
Subject to the additions, amendments, or deletions set forth in Section 14.02.050, the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Building Code, including Appendix Chapter I, published as Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, Title 24, C.C.R., published by the International Code Council, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom Building Codes. One copy of the Folsom Building Code and any and all amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.045 Right of entry.
The code enforcement officer, the fire chief, the chief building official, or their designees shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property as provided for in Section 1.09.025 to enforce the provisions of this title, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of any work performed pursuant to this title. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.050 Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Building Code.
The Folsom Building Code is amended as follows:

CHAPTER 1, DIVISION II

A.    Section 101.1 TitleInsert the words City of Folsom as the name of jurisdiction. This shall apply to any of the adopted codes wherever the name of the jurisdiction is to be inserted.

B.    Section 101.2 ScopeDelete the words California Residential Code and insert, in lieu thereof, the words Folsom Residential Code.

C.    Section 101.4 Referenced codesDelete in its entirety and revised to read as follows:

101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.8 and referenced elsewhere in this Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each reference. If another code is referenced elsewhere in this Code and has not been adopted, then that section shall be considered invalid. Where there is a conflict between the administrative requirements in this Code and those in other adopted technical codes, the more restrictive or specific requirements shall apply.

Exception: Administrative requirements in the City of Folsom Fire Code

Any references to the International Residential Code, Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings, or California Residential Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Residential Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the National Electrical Code or California Electrical Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Electrical Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Fuel Gas Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Plumbing Code or California Plumbing Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Mechanical Code or California Mechanical Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Mechanical Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Property Maintenance Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Property Maintenance Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Fire Code or California Fire Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Fire Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Zoning Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Zoning Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Energy Conservation Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Energy Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the California Historical Building Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Historical Building Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the California Existing Building Code shall be deleted and the words Folsom Existing Building Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

Any references to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be deleted.

101.4.1 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.

101.4.2 Plumbing and Gas. The provisions of the Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall apply to the installation alterations, repairs and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all applicable aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions shall also apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories.

101.4.3 Mechanical. The provisions of the Mechanical Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems.

101.4.4 Property maintenance. The provisions of the Property Maintenance Code, adopted by the City of Folsom, and amended from time to time shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety, hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures and shall be enforced along with the requirements of Title 8, Health, Sanitation and Welfare, of the Folsom Municipal Code. Where there is a conflict between Title 8 of the Folsom Municipal Code and the Folsom Property Maintenance Code, the more restrictive shall apply.

101.4.5 Fire prevention. The provisions of the Fire Code adopted by the City of Folsom and amended from time to time shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire or explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.

101.4.6 California Energy Code and California Green Building Standards Code. The provisions of the California Energy Code and California Green Building Standards Code adopted by the City of Folsom shall apply to all matters governing the sustainable and energy efficiency design and construction of those structures regulated by the Folsom Construction Codes as adopted by the City of Folsom.

101.4.7 California Historical Building Code. The provisions of the California Historical Building Code adopted by the City of Folsom are intended to facilitate, by means of alternative solutions, the restoration of change of occupancy so as to preserve their original or restored architectural elements and features, to encourage energy conservation, disabled access and a cost-effective approach to preservation, and to provide for the safety of the building occupants of those structures regulated by the Folsom Construction Codes as adopted by the City of Folsom.

101.4.8 California Existing Building Code. The provisions of the California Existing Building Code adopted by the City of Folsom are intended to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, access to persons with disabilities, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation and energy conservation; safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment; and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.

D.    Section 105.2(2) Work exempt from permitAmend to read as follows:

2.    Fences not over 6 feet high.

E.    Section 105.3.1 Action on applicationAdd a new paragraph at the end to read:

Without approval of the Building Official, no new or additional permits shall be issued to any property or person who has any outstanding violations of this Code or any other code of this jurisdiction.

F.    Section 105.3.2 Time limit of applicationAmend to read as follows:

An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 calendar days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one extension of time for a period not to exceed 90 calendar days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

G.    Section 105.5 ExpirationAmend to read as follows:

Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced and required inspections are requested by the permittee and approved by the Building Official within 180 calendar days after its issuance, or if more than 180 calendar days elapses between approval of required inspections. The Building Official shall be authorized to grant one extension of time for a period not to exceed 180 calendar days for permits that have not yet expired. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City. If action on an expired permit also requires an additional plan review, a full plan review shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

All building permits shall be valid for up to two years after the issuance date as long as the requirements in the previous paragraph are complied with. The Building Official is authorized to extend a permit beyond this period if the work authorized by the permit is, in the opinion of the Building Official, being diligently pursued but only upon written request by the permittee and evidence acceptable to the Building Official indicating substantial progress. Review of the request and granting of an approved time extension beyond two years shall be made by the Building Official and any additional fees shall be paid based on the current fee schedule as adopted by the City.

Exception: Landscape permits issued to obtain compliance with the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO) shall expire two years after date of issuance. The Building Official shall be authorized to grant one additional extension of 90 calendar days when such a written request is received before the permit expires and justifiable cause is demonstrated as acceptable to the Building Official. Such landscape permits shall be issued prior to, or at the time of, issuance of the primary building permit.

H.    Section 108.3 Building Permit ValuationsAmend to read as follows:

108.3 Building Permit Valuations. The applicant for a permit for a new building or structure or additions or alterations to an existing building or structure shall provide a reasonable estimated permit value at time of application. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be, including labor, the total of all construction work for which the permit is being issued, as well as grading, roofing, siding, electrical, plumbing, gas, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, permanent mechanical equipment and systems as well as any other items which will require plan review and/or inspection. When permitted work includes an alteration to an existing structure, or includes work outside of the standard calculated fee areas determined by square footage cost tables, the applicant shall provide legitimate actual/contracted project costs to establish the additional non-calculated valuation of the total permitted project. Value for donated and/or discounted materials and labor shall be established at typical market rates. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates acceptable to the Building Official.

Exceptions: The Building Official is authorized to omit the cost of land, finish materials such as paint, wallpaper, tile, flooring, interior paneling, except those finish materials requiring fire resistive qualities, solar panels, electric vehicle charging devices, counters, counter tops, cabinets, and residential appliances such as dishwashers, stoves, ovens and microwaves. In addition, the Building Official is authorized to omit the cost of electrical fixtures and plumbing fixtures such as garbage disposals, sinks, lavatories and water closets where their removal or replacement does not require inspection. These exceptions shall not include the replacement of any concealed or exposed electrical, plumbing, gas, ventilation or other mechanical systems required to operate these appliances or the exposed or concealed extension of any of these systems.

Final building permit valuation shall be set by the Building Official.

I.    Section 109.1 Payment of feesAdd an additional paragraph to read as follows:

When submittal documents are incomplete or revised so as to require additional plan review after the second review, final review, or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.1, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate as set forth by resolution of the City Council.

J.    Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuanceAdd an additional sentence to read as follows:

The minimum investigative fee for commencing work before permit issuance shall be equal to and in addition to the amount of the normal permit fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council for the first offense and four times the amount of, and in addition to, the normal permit fee for second and subsequent offenses. The payment of such investigative fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with other provisions of this Code, the technical codes, or from any penalty prescribed by law.

K.    Section 109.6 RefundsAmend to read as follows:

Refunds. The Building Official shall be permitted to authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

The Building Official shall be permitted to authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code.

The Building Official shall be permitted to authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The Building Official shall not be permitted to authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 calendar days after the date of fee payment. Under no circumstances shall there be a refund of either fee if the plan review or building permit has expired.

L.    Section 110 InspectionsAdd additional section to read as follows:

Section 110.7 Reinspections is added as follows:

110.7 Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when any of the following conditions exist:

1.    Such portion of work for which inspection is called is not completely ready.

2.    Previous written or verbal correction notices have not been complied with.

3.    The job address is not clearly posted and clearly visible from the street or the front of the building.

4.    The inspector has no access to the work to be inspected.

5.    The approved plans are not readily available to the inspector.

6.    The building permit, application, appropriate documents, or any previous correction notice(s) are not available at the job site.

7.    Deviating from the approved plans requiring further approval of the Building Official.

This section shall not be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time an inspection is not approved for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of scheduling inspections before the project is completely ready for such inspections, the inspection site is not accessible to the building inspector or when plans and/or permit documents are not available to the building inspector at the site where the inspection is to be performed.

To obtain a reinspection, the applicant, or his/her designee, shall first pay the reinspection fee in accordance with resolution adopted by the City Council.

In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the reinspection fees have been paid.

M.    Section 111.1 Use and occupancyAmend to read as follows:

No building or structure shall be used, occupied, or furnished in whole or in part, and no change in the existing use or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein.

Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

N.    Section 111.3Add a second paragraph to read as follows:

Temporary occupancy may occur only upon application for a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy and the clearance for the connection of the gas and electrical utilities is granted and payment is made for the additional inspections remaining to grant final approval for occupancy of the entire building. In the event the building is not completed and ready for final inspection in the time prescribed by the Building Official or if the building is occupied prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy, the Building Official shall be authorized to cause the building to be vacated and the utilities disconnected until such time as the building is completed, final inspections are conducted and a Certificate of Occupancy is issued as set forth above.

O.    Section 1612.3Insert the words City of Folsom as the jurisdiction name and January 6, 1982 as the date of issuance. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.055 ViolationsNuisance.
Any violation of any code as adopted and amended by ordinance shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.060 Enforcement.
Unless otherwise set forth in this title, the chief building official or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this title pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.070 Penalties.
The following penalties shall apply to any violation of a provision of this title, unless a different penalty is otherwise established by the city council and specifically set forth by ordinance:

A.    A violation of any provision of this title shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this title shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, based upon the standards for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of any provision of this title shall be deemed a Level E violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for violation of this chapter shall be as forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(5). (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.080 Enforcement procedures.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any license or permit, the assessment of any fee, penalty, or change, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this title, the director of the community development department shall follow the procedures as set forth in Sections 1.09.020 to 1.09.048, inclusive. The rights to judicial review set forth in Section 1.09.050 to 1.09.052, inclusive, shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct or stop order shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023.

1.    Unless otherwise set forth in this title, if the violation that is subject of the notice to correct concerns the failure to apply for and/or obtain a valid permit, the time allowed for application for a permit shall be no less than seven calendar days and no more than thirty calendar days. A stop order shall accompany the notice to correct, and shall remain in effect pending the review of and decision on any permit application.

2.    Unless otherwise set forth in this title, if the violation that is the subject of the notice to correct concerns (a) the failure to comply with conditions placed on a permit or other entitlement issued by the city or (b) a violation of any provision of this title, the time allowed to correct the violation shall be a minimum of twenty-four hours and a maximum of ninety calendar days, depending upon the type of action that will be necessary to correct the violation. If the violation creates a potential risk of harm to persons or property, a stop order may accompany the notice to correct, and shall remain in effect until the violation has been remedied to the satisfaction of the director of the community development department.

C.    If the director of the community development department determines that there has been a good faith effort to correct the violation(s) set forth in a notice to correct, the director may extend the deadline for compliance for a reasonable period of time. Any such extension shall be memorialized in writing and a copy shall be sent by first class mail to all responsible persons.

D.    A notice of administrative violation may be issued pursuant to the procedures established in Section 1.09.024. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.02.085 Conflicts.
In the event of any conflict between this code and any law, rule, or regulation of the federal or state government, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard of safety shall be a violation of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 14.04
RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections:

14.04.010    Title.

14.04.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.04.030    Purpose.

14.04.040    Adoption by reference.

14.04.050    Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Residential Code.

14.04.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Residential Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.04.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Residential Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of the Folsom Residential Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.04.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within this jurisdiction, and certain equipment specifically regulated herein, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.04.040 Adoption by reference.
Subject to the additions, amendments, or deletions set forth in Section 14.04.050, the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, including Appendix Chapters H and J published as Part 2.5, Title 24, C.C.R., published by the International Code Council, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Residential Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.04.050 Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Residential Code.
A.    Section R101.1 TitleInsert the words City of Folsom as the name of jurisdiction.

B.    Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit, Building, Item No. 2Delete the number 7 and insert, in lieu thereof, the number 6.

C.    Table R301.2(1)Shall read as follows:



 

D.    Appendix J Existing Buildings and StructuresAmend the following sections to read as follows:

a.    AJ 102.4.1 Energy efficiency. Replacement windows shall comply with the 2016 California Energy Code and the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen).

b.    AJ301.2 Water closets. Where any water closet is replaced with a newly manufactured water closet, the replacement water closet shall comply with the requirements of the 2016 California Plumbing Code and 2016 California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen).

c.    AJ301.3 Electrical. Exceptions 1, 2 and 3. The words Chapters 34 through 43 shall be replaced with the words 2016 California Electrical Code.

d.    AJ501.5.1 Materials and methods. In this section and in the Exception to this section, the words Chapters 34 through 43 shall be replaced with the words 2016 California Electrical Code.

e.    AJ501.5.3.3 Ground-fault circuit-interrupter. The words Chapters 34 through 43 shall be replaced with the words 2016 California Electrical Code.

f.    AJ501.5.3.5 Clearance. The words Chapters 34 through 43 shall be replaced with the words 2016 California Electrical Code.

(Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 14.08
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:

14.08.010    Title.

14.08.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.08.030    Purpose.

14.08.040    Adoption by reference.

14.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Electrical Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.08.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Electrical Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of the Folsom Electrical Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.08.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Electrical Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare and to protect against hazards that may arise from the use of electricity by regulating and controlling the design, construction, and installation, quality of materials, location and operation of electrical equipment, wiring and systems, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.08.040 Adoption by reference.
The California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code, published as Part 3, Title 24, C.C.R., published by the National Fire Protection Agency, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Electrical Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 14.12
PLUMBING CODE
Sections:

14.12.010    Title.

14.12.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.12.030    Purpose.

14.12.040    Adoption by reference.

14.12.050    Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Plumbing Code.

14.12.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Plumbing Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.12.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Plumbing Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of the Folsom Plumbing Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.12.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Plumbing Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare, and to protect against hazards that may arise from the use of plumbing and fuel gas piping and systems by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location and operation of plumbing and fuel gas systems within the city, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.12.040 Adoption by reference.
Subject to the additions, amendments, or deletions set forth in Section 14.12.050, the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code, including Appendix Chapters A, B, D, G and I, published as Part 5, Title 24, C.C.R., published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Plumbing Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.12.050 Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Plumbing Code.
The Folsom Plumbing Code is amended as follows:

A.    Section 104.3.2, Plan Review Fees, is hereby deleted in its entirety.

B.    Section 104.5, Fees, and all of its subsections shall be deleted in their entirety.

C.    Table 104.5, Plumbing Permit Fees, is hereby deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 14.16
MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:

14.16.010    Title.

14.16.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.16.030    Purpose.

14.16.040    Adoption by reference.

14.16.050    Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Mechanical Code.

14.16.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Mechanical Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.16.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Mechanical Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of the Folsom Mechanical Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.16.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Mechanical Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation, and maintenance of use of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the city, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.16.040 Adoption by reference.
Subject to the additions, amendments, or deletions set forth in Section 14.16.050, the California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code published as Part 4, Title 24, C.C.R., published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Mechanical Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.16.050 Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Mechanical Code.
The Folsom Mechanical Code is amended as follows:

A.    Section 104.3.2, Plan Review Fees, is hereby deleted in its entirety.

B.    Section 104.5, Fees, and all of its subsections are hereby deleted in their entirety.

C.    Table 104.5, Mechanical Permit Fees, is hereby deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 14.19
ENERGY CODE
Sections:

14.19.010    Title.

14.19.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.19.030    Purpose.

14.19.040    Adoption by reference.

14.19.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Energy Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.19.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Energy Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of the Folsom Energy Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.19.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Energy Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation, and maintenance or use of energy and energy systems within the city, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.19.040 Adoption by reference.
The California Energy Code, 2016 Edition, published as Part 6, Title 24, C.C.R., published by the International Code Council, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Energy Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 14.20
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

14.20.010    Title.

14.20.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.20.030    Purpose.

14.20.040    Adoption by reference.

14.20.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Green Building Standards Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.20.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Green Building Standards Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of the Folsom Green Building Standards Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.20.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Green Building Standards Code is to improve public health, safety and general welfare by enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact and encouraging sustainable construction practices, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

14.20.040 Adoption by reference.
The California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen Code), 2016 Edition, excluding Appendix Chapters A4, A5 and A6.1, published as Part 11, Title 24, C.C.R., is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Green Building Standards Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013)

Chapter 14.22
HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Sections:

14.22.010    Title.

14.22.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.22.030    Purpose.

14.22.040    Adoption by reference.

14.22.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Historical Building Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.22.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Historical Building Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of Folsom Historical Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.22.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Historical Building Code is to provide building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration (including related reconstruction), or relocation of buildings or structures designated as historic buildings. Such building regulations are intended to facilitate, by means of alternative solutions, the restoration or change of occupancy so as to preserve their original or restored architectural elements and features, to encourage energy conservation, disabled access and a cost-effective approach to preservation, and to provide for the safety of the building occupants. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.22.040 Adoption by reference.
The California Historical Building Code, 2016 Edition, published as Part 8, Title 24, C.C.R., is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Historical Building Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 14.23
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections:

14.23.010    Title.

14.23.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.23.030    Purpose.

14.23.040    Adoption by reference.

14.23.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Existing Building Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016)

14.23.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Existing Building Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of Folsom Existing Building Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016)

14.23.030 Purpose.
The provisions of the California Existing Building Code adopted by the city of Folsom are intended to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, access to persons with disabilities, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation and energy conservation; safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment; and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016)

14.23.040 Adoption by reference.
The California Existing Building Code, 2016 Edition, published as Part 10, Title 24, C.C.R., is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Existing Building Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016)

Chapter 14.24
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sections:

14.24.010    Title.

14.24.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.24.030    Purpose.

14.24.040    Adoption by reference.

14.24.050    Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Property Maintenance Code.

14.24.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Property Maintenance Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010. Formerly 14.23.010)

14.24.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Property Maintenance Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of Folsom Property Maintenance Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010. Formerly 14.23.020)

14.24.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Property Maintenance Code is to provide minimum standards to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises, and to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. The Folsom Property Maintenance Code is not to be construed to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by its terms. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010. Formerly 14.23.030)

14.24.040 Adoption by reference.
Subject to the additions, amendments, or deletions set forth in Section 14.24.050, based on the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Property Maintenance Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010. Formerly 14.23.040)

14.24.050 Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Property Maintenance Code.
The Folsom Property Maintenance Code is amended as follows:

A.    Section 101.1 TitleInsert the words City of Folsom as the name of jurisdiction.

B.    Section 102.10 Other lawsAdd one additional sentence to read as follows:

Whenever the requirements of this code conflict with Title 8, Health, Sanitation and Welfare in the Folsom Municipal Code or the State of California requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall govern.

C.    Section 103.5 FeeRemove the words indicated in the following schedule and insert, in lieu thereof, the following: adopted by resolution by the city council.

D.    Section 112.4 Failure to complyRemove the words of not less than [AMOUNT] dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars and insert, in lieu thereof, the following: as established in Title 14, Chapter 14.02, Sections 14.02.070 and 14.02.080 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

E.    Section 302.4 WeedsDelete this section in its entirety.

F.    Section 304.14 Insect screensInsert the dates January 1 to December 31.

G.    Section 602.3 Heat supplyInsert the dates October 1 to May 1.

H.    Section 602.4 Occupiable work spacesInsert the dates October 1 to May 1. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010. Formerly 14.23.050)

Chapter 14.26
REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

14.26.010    Title.

14.26.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.26.030    Purpose.

14.26.040    Adoption by reference.

14.26.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Referenced Standards Code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.26.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Referenced Standards Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of Folsom Referenced Standards Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.26.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.26.040 Adoption by reference.
The California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 Edition, published as Part 12, Title 24, C.C.R., is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Referenced Standards Code and any amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1268  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 14.28
SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE
Sections:

14.28.010    Title.

14.28.020    Authority having jurisdiction.

14.28.030    Purpose.

14.28.040    Adoption by reference.

14.28.050    Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code.

14.28.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. (Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.28.020 Authority having jurisdiction.
The chief building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. The chief building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code and the other referenced technical codes. (Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.28.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is to provide minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the design, erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any swimming pool, spa or hot tub plumbing system except as otherwise provided for in this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.28.040 Adoption by reference.
Subject to the additions, amendments, or deletions set forth in Section 14.28.050, the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide technical requirements and the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Folsom construction codes. One copy of the Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, and any amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the community development department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1267  2 (part), 2017: Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

14.28.050 Additions, amendments, or deletions to Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code.
The Folsom Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended as follows:

A.    Section 102.1 Conflicts Between CodesRevise to read as follows:

Where the requirements or definitions within the jurisdiction of this Code conflict with the requirements of the Folsom Plumbing Code, Folsom Mechanical Code, Section 3109 of the Folsom Building Code or the Folsom Residential Code, this Code shall prevail. Any requirements of the State of California Health and Safety Code which may be more restrictive shall also apply.

B.    Section 104.0 Permits.

1.    104.1 Permits RequiredAfter the first paragraph, insert the following paragraph:

Before any person commences with construction of a structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading, including the installation of any plumbing, filter system, circulating pump, chlorinating or emptying system for any swimming pool, hot tub or spa, or any reconstruction, remodeling or replastering, an application accompanied by a fee shall be paid and a permit shall be obtained from the City. Every such application and submittal shall include the information required in sections 104.3 and 104.3.1. Where structural work will occur and when necessary, as determined by the Building Official, engineered wet stamped/signed plans and specifications shall be submitted.

2.    104.3.2 Plan Review FeesRevise to read as follows:

Where a plan or other data is required to be submitted by Section 104.3.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review.

The plan review fees for work to install, alter, or repair a swimming pool, spa, hot tub system, or part thereof shall be determined and adopted by this jurisdiction. The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 104.5

Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional review, an additional fee as adopted by resolution by the Folsom City Council shall be charged.

C.    Section 104.5 FeesDelete in its entirety and revise to read as follows:

104.5 Fees. Fees shall be as adopted by resolution by the Folsom City Council.

D.    Table 104.5 Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Permit FeesDelete in its entirety.

E.    Section 107.0 Board of AppealsDelete in its entirety.

F.    Section 221.0 in Chapter 2, Definitions.

1.    Amend the definition of Swimming Pool to read as follows:

Swimming PoolA swimming pool, hot tub or spa shall be any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over eighteen inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools, hot tubs, spas and fixed-in-place wading pools. Fish ponds or shallow decorative pools shall be exempt except where the Chief Building Official, in individual cases, deems it a public nuisance and/or dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare.

G.    Chapter 3 General RequirementsRevise to read as follows:

313.0 Barriers, Locations and Excavation Spoils

313.1 Barriers

All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be provided with a barrier. The top of the barrier shall be at least sixty (60) inches above the highest adjacent grade or improved area measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool and extending at least thirty-six (36) inches horizontally away from the barrier. The Building Official shall be authorized to accept an equivalent form of protection when the full thirty-six inches cannot be obtained due to adjacent terrain or structures not in control of the pool owner or other unique conditions. Openings in the barrier shall not allow the passage of a four-inch sphere. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool. When the grade is a paved or solid surface, the bottom of the barrier may be increased to a maximum of four inches. Gates and fencing shall not be constructed in a manner that either intentionally or unintentionally provides hand or foot holes for climbing and shall comply with Sections 3109.4.1.3, 3109.4.1.4, 3109.4.1.5 and 3109.4.1.6 of the Folsom Building Code. Access gates shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool area and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Self-latching device heights shall be located no less than sixty (60) inches above grade. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-closing and self-latching device. Double width gates which are not the sole means of ingress or egress from the pool area shall not be required to be self-closing but shall be closed and suitably latched and locked at all times when not in use. All doors directly accessing a swimming pool area shall be equipped with an approved alarm in accordance with the State of California Health and Safety Code and UL 2017 unless an approved enclosure or barrier is provided around the pool area.

Exception: Spas and hot tubs equipped with an approved safety cover that meets all the requirements of ASTM F 1346. Supporting documentation shall be submitted at time of permit application.

Any safety devices for pools, spas and hot tubs permitted by the State of California shall also be acceptable when supporting documentation is submitted at time of permit application.

H.    Chapter 5 Water QualitySection 512.0 Wastewater Disposal.

1.    512.1 GeneralRevise to read as follows:

Unless specifically permitted in writing by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, no wastewater shall be discharged into any storm sewer or on any adjacent property, waterway or public way.

(Ord. 1267  2 (part), 2017; Ord. 1188  2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1137  2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 14.29
GRADING
Sections:

14.29.100    Short title.

14.29.110    Purpose.

14.29.120    Definitions.

14.29.130    Scope.

14.29.140    Administration.

14.29.150    Validity and severability.

14.29.160    Fees.

14.29.170    Exemptions.

14.29.180    Transfer of responsibility for certification.

14.29.190    Uniform Building Code superseded.

14.29.200    Grading permits.

14.29.201    Excavation.

14.29.202    Fill.

14.29.203    Earth-filled dams.

14.29.204    Gravel extraction.

14.29.210    Appeals.

14.29.220    Hazards.

14.29.230    Amendment to permit.

14.29.240    Extension of time.

14.29.250    Transfer of permit.

14.29.260    Grading permit requirements.

14.29.261    Application.

14.29.262    Plans and specifications.

14.29.263    Issuance.

14.29.300    Grading standards.

14.29.301    Grading standardsCuts and fills minimum.

14.29.302    Grading standardsCut slopes.

14.29.303    Grading standardsFills.

14.29.310    Setbacks.

14.29.320    Drainage and terracing.

14.29.321    Drainage plan content.

14.29.322    Storm drainage system standards.

14.29.330    Erosion control.

14.29.400    Grading inspection.

14.29.410    Suspension and revocation of permit.

14.29.420    Security.

14.29.430    Enforcement and penalty.

14.29.100 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the Grading Ordinance of the city and may be so cited. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.110 Purpose.
This chapter establishes standards for the preparation of sites and construction activities to protect the health, safety and general welfare of those working or living on or near the site by protecting against unwarranted or unsafe grading, drainage works or other aspects of site development as follows:

1.    To establish standards and procedures for grading and excavation so as to minimize hazards to life and limb, protect against erosion, maintain the natural environment, and protect the safety, use and stability of public rights-of-way and drain-age channels;

2.    To assure that projects approved under this chapter will be free from harmful effects of runoff, including inundation and erosion, and that neighboring and downstream properties will be protected from drainage problems resulting from new development;

3.    To assure proper restoration of vegetation and soil systems disturbed by grading or fill activities authorized under this chapter. It is intended through this chapter to maintain an attractive and healthy landscape and to control against dust and erosion and their consequent effects on soil structure and water quality. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.120 Definitions.
The definitions as stated in the glossary of the Erosion and Sediments Control Handbook maintained by the department of public works shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.130 Scope.
This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction including fills and embankments, establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits, and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.140 Administration.
The public works department is designated the department responsible for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.150 Validity and severability.
If any part of this chapter is found not valid, the remainder of this chapter shall remain in effect. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.160 Fees.
A schedule of fees may be established by resolution of the city council for all costs incurred in the processing of any grading application. Such fees shall cover the full costs of review, approvals, inspections, certification of compliance, or other determinations or actions necessitated by the permit application. A separate and distinct fee may be set by the city council by resolution for the cost of appeals filed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.170 Exemptions.
A grading permit is not required if the proposed work consists of the following activities and such activities will not endanger adjacent property, cause increased erosion, sedimentation and rate of water runoff, divert or impair the flow of water within a water course or cause a public nuisance. All development activities exempted from the grading permit requirement shall be carried out in a manner consistent with the design principles and standards set out herein to assure that the potential for erosion of any project is minimized.

A grading permit is not required for the following:

1.    Excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall, swimming pool, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structures;

2.    Excavation for cemetery graves;

3.    Excavation when all of the following conditions are met:

a.    The quantity is fifty cubic yards or less,

b.    The depth is three feet or less,

c.    The slope of the cut face is two feet horizontal to one foot vertical or less;

4.    Fill when all of the following conditions are met:

a.    The quantity is fifty cubic yards or less placed on ground sloping twenty percent or less,

b.    The height is three feet or less,

c.    The slope of the fill embankment face is two feet horizontal to one foot vertical or less,

d.    The existing drainage patterns are not altered;

5.    Minor agricultural land leveling when the change in elevation is three feet or less;

6.    Clearing vegetation when all of the following conditions are met:

a.    The slope of the ground is twenty percent or less,

b.    The area to be cleared is one acre or less;

7.    Grading in refuse disposal areas and sanitary landfills;

8.    Trenches for public utilities, unless encroachment permits are otherwise necessary. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.180 Transfer of responsibility for certification.
If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence for certification upon completion of the work. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.190 Uniform building code superseded.
If there is any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.200 Grading permits.
Unless exempted under Section 14.29.170, a grading permit is required from the public works director prior to the initiation of any grading, excavation, fill or dredging activities included under Section 14.29.201 or Section 14.29.202. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.201 Excavation.
A grading permit is required for any excavations that:

1.    Disturbs more than five thousand square feet in surface area or more than eight hundred cubic yards total cut area; or

2.    Disturbs more than two thousand five hundred square feet in surface area or more than four hundred cubic yards total cut area in a flood hazard or erosion hazard area;

3.    Is more than two feet deep; or

4.    Creates a cut slope more than five feet high and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.202 Fill.
A grading permit is required for any fill that:

1.    Exceeds fifty cubic yards on any one lot; or

2.    Exceeds twenty-five cubic yards on any one lot in a flood hazard or erosion hazard area; or

3.    Has an unsupported height more than five feet; or

4.    Is more than one foot deep and is placed on natural terrain with a slope steeper than two horizontal to one vertical; or

5.    Is more than three feet deep and is intended to support structures;

6.    Obstructs a natural or manmade drainage course which carries a significant amount of storm runoff to the extent that increased erosion and siltation will occur. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.203 Earth-filled dams.
For the purpose of creating ponds or catching stormwater, earth-filled dams require a grading permit. Such requirement may be waived on a case-by-case basis by the public works director where the following conditions exist:

1.    The proposed dam will not create a hazard to private property and improvements;

2.    The proposed dam will not drastically affect existing drainage patterns or create erosion hazards. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.204 Gravel extraction.
Grading in areas of mining, quarrying, excavating, processing and stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay shall be conducted in accordance with a mining and reclamation plan prepared in accordance with the laws of the state of California and any ordinances of this city enacted pursuant thereto and shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 415  l (part), 1981)

14.29.210 Appeals.
The decision of the public works director upon applications for permits under this chapter shall be in writing and a copy of such decision shall be served upon the applicant, in person or by first class mail, postage prepaid. Any other person who files a written request therefor with the public works director shall also receive a copy of such decision.

If the applicant or any other person is dissatisfied with any determination made by the public works director, he may appeal in writing to the city council stating the reasons for his dissatisfaction with the determination of the public works director. The appeal must be filed within 10 days of the decision by the public works director. The appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the city council and the council shall hear the appeal within sixty days after the date of the filing of the appeal. Written notice shall be given to the public works director, the appellant and all other persons requesting the same, specifying the place, date and time of hearing the appeal. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.220 Hazards.
Existing Hazards. Whenever the public works director determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property, to include the exceptions listed in Section 14.29.170 has become a hazard to life or limb, endangers property or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation, embankment or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property or project, upon receipt of notice in writing from the public works director, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation, embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. The public works director may issue special or conditional permits and/or require performance bonds or other forms of security in accordance with Section 14.29.420 to ensure compliance with the intent of this section. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.230 Amendment to permit.
All changes in the plans, grades, timing or extent of work shall be submitted to the director of public works for written approval and incorporation into the permit before any change in the work is commenced. The director of public works may amend the permit to approve such changes if appropriate, or may deny approval of such changes.

Failure to obtain prior approval for any change in the work shall be cause for the suspension of the permit until approval is obtained, and may result in the revocation of the permit if such changes are deemed to be hazardous to adjoining properties or to the public at large. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.240 Extension of time.
Each permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance unless noted otherwise on the permit. The date the permit expires shall be noted on the permit.

1.    The permittee may, before the expiration of the permit, apply for an extension of time in which to complete the work in a reasonable and expeditious manner.

2.    Extensions of time may be granted by the director of public works for a period or periods not exceeding a total of one year.

3.    Denial of an extension of time shall not preclude the right of the permittee to apply for a new permit for the remaining balance of the work.

4.    Written consent of the surety to any extension of time must be furnished before the approval of the extension becomes effective, unless the security consists of a cash deposit.

5.    Every permit issued by the public works director under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred twenty days. Permits may be granted an extension of time where the public works director finds that unusual circumstances warrant such an extension of time and will not create a hazard or nuisance.

6.    Before any work can be recommenced, if a permit has expired, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work and provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.250 Transfer of permit.
The transfer of a permit from the permittee to another person shall be subject to the written approval of the director of public works. The person to whom the permit is being transferred shall agree in writing to such modifications as may be required, and shall furnish the required security before transfer of the permit will be approved. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.260 Grading permit requirements.
Except as exempted in Section 14.29.170, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the public works director. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. Subdivisions on which all grading is performed as a unit shall be considered a single site. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.261 Application.
To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose by the public works director. Every application shall include the following:

1.    The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

2.    The names, addresses, and the telephone numbers of all property owners other than the applicant;

3.    The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any and all contractors or persons actually doing the work, and the work that each will be doing;

4.    The name, address, telephone number and registration number of the party responsible for preparing the grading plan;

5.    The name, address and telephone number of the party responsible for preparing the erosion and sediment control plan;

6.    The name, address and telephone number and registration number of the registered civil engineer responsible for the preparation of the soils and engineering report, if required;

7.    Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

8.    Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block, tract, and house and street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;

9.    Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;

10.    Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in Section 14.29.263;

11.    Be signed by the permittee, or his authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;

12.    State the estimated quantity of work involved;

13.    State the estimated starting and completion dates;

14.    Give such other information as reasonably may be required by public works director. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.262 Plans and specifications.
A.    Minor Grading. A minor grading plan is to be submitted where the grading includes less than five thousand cubic yards total of cut and fill where the public works director has determined that a grading project is of a minor nature due to the absence of:

1.    Steep slopes (greater than or equal to fifteen percent);

2.    Location in a geologic study area or flood hazard area;

3.    Potential damage to structures on or adjacent to the subject site;

4.    Potential blockage of drainage channels;

5.    Potential impairment of significant natural vegetation, biological habitats, public views or other sensitive natural resources.

B.    A minor grading plan is to consist of the following as determined by the public works director, provided that information submitted with any required plot plan, site plan, or development plan may also be used to fulfill those submittal requirements:

1.    General vicinity map;

2.    Property limits of the site;

3.    Generalized existing contours and drainage channels including those areas of the subject site and adjoining properties that will be affected by the disturbance either directly or through drainage alterations;

4.    Location of any buildings or structures that are within fifty feet of the area which may be affected by the proposed grading operation,

5.    Limiting dimensions, elevations or finished contours to be achieved by the grading and proposed drainage channels and related construction.

C.    Engineered Grading. An engineered grading plan is to be submitted for any grading in excess of five thousand cubic yards or where the public works director has determined that a grading project should be engineered, based on the presence of:

1.    Steep slopes;

2.    Located in an erosion hazard area or a flood hazard area;

3.    Potential damage to structures on the subject site or adjacent properties;

4.    Potential impairment of natural vegetation, biological habitats, public views, or other sensitive resources.

D.    Where it is determined by the public works director that, due to terrain, soil characteristics, grading design, etc., engineered grading plans will serve no benefit with respect to effecting a safe and adequate grading operation, such engineered grading plan requirements may be waived.

E.    An engineered grading plan is to be drawn to scale and is to be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this chapter. Two sets of plans and specifications are to be prepared and signed by a civil engineer and are to include the following information as determined by the public works director:

1.    General vicinity map;

2.    Property limits of the subject site;

3.    Details of terrain and area drainage and accurate contours of existing ground at intervals determined by the public works director;

4.    Location of any buildings or structures that are within fifty feet of the area which may be affected by the proposed grading operations;

5.    Limiting dimensions, elevations of finished contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction;

6.    Specifications covering construction and material requirements;

7.    Soil engineering report to include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and criteria for corrective measures when necessary, and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading;

8.    Engineering geology report to include a description of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading;

9.    A statement indicating methods to mitigate any conditions whereby the public works director may require an engineered grading plan such as steep slopes, location in a geologic study area or flood hazard area, potential damage to structures on the subject site or adjacent property, potential impairment of natural vegetation, habitat, public view or other sensitive resources;

10.    Drainage plan if not included in any of the above;

11.    Erosion control plan and/or recommendation for mitigating measures. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.263 Issuance.
A.    The application, plans and specification filed by an applicant for a permit shall be checked by the public works director. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city to check compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the public works director is satisfied that the work described in an application for permit and the plans filed therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances and that the fee specified in Section 14.29.160 has been paid, the public works director shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.

When the public works director issues the permit, he shall endorse in writing or stamp on both sets of plans and specifications APPROVED. Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the public works director; and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. The public works director may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur weather generated problems not considered at the time the permit was issued.

B.    Coordination of Grading Plans. The public works director may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency or the public works department, and he is responsible for coordination of the parties to all grading activities including the civil engineer, soils engineer, engineering geologist, public works department, other city departments where required, the grading contractor, and the testing agency.

C.    Retention of Plans. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the public works director for a period of not less than ninety days from date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept on such building or work site at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.

D.    The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the public works director from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the city.

E.    Upon completion of the rough grading and/or final grading for any engineered gradings, the public works director may require submission of an as-graded grading plan and soil and geologic grading reports.

F.    The applicant is to notify the public works director when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval will not be given until all work has been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan including installation of all drainage facilities and their protection devices and all revegetation and erosion control measures as required. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.300 Grading standards.
Excavations and fills are to be conducted in accordance with the standards set out in Section 14.29.301 through Section 14.29.303. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.301 Grading standardsCuts and fills minimum.
Cuts and fills are to be limited to the minimum amount necessary to provide stable embankments for required parking areas or street rights-of-way, structural foundations, and adequate residential yard area or outdoor storage or sales area incidental to a nonresidential use. Adequate graded storage and sales area is to be limited to not more than twenty percent of gross floor area. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.302 Grading standardsCut slopes.
Cut slopes are to be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical or fifty percent except where certified by a registered civil engineer as to stability and/or approved by the public works director. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.303 Grading standardsFills.
Fills are to be subject to the following standards, provided that the public works director may exempt minor fills that are not intended to support structures unless otherwise recommended in an approved soil engineering report:

1.    Fill slopes may not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two to one or as determined by the public works director.

2.    The ground surface is to be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil, and other unsuitable materials, scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill, and, where slopes are steeper than two to one and the height is greater than five feet, benching into sound bedrock or other competent materials as determined by the public works director.

3.    The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than two to one is to be at least ten feet wide. The area beyond the toe of a fill is to be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain provided. Where fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of a fill is to be at least ten feet wide, but the cut must be made before placing any fill and approved by the soils engineer (or public works director for minor grading) as a suitable foundation for fill. Unsuitable soil is soil which is not competent to support other soil or fill, to support structures, or to perform satisfactorily the other functions for which the soil is intended.

4.    Detrimental amounts of organic material may not be permitted in fills. No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve inches is to be buried or placed in fills, except that the public works director may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions also apply in such case:

a.    Prior to issuance of a grading permit, potential rock disposal areas are to be delineated on the grading plan if required;

b.    Rock sizes greater than twelve inches in maximum dimension are to be below grade, measured vertically at a distance determined by the public works director;

c.    Rocks are to be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with fines.

5.    All fills for building pads and roads are to be compacted to a minimum of ninety percent of maximum density as determined by the public works director. Fill density will be determined by the public works director.

6.    Drainage and terracing is to be provided and the area above fill slopes and the surfaces of terraces are to be graded and paved as required in Section 14.29.320. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.310 Setbacks.
Setbacks for cuts and fills are to be as follows:

1.    The tops of cuts and toes of fill slopes are to be set back from the outer boundaries of the permit area including slope right areas and easements in accordance with Figure No. 1 and Table No. 1 attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

2.    Setbacks between graded slopes and structures are to be provided in accordance with Figure No. 2 attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.320 Drainage and terracing.
Drainage facilities and terracing are to conform to the following unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan:

1.    Terraces at least six feet in width are to be established at not more than thirty-foot-in-height intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris except that, where only one terrace is required, it is to be a mid-height. For cut slopes greater than sixty feet and up to one hundred twenty feet in height are to be twelve feet in width. Terraces on cut or fill slopes greater than one hundred twenty feet in height are to be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the public works director. Suitable access is to be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.

2.    Swales or ditches on terraces are to have a minimum gradient of five percent paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches in thickness or an approved equal paving. They are to have a minimum paved width of five feet.

3.    A single run of swale or ditch may not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding thirteen thousand five hundred square feet (projected) without discharging into a down drain without approval of the public works director.

4.    Cut and fill slopes are to be provided with subsurface drainage as determined necessary by the public works director based upon the soils engineer report or in accordance with a drainage and/or erosion control plan prepared pursuant to this chapter. Check dams, cribbing, rip-rap, or other devices or methods are to be employed to control erosion and provide safety.

5.    All drainage facilities are to be designed to carry waters to the nearest practical drainage way approved by the public works director as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge is to be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices.

6.    Building pads are to have a drainage gradient of two percent toward the street or in an underground conduit. The approved drainage facilities may be one percent if approved by the public works director and all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:

a.    No proposed fills are greater than ten feet in maximum depth;

b.    No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of ten feet;

c.    No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than ten horizontally to one vertically, have a vertical height in excess of ten feet.

7.    Paved interceptor drains are to be installed along the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes towards the cut and has a drainage path greater than forty feet measured horizontally or as approved by the public works director. Interceptor drains are to be paved with a minimum of three inches of reinforced concrete or approved equal. They are to have a minimum depth of twelve inches and a minimum paved width of thirty inches measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of such drain is to be approved by the public works director.

Grading, dredging or diking may not alter any intermittent or perennial stream as shown on any USGS seven and one-half minute map, except as permitted through approval of a streambed alteration permit from the California Department of Fish and Game issued under Section 1601 or 1602 of the Fish and Game Code.

Contours of finished surfaces are to be blended with adjacent natural terrain to achieve a consistent grade and natural appearance. Borders of cut slopes and fills are to be rounded off to a minimum radius of 5 feet so as to blend with the natural terrain. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.321 Drainage plan content.
Drainage plans are to be accurately and neatly drawn to include the following as determined by the public works director:

1.    Flow of surface water onto and off the site;

2.    Existing and finished contours at intervals determined by the public works director;

3.    Building and road elevations, existing and proposed;

4.    Existing and proposed drainage channels including drainage swales, ditches and berms;

5.    Location and design of any proposed facilities for storage or for conveyance of runoff into indicated drainage channels including sumps, basins, channels, culverts, ponds, storm drains and drop inlets;

6.    Estimates of existing and increased runoff resulting from the proposed improvements if required. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.322 Storm drainage system standards.
Drainage facilities are to be adequate to assure that the development will not result in stormwater runoff that could cause flooding, ponding, soil erosion, sediment production, and sediment pollution. The following standards also apply:

1.    Site development is to be accomplished wherever possible in a manner that will maximize percolation and infiltration of precipitation into the ground and will minimize direct surface runoff into adjoining streets, water courses, or properties.

2.    In general, the release rate of stormwater from all parts of the subject site after development should not exceed the stormwater runoff rate from the area in its previous undeveloped state for all intensities and durations of rainfall. The carrying capacity of the channels immediately downstream is to be considered in determining the permitted amount of the stormwater release.

3.    All drainage facilities are to be designed to carry stormwaters to the nearest stable channel or natural drainage way with adequate capacity to carry the flow. If drainage facilities discharge onto natural ground, the applicant is to provide a method to reduce the velocity of flow in order to prevent erosion or other harmful effects to the subject site or other adjoining properties. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.330 Erosion control.
A.    The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final approval. Where it is determined by the public works director that cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted.

B.    Erosion control plan content. With any minor or engineered grading plan, an erosion control plan may be required to be submitted including the following items:

1.    Protective measures to be taken during construction such as hydromulching, berms (temporary or permanent), interceptor ditches, subsurface drains, terraces and/or sediment traps in order to prevent erosion by surface or ground water of the cut faces of excavations or of the sloping surfaces of fills;

2.    Permanent methods of revegetation following completion of proposed grading or improvements;

3.    Approximate sequence and timing of grading and construction increments and/or subsequent revegetation and/or landscaping work.

C.    Revegetation standards.

1.    Permanent revegetation or landscaping, if required, is to be commenced on the construction site as soon as practical and in no case exceeding twelve months after achieving final grades and utility implacements. Whenever practical, land is to be developed in increments of workable size which can be completed during a single construction season; erosion control measures are to be coordinated with the sequence of grading or improvements.

2.    Grading equipment is to be confined to area immediately adjacent to areas of disturbance as indicated by the plan approved by the public works director.

3.    All surfaces disturbed by vegetation removal, grading, haul roads, or other activity of construction which alters the natural vegetative cover are to be prepared for expedient revegetation or otherwise maintained to control erosion unless covered with impervious or other improved surfaces pursuant to approved plans within thirty days of following the completion of grading, or removal of vegetation if no grading was involved. Erosion control described in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, May 1978, may be used as a guide.

4.    Topsoil removed from the surface in preparation for grading and construction is to be stored whenever possible on or near the site and protected from erosion while grading operations are underway; provided, that such storage may not be located where it would cause suffocation of root systems of trees intended to be preserved. After completion of such grading, topsoil is to be restored to exposed cut and fill embankments or building pads so as to provide a suitable base for seeding and planting.

5.    Acceptable methods of revegetation include straw-mulching, hydro-mulching or planting of mixture specified by public works director. Other methods of revegetation may be approved by the public works director where equivalent protection is provided.

6.    All revegetation and landscaping are to be conducted within suitable growing periods. Native plant material are specifically encouraged in order to reduce irrigation demands.

7.    For all grading or improvements to be conducted during the rainy season, a sedimentation control plan is to be submitted including, where necessary, temporary sedimentation basins. Sedimentation control facilities are to be installed in conjunction with initial grading operations and maintained throughout the construction period to remove sediments from runoff waters during development.

8.    Permanent sediment catchment basins or other types of sediment retention facilities are required wherever necessary to prevent discharge of sediment into stream channels. Accumulated sediment is to be inspected and removed for disposal according to a regular maintenance schedule.

9.    The planting or seeding of vegetative protection must be effective. If the vegetation does not grow and offer proper protection, it must be replanted or reseeded.

10.    The maintenance of vegetative protection on graded slopes shall be the responsibility of the permittee and shall be guaranteed until the vegetation is well established or is officially assumed by another party approved by the public works director. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.400 Grading inspection.
A.    General. All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the public works director. When required by the public works director, special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Engineered Grading Requirements. For engineered grading, it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and certification of the grading within his area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and certification as to the establishment of line, grade, and drainage of the development area. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor and the public works director. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-graded grading plans upon completion of the work.

Soil engineering and engineering geology reports may be required as specified in Section 14.29.262. During grading all necessary reports, compaction data, and soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and public works director by the soil engineer and the engineering geologist. The engineering geologists area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to professional inspection and certification of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters and the need for sub-drains or other ground water drainage devices. He shall report his findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis. The public works director shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring certification and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.

C.    Regular Grading Requirements. The public works director may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency, the expense of which shall be borne by the applicant. The testing agencys responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, certification concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill and the compaction of fills.

When the public works director has cause to believe that geologic factors may be involved, the grading operation will be required to conform to engineered grading requirements at no expense to the city. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.410 Suspension and revocation of permit.
A.    A grading permit shall be suspended or revoked by the public works director, unless exempted by said director, if:

1.    Conditions at the site vary appreciably from those shown on the approved plans;

2.    Construction does not conform to the approved grading plan, final erosion and sediment control plan, time schedules, or conditions of the grading permit;

3.    The site is left in a condition hazardous to the public or to the adjacent properties, and permittee does not comply with reasonable requirements to correct said conditions;

4.    The permittee does not comply with reasonable requirements to safeguard the workmen, the public or other persons acting in a lawful manner;

5.    The permittee, in connection with the operations for which the permit was issued, fails to operate his equipment properly on public roads; or allows material to encroach, obstruct, or be deposited within a public road right-of-way or within a drainage channel in a manner not authorized by said permit; or causes unauthorized obstruction or diversion of drainage channels;

6.    The permittee fails to have a qualified inspector, working under the supervision of a registered civil engineer, on the site during operations when so required by the permit or fails to have the work under proper supervision at all times;

7.    Emergency conditions exist on the site which constitute a threat to health, safety or public welfare.

B.    Prior to the suspension or revocation of a permit, the public works director shall give to the permit holder written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the permit, which notice shall specify the grounds for such intended action and the time and place for the holding of a conference between the public works director and the permit holder and/or their authorized representatives to review the grounds for the proposed action. Notice of the proposed action shall be given to the permit holder at least forty-eight hours, but not more than seventy-two hours before the time set for the conference, if given by personal service, and at least ninety-six hours, but not more than one hundred twenty hours before the time set for the conference, if given by first class mail. Weekends and holidays shall not be counted in determining the time for the giving of notice and the holding of the conference. With the consent of the permit holder the time periods provided for herein may be shortened or extended.

Upon receipt of the notice of intended suspension or revocation, the permit holder shall cease all work in connection with the permit, with the exception of work necessary to correct any condition or perform any work cited in the notice of proposed action as a ground for suspension and/or revocation and work of an emergency nature.

Within twenty-four hours following the conclusion of the conference, the public works director shall render his written decision, either revoking the permit, suspending the permit, or authorizing the permit holder to proceed with the work. Such action may be with or without conditions. The decision shall be served upon the permit holder by personal service or first class mail, postage prepaid, within twenty-four hours after the rendition of the decision.

If the permit holder is dissatisfied by the decision of the public works director, he may appeal to the city council. Said appeal shall be filed, noticed, and acted upon within the same time and in the same manner as an appeal under Section 14.29.210.

C.    If the permittee fails to correct said objectionable or emergency conditions, the city may cause the work necessary to correct said conditions to be done, and the city may take action against the permittees security to cover the cost of performing the work.

D.    Any permit which has been suspended may be either reinstated or revoked by the public works director. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.420 Security.
In all cases, the application for engineered grading permit shall be accompanied by a performance bond or other form of security acceptable to the public works director, posted by the applicant. A bond may also be required along with the application for a minor grading permit if deemed necessary by the public works director. The amount of the bond or security shall be the full cost of the installed erosion and sediment control measures and for the maintenance of such facilities. The bond shall be held until the erosion and sediment control measures have performed satisfactorily for a period of one year following completion of development or until such measures are permanently stabilized as provided for in this chapter. The bond may be used to provide for the installation and maintenance of the control measures if not done by the applicant and sediment runoff is occurring as a result. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

14.29.430 Enforcement and penalty.
A.    It shall be the duty of the public works director and other authorized employees of the city, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. No oversight or dereliction on the part of the public works director, or any authorized assistants of any official, or employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, shall legalize, authorize, waive or excuse the violation of any provision of this chapter.

B.    In the administration and enforcement of this chapter, any duly authorized official or employee of the city shall have authority to enter upon the premises for the purposes of investigation and inspection; provided, however, that the above referred to right of entry shall be exercised only during the daylight hours. No person shall refuse to permit such inspection.

C.    In the event any person, firm or corporation shall perform any work in violation of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant thereto, or fail or refuse to perform any work required by this chapter or any permit issued pursuant thereto, the same is declared to be a public nuisance and at the direction of the city council, the city attorney is authorized to bring and prosecute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the performance of such work or, if such work has been accomplished, from maintaining the same.

D.    The violation of this chapter is an infraction and shall be punishable by:

1.    A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation;

2.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation within one year;

3.    A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year. (Ord. 415  1 (part), 1981)

Chapter 14.30
RESIDENTIAL UNITS IN IMPACTED SCHOOL AREAS
Sections:

14.30.010    Authority.

14.30.020    Definitions.

14.30.030    Findings.

14.30.040    Application of chapter.

14.30.050    Exemptions.

14.30.060    School impact fees.

14.30.070    Schedule of use of fees.

14.30.080    Accounting for fees.

14.30.090    Declaration of continued impaction.

14.30.100    General plan consistency.

14.30.110    Termination.

14.30.120    Notice of intention to offer subdivided lands.

14.30.130    Limitation of actions.

14.30.140    Sunset provision.

14.30.010 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

1.    Affected school district means a school district which contains an impacted school.

2.    Attendance area of an impacted school means the attendance area for an impacted school as defined by the governing board of the district involved.

3.    City council means the city council of the city of Folsom.

4.    Certificate of mitigation means a written notification from an affected school district indicating that a binding agreement or other form of mitigation has been agreed to by the district and a developer.

5.    Conditions of overcrowding means the same as impacted school as defined in this chapter.

6.    Declaration of continued impaction means the resolution the governing board of a school district submits to the city council that a condition of overcrowding continues to exist in designated attendance areas within such district.

7.    Developer means the person, firm, corporation, partnership or association seeking to develop land within the attendance area of an impacted school.

8.    Director means the planning director of the city.

9.    District means school district.

10.    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment house or apartment hotel designed for or occupied by one for living or sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen and separate toilet facilities. Dwelling unit also includes a mobilehome, either on a permanent foundation or within a mobilehome park.

11.    Governing board means the district governing board which has a school attendance area within the city.

12.    Impacted school means an existing or proposed school whose total enrollment, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds its rated capacity.

13.    Interim facilities shall be limited to the following:

a.    Temporary classrooms not constructed with permanent foundations and defined as structures containing one or more rooms, each of which is designed, intended, and equipped for use as a place for formal instruction of pupils by a teacher in a school;

b.    Temporary classroom toilet facilities not constructed with permanent foundations;

c.    Reasonable site preparation and installation of temporary classrooms.

14.    Mitigation means that relief or abatement negotiated between and agreed to by the affected school district and the developer.

15.    Mobile home park means an area or tract of land where mobile home sites are rented, leased or sold or held out for rent, lease or sale to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation on a permanent basis. Mobilehome site is a portion of a mobilehome park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome.

16.    Residential development means a project containing residential dwellings, including mobile homes of one or more units, or a subdivision of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units.

17.    Rated capacity means that capacity determined by the governing board of a school district to be the maximum acceptable enrollment in a school facility based on the governing boards policies and programs.

18.    Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding include, but are not limited to, agreements between a subdivider and the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to the school district or temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used and the dedication of land.

19.    Schedule of mitigation means a program developed by the governing board of a district which sets forth in detail mitigation measures deemed appropriate by the governing board. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.030 Findings.
The city council finds and declares as follows:

1.    Adequate school facilities should be available for children residing in new residential developments.

2.    Public and private residential developments may require the expansion of existing public schools or the construction of new public school facilities.

3.    In certain areas of the city, funds are not available for school districts to construct new classroom facilities when new development occurs, resulting in conditions of overcrowding in certain school attendance areas.

4.    New housing developments frequently cause conditions of overcrowding in existing school facilities which cannot be alleviated in a reasonable period of time without mitigation programs as provided in this chapter.

5.    The San Juan Unified School District has made a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that conditions of overcrowding exist within the attendance areas of the following schools within the city which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs and that no feasible method of reducing the condition exists: Orangevale Elementary School and Pasteur Intermediate School.

6.    The Folsom Cordova Unified School District has made a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that conditions of overcrowding exist within the attendance areas of the following schools within the city which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs and that no feasible method of reducing such condition exists: Theodore Judah Elementary School, Blanche Sprentz Elementary School and Folsom Junior High School.

7.    The city council concurs in the finding of San Juan Unified School District and Folsom Cordova Unified School District and determines that the provisions of this chapter are necessary to finance interim school facilities within the attendance areas until such time as conditions of overcrowding no longer exist. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.040 Application of chapter.
Except as provided in Section 14.30.050, neither a building permit for the construction of a dwelling unit nor a hookup permit for installation and hookup of a mobile home shall be issued within the attendance area of an impacted school until the fees provided for in Section 14.30.060 have been paid or the affected school district has notified the city that the district and the developer have agreed upon reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.050 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the following instances:

A.    To the issuance of hookup permits for mobile home sites which have previously paid a school impact fee. The city shall maintain records showing the mobile home sites from which fees have been collected;

B.    To a residential development for which a certificate of mitigation has been issued. (Ord. 584  1, 1986: Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.060 School impact fees.
School impact fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be reviewed annually in connection with the declaration of continued impaction pursuant to Section 14.30.090.

The fees shall be paid directly to the affected school district prior to the issuance of a building or hookup permit. The district shall furnish to the developer a written receipt setting forth the lots or parcels upon which fees have been paid and the attendance area within which such lots are situated. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.070 Schedule of use of fees.
Prior to the disbursement of any fees, each affected school district shall submit to the city a schedule specifying the following:

1.    Identification of the existing or proposed school sites upon which interim facilities are to be placed;

2.    A description of the interim facilities to be placed thereon;

3.    The times when such facilities will be available.

The affected school district may from time to time modify the schedule by submitting a modified schedule, containing the reasons for such modification. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.080 Accounting for fees.
Each affected district receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for the fees received and shall file an annual report with the city council of the city, setting forth the amount of funds expended for interim facilities and the balance in the account. The report shall be filed on or before October 15th of each year covering the transactions in the account through June 30th of the year. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.090 Declaration of continued impaction.
A.    On or before June 10th of each year, commencing June 10, 1984, each affected district shall file a declaration of continued impaction with the city, which shall be in the form of a resolution of its governing board. The resolution shall include findings supported by clear and convincing evidence that conditions of overcrowding continue to exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which impairs the normal function of educational programs, including the reasons such conditions exist. The findings shall further provide that all reasonable methods of reducing the conditions of over-crowding have been evaluated and feasible method of reducing such conditions exist. Feasible methods to reduce conditions of overcrowding shall include:

1.    Temporary buildings;

2.    Busing;

3.    Double sessions;

4.    Extended day programs;

5.    Year-round school attendance;

6.    Open enrollment;

7.    School boundary realignments;

8.    Elimination of low-priority uses;

9.    Holding an election to increase the tax rate.

B.    The district, at the time of filing a declaration of continued impaction, shall also submit a program of mitigation proposed for each impacted school whose attendance area lies within the city, which includes a recommendation for fees to be charged to provide interim facilities for the ensuing year.

C.    If the city council concurs in the findings that conditions of overcrowding continue to exist and that reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been undertaken, the provisions of this chapter shall remain in effect, or shall continue as modified by the city. If the city council finds that overcrowding conditions no longer exist within any attendance area or that feasible methods of reducing overcrowding within an attendance area have not been employed, the city shall cease to collect school impact fees within such attendance area. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.100 General plan consistency.
Interim school facilities constructed from school impact fees and/or land dedicated pursuant to a certificate of mitigation shall be consistent with the city general plan and the elements thereof. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.110 Termination.
Unless there is a finding as authorized by Government Code Section 65979, the city shall cease to impose school impact fees for any affected district one year after receipt by such district of an apportionment pursuant to the Leroy F. Greene State School Building Lease Purchase Law of 1976 (Chapter 22commencing with Section 17700 of Part 10 of the Education Code)

Any fees collected or land dedicated after the receipt of the construction apportionment and not used to avoid overcrowding shall be returned to the person who paid the fee or made the land dedication. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.120 Notice of intention to offer subdivided lands.
Each developer of land within an attendance area where it has been determined that overcrowding exists shall include in any notice of intention filed pursuant to Business and Professional Code Section 11010 a statement to that effect. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.130 Limitation of actions.
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this code, any court action or proceeding to attack, set aside, void, or annul any decision, act or determination by the city council concerning any matter provided for in this chapter shall not be maintained unless such action, or proceeding is commenced within thirty days after the date such determination or decision becomes final. (Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

14.30.140 Sunset provision.
The provisions of this chapter shall expire and shall not be effective after June 30, 1989. (Ord. 580  1, 1986: Ord. 497  1 (part), 1983)

Chapter 14.32
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Sections:

14.32.010    Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.

14.32.020    Definitions.

14.32.030    General provisions.

14.32.040    Administration.

14.32.050    Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

14.32.060    Variance procedures.

14.32.010 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.
A.    Statutory Authorization. The California Constitution, Article XI, Section 5, grants charter cities the power to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does hereby adopt this chapter.

B.    Findings of Fact.

1.    The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in losses of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

2.    These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

C.    Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

1.    Protect human life and health;

2.    Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;

3.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

4.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

5.    Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

6.    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

7.    Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

8.    Insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

D.    Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

1.    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

2.    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

3.    Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

4.    Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

5.    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 882  2 (part), 1998)

14.32.020 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

Accessory use means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

Alluvial fan means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows and then deposited on the valley floors and which are subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition and channel migration.

Apex means a point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrators interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

Area of special flood hazard. See Special flood hazard area.

Base flood means the flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.

Breakaway walls are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material, which are not part of the structural support of the building and which are so designed as to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by an appropriately California licensed civil engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

a.    Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

b.    The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

Building. See Structure.

Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

Encroachment means the advance of infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this chapter.

Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of street, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete).

Flood, flooding or flood water means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

a.    The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

b.    The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

Flood hazard boundary map means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See also Flooding.

Floodplain administrator means the individual appointed to administer and enforce this chapter.

Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulation and open space plans.

Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as regulatory floodway.

Floodway fringe is that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.

Fraud and victimization as related to Section 14.32.060, Variance procedures, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

Governing body is the city council for the city of Folsom.

Hardship as related to Section 14.32.060, Variance procedures, of this chapter, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardships alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of ones neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

Historic structure means any structure that is:

a.    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

b.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or

c.    Individually listed on the state or city inventory of historic places.

Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.

Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see Basement definition). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a buildings lowest floor, provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, but not limited to:

a.    The wet floodproofing standards in Section 14.32.050(A)(3)(c) of this chapter;

b.    The anchoring standards in Section 14.32.050(A)(1) of this chapter;

c.    The construction materials and methods standards in Section 14.32.050(A)(2) of this chapter;

d.    The standards for utilities in Section 14.32.050(B) of this chapter.

For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited within the designated flood hazard area, as they are considered to be basements (see Basement definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in 1 or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.

Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a communitys flood insurance rate map are referenced.

Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of usually heavy or sustained rain.

Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.

New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See Base flood.

Public safety and nuisance as related to Section 14.32.060, Variance procedures, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:

a.    Built on a single chassis;

b.    Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

c.    Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

d.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot.

Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

Sheet flow area means a designated AO or AH Zone (area of shallow flooding) on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.

Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area having a special flood and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A1-A30, and/or A99.

Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. For a substantial improvement, the actual start means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external portion of the building, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or manufactured home.

Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial improvement means any repair, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however include either:

a.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

b.    Any alteration for improvement of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure.

Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographical feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 882  2 (part), 1998)

14.32.030 General provisions.
A.    Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.

B.    Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the flood insurance study (FIS) dated July 6, 1981, and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city by the floodplain administrator. This study and FIRMs are on file at Folsom City Hall, 50 Natoma Street, Folsom.

C.    Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.

1.    Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

2.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 of the Folsom Municipal Code shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

3.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014 of the Folsom Municipal Code, a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be deemed a Level E violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012, Levels of administrative violations, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

4.    Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

D.    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

E.    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

1.    Considered as minimum requirements;

2.    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

3.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

F.    Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

G.    Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any portion there of other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 882  2 (part), 1998)

14.32.040 Administration.
A.    Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection B of Section 14.32.030. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:

1.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

2.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed, if required in Section 14.32.050(A)(3)(c) of this chapter;

3.    Certification by a California registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in Section 14.32.050(A)(3)(b); and

4.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

B.    Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The director of planning, inspections and permitting is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

C.    Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not limited to:

1.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

a.    The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and that all other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

b.    The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

c.    The proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, adversely affects means the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any point.

2.    Review and Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 14.32.030(B), Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Section 14.32.050 of this chapter.

3.    Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

a.    Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to the alteration or relocation;

b.    Submit evidence of such notification to the city, Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

c.    Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

4.    Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

a.    The certified elevation required in Section 14.32.050(A)(3)(a) (lowest floor elevations);

b.    The flood proofing certification required in Section 14.32.050(A)(3)(b) (elevation or floodproofing);

c.    The certified elevation required in Section 14.32.050(C)(3)(c) (wet floodproofing);

d.    The certified elevation required in Section 14.32.050(C)(2) (subdivision standards);

e.    The certified elevation required in Section 14.32.050(E)(1) (floodway encroachments).

5.    Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and the actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 14.32.060 of this chapter.

6.    Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 14.32.030(C) of this chapter.

D.    Appeals. The planning commission of the city of Folsom, shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Such appeal shall be filed within 10 calendar days of the decision rendered by the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 882  2 (part), 1998)

14.32.050 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
A.    Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

1.    Anchoring.

a.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

b.    All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 14.32.050(D).

2.    Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed:

a.    With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

b.    Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

c.    With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;

d.    For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit to floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of 2 openings having total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one 1 foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

3.    Elevation and flood proofing. (See Section 14.32.020 definitions for basement, lowest floor, new construction, substantial damage and substantial improvement.)

a.    Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least 2 feet above the base flood elevation as determined by this community. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a California registered professional engineer or land surveyor and verified by the chief building official for the city to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

b.    Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvements, shall either meet the standards in subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

i.    Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended in subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

ii.    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

iii.    Be certified by a California registered professional engineer or architect that standards of this subsection (A)(3)(b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

c.    All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest flow (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood-water. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

i.    Be certified by a California registered professional engineer or architect; or

ii.    Have a minimum of 2 openings having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

d.    Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the standards for manufactured home parks or subdivisions. (See subsection D of this section).

B.    Standards For Utilities.

1.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters;

2.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

C.    Standards For Subdivisions.

1.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

2.    All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a California registered professional engineer or land surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

3.    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

4.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

5.    All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood damage.

D.    Standards for Manufactured Homes.

1.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A and A1-A30 on the communitys flood insurance rate maps, on sites located outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated 2 feet above the base flood elevation and securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.

2.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A or A1-A30 on the communities flood insurance rate maps that are not subject to provisions of Section 14.32.050(D)(1) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse, and lateral movement and be elevated so that either the lower floor of the manufactured home is 2 feet above the base flood elevation or the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade.

E.    Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A or A1-30 on the communities flood insurance rate maps will either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions) or meets the permit requirements of Section 14.32.040 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 14.32.050(D)(1) of this chapter.

F.    Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection B of Section 14.32.030 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

1.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

2.    If subsection (F)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 14.32.050, Provisions for flood hazard reduction;

3.    If no floodway is identified, then a setback of 20 feet from the bank(s) of the watercourse will be established, where encroachment will be prohibited. (Ord. 882  2 (part), 1998)

14.32.060 Variance procedures.
A.    Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.

It is the duty of the planning commission for the city of Folsom, to protect its citizens from flooding. The need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built at or below the base flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

B.    Appeal Board. In passing upon requests for variances, the planning commission for the city of Folsom shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

1.    Danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2.    Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3.    Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

4.    Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5.    Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding;

6.    Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

7.    Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

8.    Safety access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

9.    Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

10.    Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

C.    Granting of Variance. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

1.    The issuance of a variance to construct a structure at or below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and

2.    Such construction at or below the base flood level increases the risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

D.    Records. The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variances actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

E.    Conditions for Variances.

1.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed at or below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 14.32.040 and 14.32.050 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

2.    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (as defined in Section 14.32.020 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

3.    Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

4.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard to afford relief. Minimum necessary means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the planning commission need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the planning commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter.

5.    Variances shall only be issued upon a:

a.    Showing of good and sufficient cause;

b.    Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship (as defined in Section 14.32.030 of this chapter) to the applicant; and

c.    Determine that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 14.32.020 of this chapter; see Public safety and nuisance), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 14.32.020 of this chapter) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

6.    Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Section 14.32.060(E)(1) through 14.32.060(E)(5) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

7.    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 14.32.060(B) and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 882  2 (part), 1998)

Chapter 14.33
HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Sections:

14.33.100    Short title.

14.33.110    Purpose.

14.33.120    Definitions.

14.33.130    Scope.

14.33.140    Interpretation.

14.33.150    Grading plans.

14.33.160    Standards.

14.33.170    Subdivisions in hillside areas.

14.33.180    Design standards for residential subdivisions.

14.33.190    Design standards for development in hillside areas.

14.33.200    Appeals.

14.33.210    Enforcement and penalty.

14.33.100 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the hillside development standards ordinance of the city of Folsom and may be so cited. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.110 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and general welfare; to protect property against losses from erosion, ground movement and flooding; to protect significant natural features; and to provide for functional and visually pleasing development of the citys hillsides by establishing procedures and standards for the siting and design of physical improvements and site grading. The specific purposes of the hillside development standards are to:

A.    Ensure development patterns that preserve and protect the natural forms and features of hillside areas including swales, canyons, knolls, ridgelines, rock outcrops, riparian and other wildlife habitats, streambeds, vernal ponds, other water features, woodlands and significant trees;

B.    Locate and design physical improvements, including streets and other infrastructure, to minimize the need for earth movement and avoid or minimize the amount and impacts of grading;

C.    Foster development patterns to avoid or minimize the risks from erosion, fires, floods, landslides and other safety hazards;

D.    Ensure safe movement of automobiles, pedestrians and emergency vehicles and equipment to and from hillside areas with a minimum of grading;

E.    Encourage development patterns that avoid or minimize the cost to the city of installing and maintaining public infrastructure, including park and recreation facilities;

F.    Allow flexibility in the design of development projects in hillside areas to preserve significant open spaces and concentrate development in parts of properties where environmental and visual impacts would be the least severe;

G.    Establish design standards for physical improvements in hillside areas to ensure that they are compatible with the natural environment, contiguous lands and preservation of views to and from hillside areas;

H.    Establish responsibilities of the community development department and public works department to administer the hillside development standards. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.120 Definitions.
Unless otherwise apparent from the context, the following definitions shall govern the use of terms in this chapter:

Building site means the land area occupied or capable of being covered by any structures permissible under Title 17 of this code.

City means the city of Folsom.

Community development department means the community development director or his or her delegate.

Driveway means any vehicular connection between a road or street and adjacent property.

Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, dredged, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and includes the conditions resulting therefrom.

Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by a person to a new location, and includes the conditions resulting therefrom.

Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface.

Grading means any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

Grading permit means and includes an approved grading plan.

Heritage oak is as defined in Chapter 12.16 of this code (Tree Preservation).

Hillside areas means those areas within the incorporated boundaries of the city identified as hillside areas on Exhibit A, hillside areas map, of the hillside development standards ordinance, codified in this chapter. Exhibit A is on file in the city clerks office.

Hillside lots or hillside parcels means all parcels or lots which are located within hillside areas as defined in this chapter.

Impervious surface means concrete, asphalt, bricks, paving stones, swimming pools, roofs and similar features that significantly inhibit or prevent the percolation of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces do not include wood decks that are suspended over otherwise uncovered ground. Further, impervious surfaces do not include impervious surfaces beneath roof overhangs when the roof overhangs are counted as impervious surfaces.

Padded building site or terraced building site means a building site created by cutting into a hillslope and filling above the existing ground to obtain a flat area to accommodate a building foundation and other site improvements.

Parcel or lot means a unit of land of record as defined in Title 16 (Subdivisions) of this code.

Pre-grading means grading prior to issuance of a valid grading permit.

Protected tree or protected trees means a tree or trees as defined and regulated in Chapter 12.16 (Tree Preservation) of this code.

Public works department means the public works director or his or her delegate.

Residential street means local or tertiary streets and street ends, and does not include arterial or collector streets as defined in the general plan.

Site means a lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.

Slope means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. The percent of any given slope is calculated by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance.

Subdivision grading plans means grading improvement plans submitted pursuant to Chapters 16.36 (Improvements) and 16.20 (Final Subdivision MapsFive or More Parcels) prior to approval of a final subdivision map or grading plans necessary for approval of a parcel map pursuant to Chapter 16.24 (Parcel MapsFour or Less Parcels). (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.130 Scope.
A.    Except as provided for below, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the creation and development of new lots in hillside areas and to the development of existing lots in hillside areas which are of record with the Sacramento County recorder. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all proposed tentative subdivision maps, parcel maps, subdivision improvement plans and grading permits in hillside area.

B.    This chapter is in addition to, and not a substitute for, Chapter 14.29 (Grading) of this code. Except as specified in this chapter, all grading in hillside areas shall be conducted in accord with the standards, procedures and application requirements contained in Chapter 14.29 (Grading) of this code and this chapter. Further, the subdivision provisions set forth in this chapter are in addition to the requirements contained in Title 16 (Subdivisions) of this code. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.140 Interpretation.
The following provisions shall apply in administering and interpreting the hillside development standards:

A.    The guiding principle for all grading in hillside areas is to do the least grading necessary to allow reasonable development of the property in conformity with the purposes of this chapter.

B.    Hillsides can be developed without destroying the natural topography, trees, wetlands and scenic quality of the land if the subdivision of land is sensitive to the topography and natural forms.

C.    In the event of inconsistency between the hillside development standards and other city ordinances, the most restrictive shall apply.

D.    All site development and construction in a hillside area shall be consistent with required mitigation measures in any applicable certified environmental impact report (EIR). (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.150 Grading plans.
A.    Grading Permit Required. Unless exempted by Section 14.29.170 (Grading Permit Exemptions) or this section, no grading or pregrading shall take place in hillside areas unless a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Unless an engineered grading plan is required for grading pursuant to subsection D of this section, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alterations or additions to existing structures on parcels in hillside areas.

2.    Legal parcels of record in residential zoning districts which are less than 1 acre in area shall be exempt from the requirements of a grading permit pursuant to this section and Section 14.33.160 of this chapter if the parcel has improvements installed or under construction pursuant to approved subdivision improvement plans, or if municipal bonds which are secured by the parcel have been sold by the city.

3.    Legal parcels of record in commercial or industrial zoning districts shall be exempt from the requirements of a grading permit pursuant to this section and Section 14.33.160 of this chapter if a planned development permit has been approved for development of the parcel. The planned development permit, where appropriate, may be conditioned to comply with the standards for a grading permit pursuant to this chapter.

4.    If strict application of 1 or more of the design standards set forth herein would render an existing parcel unreasonably difficult to utilize, that standard or standards may be modified or waived at the discretion of the community development department, or the public works department, the planning commission or city council, depending on which body has authority over the application. Any modification or waiver shall be rendered in a written decision.

C.    Procedures for Grading Permits. Grading permits in hillside areas shall be processed pursuant to this subsection 14.33.150C.

1.    Information required pursuant to Section 14.29-.262 of this code shall be provided to the community development department, or if the proposed grading comes within the criteria of subsection D of this section, the information for engineered grading plans pursuant to subsection E of this section shall also be submitted.

2.    After review and recommendation by the community development department to the public works department, a grading plan may be approved pursuant to the procedures and standards of Chapter 14.29 without otherwise following the requirements of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the community development department finds that the proposed grading raises significant environmental issues or the public works department finds that the proposed grading raises significant engineering issues, either department may require that the standards pursuant to this chapter be followed as part of the grading permit approval.

3.    A grading plan approved pursuant to this section shall constitute a grading permit.

D.    Engineered Grading Plans for Hillside Areas. Engineered grading plans shall be submitted with all applications for permits to grade in hillside areas when any of the conditions set forth below pertain. All engineered grading plans shall be prepared by a state of California licensed engineer. Engineered grading plans for hillside areas shall be prepared pursuant to subsection E of this section.

1.    The total volume of cut and fill will exceed 500 cubic yards.

2.    Grading will require the removal of 1 or more protected trees.

3.    The public works department determines that the proposed grading raises significant engineering issues or the community development department determines that the proposed grading raises significant environmental issues.

E.    Contents of Engineered Grading Plans. Engineered grading plans required pursuant to subsection (D)(2) of this section shall, in addition to the information listed in Section 14.29.262E of this code, include the following:

1.    Horizontal scales no smaller than 1 inch = 40 feet and elevations referenced to an established point, date and name of preparer;

2.    Existing and finished grade contours at 1-foot intervals where slopes are under 20 percent, and 2-foot intervals where slopes are over 20 percent. Ninety percent of all contours shall be accurate to within one-half the contour interval. Contours should continue onto adjacent property for a minimum of 100 feet or far enough to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public works department, drainage relationships and topographic continuity between the site being graded and adjacent properties;

3.    Profiles and cross-sections sufficient to show the relationship of existing and proposed structures to existing and proposed contours;

4.    Location and drip lines of all existing protected trees. Trees planned for removal shall be clearly labeled;

5.    Locations of all existing and proposed drainageways and facilities including detailed specifications for handling drainage, minimizing erosion and sedimentation, and using existing natural site drainage to the maximum extent possible;

6.    Final landscaping plans prepared pursuant to Section 14.33.190B.

F.    Geology Report Peer Review. An engineering geologist certified by the state of California and/or a geotechnical engineer licensed by the state of California shall be retained by the city, and paid for by the applicant, to review the engineering geology report and soil engineering report submitted with the engineered grading plan. Requirements for preparation of such reports are contained in Section 14.29.262 of this code. The report requirements of this Section 14.33.150F may be waived at the discretion of the public works department if it is determined that sufficient, previously approved data exists to support an evaluation and approval of the proposed grading plan.

G.    On-Site Monitoring. The public works department shall take such actions as necessary to ensure that the proposed grading, and any conditions of approval, are strictly enforced. The public works department may retain, when necessary, a qualified civil engineer registered by the state of California, and require payment by the applicant, for full-time on-site monitoring of all grading operations to ensure that the conditions of the grading permit are strictly followed. Monitoring reports shall be kept on file in the public works department for public review. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.160 Standards.
The following standards apply to all grading permits approved pursuant to this chapter.

A.    Height of Cuts and Fills. The heights of cut and fill slopes shall be kept to the minimum necessary and shall be no higher than 15 feet unless specifically approved by the public works department. Retaining walls may be used when necessary to reduce the height of cuts and fills. When retaining walls are used, the wall material shall be selected to blend with the natural conditions of the site.

B.    Padded Building Sites. In general, foundations shall conform with the natural landforms of the site. Padded or terraced building sites shall only be permitted where the public works department finds that the land plan and engineering applications provide for access and building envelopes which conform with the existing topography of the site.

C.    Stream Setbacks. Grading near intermittent and perennial natural streams shall be subject to approval of the public works department. For the purposes of this subsection, minimum setbacks shall be as determined by the appropriate regulatory agencies such as the Department of Fish and Game and the Army Corps of Engineers, or as established in an approved environmental document. Larger setbacks may be required by the public works department to protect against flooding, preserve water quality or protect wildlife habitats.

D.    Design Standards. As applicable, grading shall conform with the design standards set forth in this chapter at Sections 14.33.180 and 14.33.190. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.170 Subdivisions in hillside areas.
A.    Preliminary Grading Plans for Tentative Subdivision and Parcel Maps. A preliminary grading plan shall be submitted with a tentative subdivision or parcel map application for all proposed subdivisions in hillside areas. The preliminary grading plan shall include the following:

1.    An exhibit or exhibits showing existing and proposed contours of property, existing and proposed evaluations at all lot corners, and grades of proposed streets and drainage facilities. Existing and proposed contours shall be drawn at 2-foot intervals where slopes are under 20 percent, and 5-foot intervals where slopes are 20 percent or greater. Where necessary to properly show flatter portions of the land, half interval contours shall be inserted and drawn in a manner to make them easily distinguishable from the whole interval contours. Ninety percent of all contours shall be accurate within one-half contour interval. Contours should continue onto adjacent property for a minimum of 100 feet or far enough to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public works department, drainage relationships and topographic continuity between the site being graded and adjacent properties. The public works department may require different contour intervals when deemed necessary to adequately portray topographic conditions. In cases where the effective use of lands to be subdivided necessitates extensive cuts and fills for streets, the proposed grading shall be clearly shown by means of both contour lines and supplementary cross-sections through such cuts and fills. The person preparing the tentative map shall indicate the source of the topographical information. In addition to the above, a diagram shall be provided that clearly identifies all proposed retaining walls and all cuts and fills that exceed 10 feet in height;

2.    Location of existing and proposed property lines;

3.    Location and widths of the streets and ways in the proposed subdivision;

4.    Location, and outline to scale of existing and proposed building sites, driveways and driveway grades; the plan shall also identify all existing fences, retaining walls, and other structures with an indication of whether or not they are to remain or be removed. Distances between existing buildings, and buildings and existing property lines shall also be shown;

5.    Approximate location of areas subject to inundation or flooding, lakes or marshes, defined wetlands, and the location, width and direction of tow of all watercourses;

6.    An evaluation of potential hydrologic, geologic and seismic hazards by a geologist registered by the state of California or an engineering geologist certified by the state of California;

7.    The outline of groves of trees and the location of all individual trees with a trunk diameter of 12 inches or greater standing within the boundaries of the subdivision, and other vegetative cover, except that individual trees need not be shown when they lie within areas shown as groves within proposed open space or conservation easements or other areas not to be developed, subject to approval of the community development department;

8.    Preliminary landscaping plans prepared pursuant to Section 14.33.190B;

9.    Such additional information as may be required by the community development department to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Planning Commission Review. Preliminary grading plans for grading in hillside areas submitted as part of a tentative subdivision or parcel map application shall be reviewed by the planning commission according to the following procedures:

1.    The preliminary grading plans required by subsection A of this section for hillside lots in residentially zoned districts shall comply with the standards of Section 14.33.160 (Grading Standards) and Section 14.33.180 (Residential Subdivisions).

2.    The public works department and the community development department shall review the preliminary grading plans, request additional information if needed, refer the plans to other staff members and consultants for comment as deemed necessary, and forward recommendations to the planning commission.

3.    The planning commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the plans application, which may be held at the same time as the hearing on the tentative subdivision or parcel map.

4.    The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary grading plans. The following findings shall be made in approving the preliminary grading plans:

a.    The proposed grading is the minimum necessary to allow use of the site; and

b.    The proposed grading will not significantly increase erosion or flooding, degrade riparian habitats or endanger the stability of the site or any adjacent properties; and

c.    The proposed grading, when completed, will be visually compatible with surrounding land; and

d.    The proposed grading preserves protected trees as defined in Chapter 12.16 on the site to the extent possible; and

e.    The proposed grading is consistent, where appropriate, with an approved CEQA document.

5.    Subdivision grading plans shall be processed as follows:

a.    Subdivision grading plans being processed prior to or with a final subdivision map or final parcel map shall be reviewed by the public works and community development departments for conformity with the approved preliminary grading plans. The public works and community development departments shall submit a report to the planning commission prior to approving the subdivision grading plans.

b.    The planning commission shall review the report and submit its comments     to the city engineer within the time limits provided in the Subdivision Map Act.

6.    Subdivision grading plans approved pursuant to this section for tentative subdivision or parcel maps shall be treated as a final grading permit. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.180 Design standards for residential subdivisions.
All applications for proposed residential subdivisions in hillside areas shall be subject to standards for new lots, residential streets, and building sites as set forth in subsections A, B, and C of this section.

A.    Standards for New Residential Subdivision Lots.

1.    Suitability of Lots for Purpose. All subdivisions shall be designed to take into account the natural qualities of the site, including steepness of terrain, location of watercourses, periodic flooding, earth movement, size, shape and other physical conditions. These elements shall be accommodated while ensuring that the sites can be developed in conformance with the height, bulk, setback and other site development limitations of Title 17 (Zoning) and/or any adopted specific plan.

2.    Lot Size. The minimum area and dimensions of all lots shall conform to the requirements of Title 17 (Zoning) for the district in which the subdivision is located, or such modifications of the lot area and dimensions as may have been approved as part of a specific plan or planned development permit. Where difficult terrain or other unusual conditions exist, the planning commission may require larger or smaller lots to accomplish the purposes set forth in this chapter. Small lots may be clustered to maximize the opportunity to preserve the natural beauty, terrain and tree cover while still allowing the density permitted by Title 17 or an adopted specific plan.

3.    Lot Depth. The average depth of any lot in hillside areas shall not exceed 3 times its width, unless a waiver from this requirement is granted by the planning commission.

4.    Lot Lines. Lot lines shall be placed to create usable building sites, permit accommodation of sites to the natural terrain and vegetation, and to afford access to the building site with a minimum of grading. To the extent possible, lot lines shall be placed so as to be compatible with contours. Where existing or proposed slopes or embankments are located between lots, the property line shall be located at the top of the slope or embankment.

5.    Lot Slope. No lots shall be created in hillside areas unless they have building sites with existing slopes of twenty percent or less, except when the planning commission finds that steeper lots are necessary to comply with the provisions of Title 17 (Zoning) and/or any adopted specific plan that the purposes of this chapter can be met by allowing lots with steeper building sites.

6.    Lot Coverage. The total amount of impervious surface, including buildings and paving, shall not exceed sixty percent of any lot in a hillside area. This limitation may be waived by the planning commission if it finds that the proposed design will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

7.    Access to Streets. The following shall apply to construction of access to streets in hillside areas:

a.    No lots shall be created unless they have at least forty feet of frontage on a public or private street meeting the minimum requirements of Title 16 (Subdivisions) of this code for pavement and right-of-way widths, and other public improvements.

b.    Lots, other than corner lots, shall not have access to more than one street.

c.    On any lot intended for residential occupancy it shall be possible to provide safe vehicular access via a private driveway, conforming to the other standards of this chapter, from the street on which the lot faces to a garage, or parking site on the lot in a location conforming with the requirements of Title 17 (Zoning). The alignment of the driveway shall not traverse slopes in excess of twenty percent. Further, no cut or fill for driveway construction shall exceed six feet in depth or height. The planning commission may allow these limits to be exceeded based on a finding that proposed design solutions will mitigate environmental and engineering problems.

d.    No private driveway shall have a grade exceeding fifteen percent. The planning commission may allow grades up to twenty percent based on the finding that the steeper grade will result in better overall development of the site consistent with the purposes of this chapter. In any case there shall be sufficient level space in front of any garage to allow for safe parking of vehicles. Furthermore, the vertical curve transition from the street to the driveway shall be designed to the satisfaction of the public works department.

e.    A maximum of four lots may share a single driveway, if the access design is recommended by both the public works department and fire department and approved by the planning commission.

B.    Standards for New Residential StreetsSubdivisions. The following shall apply to construction of new residential streets for proposed subdivisions in hillside areas:

1.    Alignment. The road pattern shall be designed to minimize grading by aligning roads and residential streets along natural ridges or valleys and existing contours.

2.    Road Width. The public works department may authorize rights-of-way and paved road widths narrower than required by the provisions of Title 16 (Subdivisions) to minimize grading when the city engineer finds narrower roads can safely handle the expected volume of traffic and the fire department finds that the narrower roads will not adversely impact access for emergency vehicles and equipment.

3.    Cul-de-Sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed five hundred feet in length; provided, however, that where turnouts or turnarounds are provided to the satisfaction of the fire department and the department finds adequate fire protection is possible, cul-de-sacs may be increased to one thousand feet in length. The cul-de-sac termination shall be as set forth in the Title 16 (Subdivisions) of this code. The planning commission may require the subdivider to improve and dedicate to the city, emergency escape routes including right-of-way and improvements from the ends of cul-de-sacs.

4.    Long and Straight Streets. Long, straight residential streets, conducive to high speed traffic and/or requiring excessive grading, shall be avoided.

5.    Grades. Grades of streets shall not be greater than twelve and one-half percent, except that the planning commission upon recommendation of the public works department may authorize grades up to fifteen percent for short portions of the street and when such grades do not adversely impact access, including emergency equipment and vehicle access, to adjacent properties in conformity with the driveway access standards of this chapter. All breaks in vertical alignment shall be as determined by the public works department according to standards of Title 16 (Subdivisions).

6.    Parking. After review and recommendation of the public works department and community development department, and where approved by the planning commission, parking bays may be substituted for on-street curbside parking.

7.    Sidewalks. The requirement for paved sidewalks may be waived in favor of pedestrian paths to reduce the need for grading and reduce the amount of impervious surface.

8.    Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be directionally shaded to reduce off-site fugitive light and glare. Streetlight standards shall not exceed thirty feet in height unless approved by the public works and community development departments.

C.    Standards for Residential Building SitesSubdivisions. The following shall apply to creation of new residential building sites for proposed subdivisions in hillside areas:

1.    Protection of Ridgelines. Whenever possible, building sites shall be created that allow for rooftops to be lower in elevation than any adjacent ridgelines.

2.    Waterway Setbacks. All development projects shall provide adequate building setbacks from intermittent and perennial natural streams. These setbacks shall be as determined by the applicable requirements of the appropriate regulatory agencies such as the Department of Fish and Game and the Army Corps of Engineers, or as established in an EIR which has been certified for the project area. Grading near intermittent and perennial natural streams shall be subject to approval. Larger setbacks may be required to protect against flooding preserve water quality or protect wildlife habitats.

3.    Emergency Access. Emergency access shall be provided to each building site. No building shall be more than one hundred fifty feet from an area where emergency equipment access is provided. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.190 Design standards for development in hillside areas.
All applications for approval of new construction in hillside areas shall be subject to design review under Chapter 17.06 of this code. Such applications shall comply with the standards in this section as well as those in Chapter 17.06 of this code. Further, they shall comply with any design guidelines established by the city council for hillside areas.

A.    Standards for New Residential Buildings.

1.    Rooflines. The rooflines of structures should be below the height of the existing tree canopy, to the extent feasible.

2.    Protection of Ridgelines. Whenever possible, structures shall be built with rooftops lower in elevation than any adjacent ridgelines. A specific setback from the ridge may be required to protect the ridgeline viewshed.

3.    Materials and Colors. Materials and colors that blend with the natural landscape shall be used for all construction in hillside areas.

4.    Nonreflective Materials. Except for window surfaces, the use of polished or reflecting exterior building materials and finishes shall be avoided. Further, windows with highly reflective treatments should be avoided and windows should be located so as to avoid highly reflective sun orientations to adjacent properties.

5.    Fire-Resistant Roof Materials. In hillside areas, all roofs shall be of Class A roof materials.

6.    Decks and Deck Supports. On downhill sites, decks should be located and designed to avoid tall and highly visible supports. Further, exposed areas under decks should be screened with lattice, or similar treatments composed of fire-resistant materials.

B.    Standards and Procedures for Landscaping Plans. All proposed subdivisions and grading permits must comply with this section.

1.    Preliminary Landscaping Plan. A preliminary landscaping plan shall be submitted to the community development department together with any tentative subdivision or parcel map application for parcels in hillside areas. The preliminary landscaping plan shall show:

a.    How existing trees, plants and rock outcrops are incorporated into the landscaping design;

b.    The location, type and size of all trees and plants to be added;

c.    Specification for irrigation and maintenance of landscaping on public lands;

d.    The location and design of landscape buffers which shall be established along all major collector, arterial and higher-capacity roads;

e.    The location and type of fencing, walls or other landscape structures. In hillside developments with natural rock outcroppings, the city encourages use of the rocks that must be moved to accommodate development in walls or other landscape features.

2.    Final Landscaping Plan. Where a preliminary landscaping plan is required pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section, a final landscaping plan shall be submitted to the community development department prior to building permit issuance. The final landscaping plan shall be in substantial conformance with the preliminary landscaping plan.

3.    Grading Permit Requirements. Where an engineered grading plan for a grading permit is required pursuant to Section 14.33.150(D), a final landscaping plan, which includes all the information required for a preliminary landscaping plan together with other information as required by the community development department, may be required with an engineered grading plan. The final landscaping plan shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied by the community development department.

4.    Use of Native Plants. Whenever practical, native landscaping materials shall be used for street trees, parks and other areas within hillside area developments. The community development department will maintain a list of plants considered native to the hillside areas.

5.    Heritage Oaks. Landscaping and irrigation around heritage oaks shall be consistent with Chapter 12.16 (Tree Preservation).

6.    Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be the minimum necessary to provide for safety for pedestrians and other nonvehicular uses around the primary building on the site. Landscaping shall be used to reduce long-range visibility of night lighting. (Ord. 1109  4, 2008: Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.200 Appeals.
Any decision of the community development department may be appealed to the planning commission at any time within ten days after the decision of the community development department is rendered. Any decision of the planning commission or the public works department may be appealed to the city council at any time within ten days after the decision of the planning commission or the public works department is rendered. Except for an appeal pursuant to Section 14.33.210(B) of this chapter, all appeals shall be made in accordance with the procedures of Section 17.60.070 (Use Permit Appeal Procedure) of this code. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

14.33.210 Enforcement and penalty.
A.    In the administration and enforcement of this chapter, any duly authorized official or employee of the city shall have authority to enter upon a premises for the purposes of investigation and inspection; provided, however, that the above-referred-to right of entry shall be exercised only during the daylight hours.

B.    A grading permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the director of public works where any of the conditions described in Section 14.29.410(A) exist. The provisions and procedures of subsections B, C and D of Section 14.29.410 shall apply to this section 14.33.210(B).

C.    In the event any person, firm or corporation performs any work in violation of this chapter or any development permit issued pursuant thereto, or fails or refuses to perform any work required by this chapter or any permit issued pursuant thereto, the same is declared to be a public nuisance, and at the discretion of the city council the city attorney is authorized to bring and prosecute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the performance of such work or, if such work has been accomplished, from maintaining the same.

D.    Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with any development permit issued hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.09 of this code. Each day, or portion thereof, during which violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 798  2 (part), 1994)

Chapter 14.34
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
Sections:

14.34.010    Purpose.

14.34.020    Applicability.

14.34.030    Definitions.

14.34.040    Solar energy system requirements.

14.34.050    Application requirementsPermit reviewInspectionUse permit.

14.34.060    Fees.

14.34.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to implement California Government Code Section 65850.5 which provides that, on or before September 30, 2015, every city, county, or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems. Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in developing an expedited permitting process, the city, county, or city and county shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The chief building official is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt such checklist. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners while expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1231  2 (part), 2015)

14.34.020 Applicability.
A.    This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

B.    Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small residential rooftop solar energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1231  2 (part), 2015)

14.34.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section:

A.    Building division means the building division of the community development department of the city of Folsom.

B.    Chief building official means the chief building official of the city of Folsom.

C.    Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following:

1.    A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

2.    A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and Section 714(c)(3) of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

3.    A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

4.    A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as regulated by the city.

D.    Solar energy system has the same meaning set forth in Sections 801.5(a)(1) and (2) of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time, and includes the following:

1.    Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

2.    Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

E.    Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1231  2 (part), 2015)

14.34.040 Solar energy system requirements.
A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city.

B.    Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C.    Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1231  2 (part), 2015)

14.34.050 Application requirementsPermit reviewInspectionUse permit.
In conjunction with the implementation of an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems, all documents required for the submission of an expedited solar system application shall be available on the city website. A standard checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review shall be made available to the public. The small residential rooftop solar energy system permit process, checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governors Office of Planning and Research.

A.    An application shall be submitted on a standard building division form and shall include the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the chief building official. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building division shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for permit issuance. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Civil Code Section 4080.

B.    Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email or facsimile is available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. However, the city is not required to accept electronic signature, in lieu of a wet signature, on application forms and other documents until the city obtains digital signature capability on all city forms.

C.    Upon confirmation by the building division that the application and supporting documentation, including payment of applicable fees, is complete and meets the requirements of the checklist, the building division shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. The building division shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit in a timely manner. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop solar energy system to the local utility providers electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.

D.    For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be conducted within two business days and may include a consolidated inspection by the building division and the fire department. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized.

E.    As provided in Government Code Section 65850.5(b), the chief building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission. Review of the application shall be limited to whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

F.    If a use permit is required, the city may deny an application for the use permit if the city makes findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined below, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact.

G.    A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact, as provided in Government Code Section 65850.5(j)(1), includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the following conditions:

1.    For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed.

2.    For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 1231  2 (part), 2015)

14.34.060 Fees.
The city council may establish, by resolution, a fee for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems consistent with Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015 and 66016 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 1231  2 (part), 2015)

Chapter 14.35
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Sections:

14.35.010    Purpose.

14.35.020    Applicability.

14.35.030    Definitions.

14.35.040    Application requirementsPermit reviewUse permit.

14.35.050    Fees.

14.35.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a process consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, whereas the chief building official shall implement an expedited administrative permit review process for electric vehicle charging stations, and implement a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited administrative permit review process and checklist may refer to the recommendations in the checklist prescribed by the most current version of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist of the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook published by the Governors Office of Planning and Research. The citys checklist shall be published on the citys website. (Ord. 1278  2 (part), 2017)

14.35.020 Applicability.
A.    This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the city.

B.    Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.

C.    Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the electric vehicle charging station permit shall not be conditioned on the approval of such a station by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. (Ord. 1278  2 (part), 2017)

14.35.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section:

A.    Building division means the building division of the community development department of the city of Folsom.

B.    Chief building official means the chief building official of the city of Folsom or his/her designee.

C.    Checklist means a checklist developed and approved by the chief building official for processing the permit application under this chapter.

D.    Electric vehicle charging station means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

E.    Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1278  2 (part), 2017)

14.35.040 Application requirementsPermit reviewUse permit.
A.    A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the application checklist shall be deemed complete by the building division and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the chief building official that the permit application and supporting documents are complete and meet the requirements of the application checklist, and that the application is consistent with all applicable laws, the chief building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the city. If the chief building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

B.    Review of the application to install an electric vehicle charging station shall be limited to the chief building officials review of whether it meets all health and safety requirements of local, state and federal law.

C.    If the chief building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit. (Ord. 1278  2 (part), 2017)

14.35.050 Fees.
The city council may establish, by resolution, an application processing fee for the permitting of electrical vehicle charging stations. (Ord. 1278  2 (part), 2017)

Title 15
(RESERVED)
Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters:

16.04    General Provisions

16.08    Definitions and Responsibilities

16.12    Maps Required

16.16    Tentative Subdivision MapsFive or More Parcels

16.20    Final Subdivision MapsFive or More Parcels

16.24    Parcel MapsFour or Less Parcels

16.28    Vesting Tentative Maps

16.32    Dedications, Reservations and Development Fees

16.36    Improvements

16.40    Reversions to Acreage

16.44    Parcel Mergers and Unmergers

16.48    Correction and Amendment of Maps

16.52    Enforcement

16.56    Landscaping and Lighting District Advisory Committee

16.60    Deferral or Waiver of Certain Residential Development Fees

16.70    Studio Apartment Fees

16.80    Temporary Deferral of Development Impact Fees

Chapter 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.04.010    Citation and authority.

16.04.020    Purpose.

16.04.030    Consistency

16.04.040    Application.

16.04.050    Exceptions.

16.04.060    Modification of requirements.

16.04.070    Fees and deposits.

16.04.010 Citation and authority.
This title is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410 et seq. of the Government Code and may be cited as the subdivision ordinance of the City of Folsom. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.04.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps provided by the Subdivision Map Act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the city regarding the maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this title are determined to be necessary to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare; to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection and proper use of land; and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and other services in the city. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.04.030 Consistency.
A.    No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is inconsistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs of the zoning code, general plan or any applicable specific plan of the city.

B.    The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and any applicable specific plan shall determine, together with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities, park and recreation facilities, open space, landscaping, local transit facilities, bicycle facilities, easements and other improvements and public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.04.040 Application.
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all or parts of subdivisions within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. All subdivisions and any part thereof lying within the city shall be made and all subdivision maps shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for in this title. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.04.050 Exceptions.
This title shall not apply to:

A.    The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobilehome parks or trailer parks;

B.    Mineral, oil or gas leases;

C.    Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the State Health and Safety Code;

D.    A lot line adjustment between 2 or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from 1 parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created; provided that, subject to the provisions of Section 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act, the lot line adjustment is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Section 16.12.030C;

E.    Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

F.    Subject to the requirements of Sections 66412(g) and 66412(h) of the Subdivision Map Act, the conversion of a community apartment project or a stock cooperative to a condominium;

G.    The leasing of, or the granting of an easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device on the land, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the city;

H.    The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city ordinances regulating design and improvements;

I.    The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel;

J.    The construction, financing or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Section 65852.2 of the Government Code; but this title shall apply to the sale or transfer, but not leasing of those units;

K.    Leasing for agricultural purposes, cultivation of food or fiber and grazing or pasturing of livestock;

L.    Subdivisions of 4 parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than 100 square feet;

M.    Any other mandatory exceptions to the applicability of the Subdivision Map Act as provided in the Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and 66412.5). (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.04.060 Modification of requirements.
Whenever, in the opinion of the planning commission or the city council, the land involved in any division is of a size or shape, or is subject to title limitations of record, or is affected by topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to a use that is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this title, the planning commission or the city council may make modifications as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.04.070 Fees and deposits.
All persons submitting applications for the approval of maps or for other approvals as required by this title shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by this title and by the city councils resolution or resolutions establishing applicable fees and deposits. Said resolution or resolutions are incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.08
DEFINITIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Sections:

16.08.010    Definitions.

16.08.020    Responsibilities.

16.08.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined in this chapter as set forth below. All definitions provided in Chapter 16.04 of this code and all definitions provided in the Subdivision Map Act shall also be applicable to this title and said definitions are incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth in this chapter.

1.    Accessory building or structure means a detached subordinate building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot, or to the use of the land.

2.    Acreage means any parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this section, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously or where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage.

3.    Advisory agency means the planning commission, that has the designated authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove maps.

4.    Alley means a passage or way open to public travel affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots not intended for general traffic circulation.

5.    Area of inundation means all areas within the city shown on the United States flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the city of Folsom as being within the area subject to at least a 1 percent chance of flooding in any 1 year.

6.    Arterial roads (or major streets) means a major street which has the purpose of connecting neighborhoods within the city and the city with surrounding communities. Arterials would normally define the boundaries of neighborhoods, not provide internal access to a neighborhood.

7.    Block means the area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.

8.    Business and Professions Code means the Business and Professions Code of the state of California.

9.    City council means the city council of the city of Folsom.

10.    City engineer means the city engineer of the city of Folsom.

11.    City street means any duly dedicated street, avenue, or the like which the city has accepted and regularly maintains, or which the County duly accepted and regularly maintained prior to the incorporation of the city, or upon which public funds have been expended for improvements or rights-of-way used by the public generally.

12.    Collector (or secondary) street means a street, intermediate in importance between a local street and an arterial road, which has the purpose of routing traffic from local streets within a neighborhood to an arterial road. Collector streets would not normally serve as through roads for more than 1 area, but would circulate throughout a neighborhood.

13.    Community apartment project shall be defined as provided in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code.

14.    Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

15.    Construction means design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, actual construction and inspections.

16.    Conversion means the creation of a separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial buildings.

17.    Cul-de-sac means a street open at 1 end, which has a vehicular turnaround at the opposite end.

18.    Day means a calendar day.

19.    Department means the community development department.

20.    Design (of the subdivision) means:

a.    Street alignments, grades and widths;

b.    Drainage, water, sewer and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades;

c.    Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

d.    Fire roads and fire breaks;

e.    Lot size and configuration;

f.    Vehicular, bicycle and public transit access;

g.    Grading;

h.    Land to be dedicated for park, recreation or open space purposes;

i.    Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of the general plan or any applicable specific plan.

21.    Development means the uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it and all alterations of the land and construction incident thereto.

22.    Dwelling means a building designed for and/or occupied by 1 or more persons of a family.

23.    Easement means an easement dedicated to the city, which shall be continuing and irrevocable unless formally abandoned by the city and any other easement whether owned by a public entity, public utility or private party.

24.    Environmental impact report (EIR) means a detailed statement prepared pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), State Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq., and state and city CEQA guidelines promulgated pursuant thereto, describing and analyzing the significant environmental effects of a project and discussing ways to mitigate or avoid the effects.

25.    Expressway means a street which has the purpose of carrying cross-town traffic from other communities or between neighborhoods within the city. An expressway may contain some grade-separated intersections, but this type of road would be mainly a surface street. Expressways should be located to allow for controlled intersections spaced at 1/2-mile intervals or more. Roads should intersect an expressway.

26.    Final map means a map showing a subdivision of 5 or more parcels for which a tentative and final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder.

27.    Flag lot means a lot which has a narrow strip of land abutting the street and expands into a larger area. A lot shall not be considered a flag lot if the frontage, at the setback line, meets the minimum parcel width.

28.    Frontage road means a local street auxiliary to, and located adjacent to the side of a major road for service to abutting property and control of access.

29.    General plan means the general plan of the city of Folsom, adopted October 31, 1988, and all amendments thereto.

30.    Government code means the Government Code of the state of California.

31.    Greenbelt means a strip of land reserved for open space or parkland between 2 developed areas, often providing pedestrian or bicycle connections between the developed areas.

32.    Hillside Area (Reserved)

33.    Improvement means streets, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, utilities, landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and acceptance of the final map thereof. Improvement shall also mean other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by or by a combination of, the subdivider, public agencies, private utilities, or any other entity approved by the city, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan, or any applicable specific plan. Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications, where applicable.

34.    Local (or tertiary) street means a street which has the purpose of serving a portion of a neighborhood and routing traffic to a collector street.

35.    Lot or parcel means a unit or portion of land separate from other units or portions by description, as on a final map or parcel map, or by such other map approved by the county or by the city under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of city ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. In general, a lot or parcel shall not have a depth that exceeds 3 times the width.

36.    Lot line adjustment means a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustment where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created as approved by the planning commission pursuant to Section 16.12.030 C.

37.    Major thoroughfare means an expressway or arterial street as designated in the transportation and circulation element of the general plan, or any applicable specific plan, whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system.

38.    Manager means the city manager of the city of Folsom.

39.    Merger means the joining of 2 or more contiguous parcels of land under 1 ownership into 1 parcel.

40.    Mobile home means a structure as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code which is located within a mobile home park.

41.    Multiple dwelling means a building of permanent character, placed in a permanent location, which is planned, designated or used for residential purposes, for 3 or more families living independently of each other in independent dwelling units.

42.    Off-site improvement means any public improvement installed in, over, under or upon the public streets or right-of-ways outside the perimeter of a subdivision.

43.    Owner means any person or persons having proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.

44.    Parcel map means a map showing a subdivision of 4 or less parcels as required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder.

45.    Parks and recreation commission means the parks and recreation commission of the city of Folsom.

46.    Parks and recreation element means the parks and recreation element of the city of Folsom, adopted October 31, 1988, and all amendments thereto.

47.    Parks and recreation master plan means the parks and recreation master plan of the city of Folsom, adopted November 20, 1989, and all amendments thereto.

48.    Peripheral street means an existing street whose right-of-way is contiguous to the exterior boundary of a subdivision.

49.    Private street means any street, accessway or the like, lying in whole or in part within a subdivision for which dedication and ownership is privately held and is utilized as access to a development. Private streets shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications.

50.    Remainder means that portion of an existing parcel which is not designated on the required map as part of the subdivision. The remainder shall not be considered as part of the subdivision but shall be shown on the required map as part of the area surrounding the subdivision. A remainder of 5 acres or more need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder.

51.    Single-family dwelling means a detached building of permanent character, placed in a permanent location, which is planned, designed or used as a residence for one family only, living independently of other families or persons.

52.    Specific plan means a tool for detailed design and implementation of a defined portion of the area covered by the general plan. A specific plan may include all detailed regulations, conditions, programs and/or proposed legislation which may be necessary or convenient for the systematic implementation of any general plan element(s) or a portion thereof.

53.    Standard engineering specifications means those standard subdivision improvement plans and specifications as prepared and/or approved by the public works director.

54.    Stock cooperative shall be defined as provided in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code.

55.    Street ends (dead end streets, etc.) means a street which is limited in length and has the purpose of serving only a few residences.

56.    Subdivider means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for oneself or for others. Employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not subdividers.

57.    Subdivision means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the State Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code and the conversion of 5 or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. Subdivision includes any division of land by gift or inheritance, but excludes a division for probate homestead. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels.

58.    Subdivision map act means Government Code Sections 66410 et seq., inclusive.

59.    Tentative map means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. Tentative map shall include a tentative map prepared in connection with a parcel map pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.24 of this title.

60.    Vesting tentative map shall be defined as provided in Section 16.28.030 A. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.08.020 Responsibilities.
A.    City Attorney. The city attorneys responsibilities shall include approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and security and all governing documents for a common interest development.

B.    City Council. The city council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative and final maps and in the approval of improvement agreements for subdivisions of 5 or more parcels. The city council shall also have final jurisdiction in the approval, conditional approval or denial of reversions to acreage. The city council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps and vesting tentative maps.

C.    Planning Commission. The planning commissions responsibilities shall include:

1.    Recommendations to the city council for the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps for subdivisions of 5 or more parcels;

2.    The approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative parcel maps for subdivisions of 4 or less parcels;

3.    The approval of lot line adjustments, mergers and certificates of compliance;

4.    Granting authorization to the city engineer for the acceptance of:

a.    Dedications for subdivisions of 4 or less parcels,

b.    Off-site dedications lying outside a subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed;

5.    Determinations of violations of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title;

6.    The approval of proposed street names.

D.    City Engineer. The city engineers responsibilities shall include:

1.    Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications;

2.    Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title;

3.    The processing and certification of final maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps and the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans;

4.    Examining and certifying that final maps and parcel maps are in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map;

5.    The approval as to form of subdivision improvement agreements;

6.    The inspection, approval and acceptance of subdivision improvements.

E.    Community Development Department. The community development departments responsibilities shall include the processing of tentative maps as to conformity with the objectives, policies, general land use and programs of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan. The department shall also be responsible for the conformity with the California Environmental Quality Act and local environmental regulations.

F.    Parks and Recreation Commission. The parks and recreation commissions responsibilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.32.040. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.12
MAPS REQUIRED
Sections:

16.12.010    General.

16.12.020    Division of landFive or more parcels.

16.12.030    Division of landFour or less parcels.

16.12.040    Public notice requirements for lot line adjustments.

16.12.050    Appeals of lot line adjustments.

16.12.010 General.
For the purpose of this title, the specific requirements for tentative, final and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.12.020 Division of landFive or more parcels.
A.    A tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land when determined by the department that such land is proposed to be divided into 5 or more parcels, 5 or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing 5 or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing 5 or more dwelling units, except where:

1.    The land before division contains less than 5 acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or

2.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or

3.    The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or

4.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than 1/4 of a 1/4 section.

B.    A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in the above, unless waived by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.24.080 of this title. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.12.030 Division of landFour or less parcels.
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into 4 or less parcels, except that maps shall not be required for:

A.    Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right- of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Section 230 of the State Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days notice in writing; or

B.    Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made by the department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map; or

C.    Lot line adjustments, provided:

1.    No additional parcels or building sites are created,

2.    The resulting parcels conform to Title 17 and Title 14 of this code,

3.    The lot line adjustment is approved by the planning director in accordance with public notice provisions of Section 16.12.040. The planning director may impose conditions or exactions on approval of a lot line adjustment to conform to Title 17 and Title 14 of this code or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. The lot line adjustment shall be effected in a deed or record of survey which shall be recorded at the applicants expense;

D.    Parcel maps waived by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.24.080. (Ord. 821  1, 1995; Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.12.040 Public notice requirements for lot line adjustments.
At least 10 days prior to the date of proposed action by the planning director, the planning department shall prepare a public notice of the proposed action and distribute this notice to all property owners abutting the subject properties. Additional public notice may be given at the discretion of the planning director. The public notice shall state the date of the proposed action, and state that any comments on the proposed action must be submitted to the planning director prior to this date. (Ord. 821  2, 1995)

16.12.050 Appeals of lot line adjustments.
Appeals of the planning directors action with respect to lot line adjustments shall be made to the planning commission within 10 days after the decision. The appellant shall file the appeal in writing with the planning director, and shall pay any applicable fee as established by the city council. The planning commission shall consider the appeal within 30 days after the date of filing of the appeal, unless the applicant consents to a continuance. The appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given according to Section 16.16.070. The planning commission may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning director and may make any findings which are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Ord. 821  3, 1995)

Chapter 16.16
TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPSFIVE OR MORE PARCELS
Sections:

16.16.010    General.

16.16.020    Form and contents.

16.16.030    Accompanying data and reports.

16.16.040    Geotechnical reports.

16.16.050    Street names.

16.16.060    Department review.

16.16.070    Planning commission action.

16.16.080    City council action.

16.16.090    Extension of time for planning commission or city council action.

16.16.100    Appeals of planning commission action.

16.16.110    Expiration.

16.16.120    Extensions.

16.16.130    Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

16.16.010 General.
A.    The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative maps for 5 or more parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.

B.    An application for approval of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter shall not be submitted nor accepted for filing unless the subdivider has previously obtained or contemporaneously seeks all other necessary discretionary city approvals for the developments that are required pursuant to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.020 Form and contents.
The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall contain not less than the following:

A.    A title which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name and type of subdivision;

B.    Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the map, including registration or license number;

C.    Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision;

D.    The names and numbers of adjacent subdivisions and the names of owners of adjacent unplatted land;

E.    Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval and source and date of existing contours;

F.    The total number of lots and gross and net acreage of the subdivision;

G.    A statement of present zoning and of existing and proposed uses of the property as well as any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future;

H.    A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroads and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community;

I.    Existing topography and zoning of the proposed site and at least 100 feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to:

1.    Existing contours at 2-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is of 20 percent or less and at not less than 5-foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal or greater than 20 percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than 150 feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines,

2.    Type, circumference and drip line of existing trees with a trunk diameter of 4 inches or more. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated. Requirements of City Ordinance No. 592, as codified in Chapter 12.16, shall be satisfied,

3.    The location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked,

4.    The approximate location of all areas of potential stormwater overflow; the location, width and direction of flow of each water course; and the flood zone designation as indicated on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), as defined in Chapter 14.32 of this code,

5.    The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways,

6.    The widths, location and identity of all existing easements,

7.    The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, stormdrains and underground gas lines and facilities. The approximate slope of existing sewers and stormdrains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated;

J.    Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to:

1.    The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated,

2.    The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs,

3.    The location, width and purpose of all easements,

4.    The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than 4 degrees,

5.    The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale, the number of each lot and the elevation of adjacent parcels,

6.    For all lots with a slope of 20 percent or greater, specific locations of building envelopes and driveways shall be shown,

7.    Proposed contours at 2-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is 20 percent or less and not at less than 5-foot intervals for existing ground slopes of greater than 20 percent. A separate grading plan may be submitted,

8.    Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use,

9.    Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space,

10.    The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, stormdrains and underground gas lines and facilities. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and stormdrains shall be indicated. The proposed sorting of stormwater runoff generated by a 100-year flood shall also be indicated,

11.    A statement as to the intention of the subdivider in regard to slope planting and erosion control,

12.    Such other improvements or types of improvements the installation of which is necessary to ensure consistency with/or implementation of, the general plan, or any applicable specific plan;

K.    The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map;

L.    The size of each sheet shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of 1 inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than 1 inch equals one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When 4 or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. All printing or lettering on the map shall be of 1/8 inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings;

M.    If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units or phases, the proposed units or phases and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown;

N.    The subdivider shall specify any deviation from city standards and the justification for such deviation;

O.    The department may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed necessary by the department to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this title;

P.    Upon the written request of the subdivider, the department may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the department determines that the type of subdivision does not justify compliance with these requirements, or if the department determines that other circumstances justify a waiver. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.030 Accompanying data and reports.
A.    The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data and reports:

1.    Street Names. A list of proposed street names for any unnamed street or alley for review by the planning commission;

2.    Soils Report. A preliminary soils report prepared in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 70 (Excavation and Grading) of the Uniform Building Code (adopted by reference by Title 14 of this code) and Section 16.16.040 shall be submitted. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision;

3.    Grading Plan. A preliminary grading plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 70 (Excavation and Grading) of the Uniform Building Code (adopted by reference by Title 14 of this code) shall be submitted;

4.    Title Report. A preliminary title report, acceptable to the department, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map;

5.    School Site/Facilities. The subdivider shall obtain from the school district or districts involved their intention, in writing, concerning and the necessity for a school site and/or temporary and/or permanent school facilities, if any, within the subdivision and shall present this information to the department prior to the consideration of the tentative map by the planning commission;

6.    Environmental Review. Information shall be submitted as required by the department to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in accordance with CEQA. The subdivider shall deposit and pay all fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents;

7.    Preliminary Engineering Calculations. Information shall be submitted as required by the standard engineering specifications to demonstrate the adequacy of the design of the proposed improvements. Such information shall include design parameters and engineering calculations;

8.    Phasing. If the subdivider plans to file multiple final maps on the tentative map, he shall submit a written notice to this effect to the community development director;

9.    Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the department.

B.    Subdivision 1 of subsection A of this section shall not apply to condominium conversions. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.040 Geotechnical reports.
A.    Three copies of a preliminary engineers soils report and engineering geology report, prepared by a civil engineer and engineering geologist registered in the state and based upon adequate borings, shall be submitted to the city engineer for subdivisions of 5 or more parcels. The city engineer may require that such reports be submitted for subdivisions of 4 or less parcels.

B.    A preliminary soils and/or geology report may be waived by the city engineer provided the city engineer finds that, due to the knowledge the city has as to the soil and geologic conditions in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. Such knowledge would include the nature, distribution and strength of the existing soils and the necessary grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures and the geology of the site and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.

C.    If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils and geology reports indicate, the presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if corrective measures are not taken, could lead to structural defects, a soils and/or geologic investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the city engineer. Such soils and/or geologic investigation shall be done by a civil engineer and/or geologist registered in the state who shall recommend regarding the adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading and the effect of the soil or geologic conditions on the proposed development. The city may approve the subdivision, or portion thereof, where soils or geologic problems exist if the city determines that the recommended actions provide for procedures and design criteria for corrective measures as necessary covering the structures and adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading. A condition of the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the grading plans and/or specifications and, if necessary, the plans and specifications for the construction of each structure.

D.    Where preliminary soils and/or geology reports are prepared, final reports shall be submitted prior to the acceptance of the improvement indicating the specific actions taken pursuant to the preliminary report recommendations. Such reports shall have sufficient field data submitted to indicate full compliance with the preliminary or subsequent progress report recommendations as they were applied to specific areas or improvements.

E.    Geotechnical reports must also comply with applicable city administrative policies and standards. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.050 Street names.
Each street which is to be dedicated which is a continuation of, or approximately the continuation of, any existing dedicated street shall be shown on the tentative map and shall be given the same name as such existing street. The proposed name of each other street shown on the tentative map shall be submitted to the city for approval in accordance with current city street naming policies prepared by the community development department. The approved street name shall be shown on the final map. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.060 Department review.
The tentative map application shall be filed with the department. The application shall be determined by the department to be complete only when the form and contents of the tentative map conform to the requirements of Section 16.16.020 and when all accompanying data and reports, as required by Section 16.16.030, and all fees and/or deposits as required by Section 16.04.070 have been submitted and accepted by the department. The subdivider shall file with the department the number of tentative maps the community development director may deem necessary. The department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies and utilities which may, in turn, forward to the department their findings and recommendations. Public agencies and utilities shall certify that the subdivision can be adequately served. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.070 Planning commission action.
A.    Notice of Public Hearings. Upon receipt of a complete tentative map application, the department shall prepare a report with recommendations. The department shall set the matter for public hearing before the planning commission. A copy of the department report shall be forwarded to the subdivider at least 7 days prior to the public hearing. At least 10 days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the time, date and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved. The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city. In addition to notice by publication, the department shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to the subdivider, the owner of the subject real property, if different from the subdivider and to all persons, including businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 300 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed application. The department shall also give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to each agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the subdivision, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. A proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project shall be noticed in accordance with Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. In the event that the proposed application has been submitted by a person other than the property owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city shall also give notice by mail or delivery to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. In addition, notice shall be given by mail or personal delivery to any person who has filed a written request with the city. The request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of the calendar year. The department may give such other notice that it deems necessary or advisable. Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in this chapter.

B.    Action. The planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map and the department shall report the decision of the planning commission to the city council and the subdivider within 50 days after the tentative map application has been determined by the department to be complete. The department shall provide the subdivider with a written determination of completion. If an environmental impact report is prepared, the decision shall be made 45 days after certification of the environmental impact report.

C.    Approval. The tentative map may be recommended for approval or conditional approval by the planning commission if it finds that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan and all applicable provisions of this code. The planning commission may require as a condition of its recommendation of approval that the payment by the subdivider of all development fees required to be paid at the time of the application for, or issuance of, a building permit or other similar permit shall be made at the rate for such fees in effect at the time of such application or issuance. The planning commission may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the departments report. The planning commission may add additional requirements as a condition of its recommendation of approval. If no action is taken by the planning commission within the time limits specified in this chapter, the tentative map, as filed, shall be deemed to be recommended for approval approved insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify or state his or her approval.

D.    Denial. The tentative map may be recommended for denial by the planning commission on any of the grounds provided by the Subdivision Map Act or this code. The planning commission shall recommended denial of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings:

1.    That the proposed map or the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or other applicable provisions of this code;

2.    That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

3.    That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

4.    That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission may approve such a tentative map if an EIR was prepared with respect to the project and a finding was made pursuant to Section 21081(c) of CEQA that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the EIR;

5.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health or safety problems;

6.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the planning commission may recommend for approval or approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to the planning commission to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

7.    Subject to Section 66474.4 of the Subdivision Map Act, that the land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (commencing with Section 51200 of the Government Code) and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.080 City council action.
Upon recommending approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map, the planning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council for action. The city council, shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.16.070. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission. The public hearing shall be scheduled at the next regular meeting of the city council following the receipt of the planning commission recommendation and shall be held within 30 days thereafter. The city council may add, modify or delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the tentative map conforms to the Subdivision Map Act and this Code. The city council may deny the tentative map on any of the grounds contained in Section 16.16.070. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the tentative map shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last recommended for approval, or conditional approval by the planning commission insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.090 Extension of time for planning commission or city council action.
Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map application may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or the city council. A waiver of applicable time limits may be required to permit concurrent processing of related project approvals or environmental review on the same development project. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.100 Appeals of planning commission action.
The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by any planning commission action with respect to the tentative map may, within 10 days after the decision, file an appeal in writing with the city clerk. The city council shall consider the appeal within 30 days after the date of filing of the appeal, unless the appellant consents to a continuance. Within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. The appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given according to Section 16.16.070. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission. The city council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make any findings which are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.110 Expiration.
A.    The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 24 months from its approval by the city council. However, if in connection with a tentative map for which the filing of multiple final maps is authorized pursuant to Section 16.20.020, the subdivider is made subject to a requirement of $100,000 or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, or if the tentative map is on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Section 65864 et seq. of the Government Code, then the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with Section 66452.6 (a) of the Subdivision Map Act. An extension to the expiration date may also be approved as provided in Section 16.16.120.

B.    The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. After service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the community development director, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within 40 days after receiving the request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to 5 years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant and upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, within 10 days, render its decision.

C.    The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to Section 66452.6(b) of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.120 Extensions.
A.    Request by Subdivider. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the department. The application shall be filed before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension.

B.    Planning Commission Action. The department shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the planning commission for approval, conditional approval or denial at a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting occurring within 60 days after the application is filed. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.16.070. A copy of the departments report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the planning commission meeting on the extension. In recommending approval, conditional approval or denial of the request for extension, the planning commission shall make findings supporting its decision, including findings with respect to the potential impact of any increases in applicable development fees which have occurred since the date of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map.

C.    City Council Action. Upon recommending approval, conditional approval or denial the request for extension the planning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council for action. The city council shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.16.070. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission.

D.    Time Limit of Extensions. The time at which the tentative map expires may be extended by the planning commission for a period not exceeding a total of 3 years.

E.    Appeal of Extension. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal any action of the planning commission on the extension to the city council in accordance with Section 16.16.100, except that any such appeal shall be filed 10 days after the action by the planning commission. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in Section 16.16.100, the extension shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as recommended by the planning commission, insofar as the tentative map complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.16.130 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.
A.    Minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval may be approved by the department upon application by the subdivider or on the departments own initiative, provided:

1.    No lots, units or building sites or structures are added;

2.    Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval;

3.    There are no resulting violations of this code or the Subdivision Map Act;

4.    No condition of approval of a tentative map is waived or amended.

B.    The amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the community development director. Amendments to the tentative map conditions of approval which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, shall be presented to the planning commission for its approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this chapter. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.20
FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPSFIVE OR MORE PARCELS
Sections:

16.20.010    General.

16.20.020    Phasing.

16.20.030    Survey required.

16.20.040    Form.

16.20.050    Contents.

16.20.060    Preliminary submittal for city approval.

16.20.070    Review by city engineer.

16.20.080    Approval by city engineer.

16.20.090    Approval by city council.

16.20.100    Denial by city council.

16.20.110    Filing with the county recorder.

16.20.010 General.
A.    The form, contents, accompanying data and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.

B.    The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.020 Phasing.
A.    Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if the subdivider, at the time the tentative map application is filed, notifies the community development director in writing of the subdividers intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map in accordance with Section 16.16.030A8. In providing the notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. The planning commission shall approve the sequence of map approvals. After filing of the tentative map application, the community development director, the city engineer and the subdivider shall concur in the filing of multiple final maps.

B.    The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part or unit of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.030 Survey required.
A.    An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerline of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.

B.    At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least 1 exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.040 Form.
The form of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

A.    The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

B.    The size of each sheet shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of 1 inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When 4 or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. All printing or lettering on the map shall be of 1/8 inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings. The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.050 Contents.
The contents of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

A.    Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data;

B.    Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following shall appear in the title, City of Folsom, Sacramento County;

C.    Scale, North Point and Basis of Hearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings based on Zone II of the California Coordinates and the equation of the bearing to true north. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the city engineer;

D.    Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerline, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius and total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map;

E.    Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at the following locations; or on city engineer approved offsets:

1.    The intersection of street centerline,

2.    Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerline,

3.    At other locations as may be required by the city engineer;

F.    Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number 1 in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on 1 sheet of the final map, unless approved by the city engineer;

G.    Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision; and if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last record owner;

H.    City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated;

I.    Street Names. The names of all streets, alleys or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown;

J.    Easements and Dedications.

1.    Easements and dedications for roads or streets, trails, bicycle facilities, parks and recreation facilities, open space, landscaping, paths, alleys, utilities, local transit facilities, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency and the use shall be specified on the map,

2.    All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorders serial number and date, or book and page of official records,

3.    Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created,

4.    The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the city engineer;

K.    Greenbelt Areas. Greenbelt areas may be shown, subject to the approval of the city. Public greenbelt areas shall be dedicated in fee unless otherwise specified in the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. Private greenbelt areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise specified in the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map;

L.    Building Setback Line. Approved building setback lines shall be shown;

M.    Building Envelope. For all lots with a slope of 20 percent or greater, specific location of building envelopes and driveways shall be shown;

N.    Areas Subject to Inundation. A statement about any lot or lots within the subdivision being subject to inundation shall be shown on the map. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.060 Preliminary submittal for city approval.
The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map along with the appropriate fees to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer and, where applicable, the city attorney:

A.    Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Section 16.36.070;

B.    Soils Report. A soils report prepared in accordance with Section 16.16.030 and Chapter 70 (Excavation and Grading) of the Uniform Building Code (adopted by reference by Title 14 of this code);

C.    Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map;

D.    Tax Certificate. A certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payments of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county;

E.    Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deeds for off-site easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility;

F.    Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerline and monument lines;

G.    Hydraulic and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all stormdrains and flood flow;

H.    Governing Documents. The submittal of the final map or parcel map for a common interest development within the meaning of Sections 1350 et seq. of the State Civil Code shall include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code. The submittal of the final map or parcel map for all subdivisions other than a common interest development shall include any declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;

I.    Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided and all public easements being offered for dedication and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary;

J.    Improvement Agreement. In the event sewer, water, drainage, grading, paving or other improvements required pursuant to Section 16.36.020 have not been completed prior to the presentation of the final map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.36.080 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.36.090;

K.    Liability Agreement and Insurance. A hold-harm-less agreement obligating the subdivider to hold the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider and/or the subdividers subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. A certificate of insurance reporting to the city the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdividers own liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider or his subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as a named insured. The agreement and certificate required by this subsection shall be subject to prior review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;

L.    Deed Restrictions. One copy of the deed restrictions shall be submitted to the city engineer at the time of final map submission;

M.    Building Envelope. For all lots with a slope of 20 percent or greater, specific locations of building envelopes and driveways shall be shown;

N.    Any additional data, reports or information as required by the city engineer or city attorney. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.070 Review by city engineer.
The city engineer shall review the final map along with the appropriate fees and any other required information and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until acceptable to the city engineer. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.080 Approval by city engineer.
The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the map and any duplicates per county requirements, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on the blueline duplicate. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the city clerk. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.090 Approval by city council.
A.    The final map approved by the city engineer as complying with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be filed with the city council for approval after all required certificates have been signed. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date on which the city clerk receives the map. The city council shall consider the final map for approval at its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map. Before approving the final map, the city council shall consider approval of the subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.36.080.

B.    If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the mayor to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. At the time the city council approves the final map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement or reject any offer of dedication. The city engineer shall certify on the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, trails, bicycle facilities, open space easements, landscaping easements, parks and recreation facilities, local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, trails, bicycle facilities, open space easements, landscaping easements, parks and recreation facilities, local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

C.    The city may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

D.    If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the city council shall make its recommended corrections, instruct the city engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted.

E.    The city council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. In such a case, the city shall follow the procedure according to Section 16.36.020 J. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.100 Denial by city council.
The city council shall not deny approval of the final map if the city has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the city council finds that the final map is in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan, any applicable specific plan and the tentative map and all conditions thereof. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.20.110 Filing with the county recorder.
Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the county recorder. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.24
PARCEL MAPSFOUR OR LESS PARCELS
Sections:

16.24.010    General.

16.24.020    Form and contents, accompanying data and reports.

16.24.030    Department review.

16.24.040    Planning commission action.

16.24.050    Appeals of planning commission action.

16.24.060    Expiration and extensions.

16.24.070    Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

16.24.080    Waiver of parcel map requirements and waiver of tentative and final maps for condominium project on single parcel.

16.24.090    Final parcel maps.

16.24.010 General.
The form and contents, submittal and approval of applications for tentative maps for 4 or less parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.020 Form and contents, accompanying data and reports.
The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of Section 16.16.020 and the accompanying data reports shall comply with and be consistent with Section 16.16.030 through 16.16.050, inclusive. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.030 Department review.
The tentative map application shall be filed with the department for review in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.060. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.040 Planning commission action.
A.    Upon receipt of a tentative map application that is determined by the department to be complete, the department shall prepare a report and set the matter for a public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.070.

B.    At the conclusion of the hearing or any continuance thereof, the planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map. The planning commission shall make findings supporting its action in accordance with the provision of Section 16.16.070 C and D. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.050 Appeals of planning commission action.
Appeals of the planning commission action with respect to the tentative map shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.100. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.060 Expiration and extensions.
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 24 months from its approval by the planning commission or city council, whichever occurs last, unless the expiration date is extended in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.110. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date for action in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.120. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request for an extension. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal the action of the planning commission to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.100. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.070 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval shall be made in accordance with Section 16.16.130; provided that amendments which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, shall be presented to the planning commission for its approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this chapter. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.080 Waiver of parcel map requirements and waiver of tentative and final maps for condominium project on single parcel.
A.    The planning commission may, in its discretion, waive all or part of the requirements for a tentative and parcel map for the following:

1.    Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees;

2.    Division of real property resulting from the conveyance of land or any interest therein to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.;

3.    Division of real property which has been merged pursuant to this title, the Subdivision Map Act or any prior ordinance of the city;

4.    Construction of a condominium project on a single parcel. The planning commission may also, in its discretion, waive the requirement for a tentative and final map for construction of a condominium project on a single parcel.

B.    The planning commission shall make a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan.

C.    Upon the waiver of the parcel map requirement, or the tentative and final map requirement, pursuant to this section, the city engineer shall file with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided, in accordance with Section 16.52.030 and a plat map showing the division. The certificate shall include a certificate by the county tax collector in accordance with Section 16.20.060.

D.    A waiver by the planning commission may be conditioned to provide for, among other things, payment by the subdivider of parkland dedication, drainage and other fees that are permitted by law by a method approved by the city council.

E.    If any waiver is approved or conditionally approved pursuant to this section, the department shall make a written report thereof to the city council. If the city council, by a majority vote, decides to review the waiver and conditions, it shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.16.070 A. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission. The public hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of the request for review. The city council may add, modify or delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the waiver conforms to the Subdivision Map Act and this code. The city council may deny the waiver on any of the grounds contained in this title. Within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the waiver shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.24.090 Final parcel maps.
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of final parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this section.

A.    Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.

B.    Form and Contents. The form and contents of the parcel map shall conform to the final map form and contents requirements of Section 16.20.040 and Section 16.20.050.

C.    Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps by Section 16.20.060. The city engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision does not justify compliance with the requirements of Section 16.20.060.

D.    Review by City Engineer. The city engineer shall review the parcel map and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer.

E.    Approved by City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map, to the city engineer. The city engineer shall approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plans, the tentative map and all conditions thereof. Appeals of the city engineer action with respect to the parcel map shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.100.

F.    Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the parcel map by the city engineer, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the maps or have an authorized agent forward the map to the county recorder. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.28
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

16.28.010    Authority and purpose.

16.28.020    Consistency.

16.28.030    Definitions.

16.28.040    Application.

16.28.050    Filing and processing.

16.28.060    Fees.

16.28.070    Expiration.

16.28.080    Rights of a vesting tentative map.

16.28.090    Amendment to approved vesting tentative map.

16.28.100    Applications inconsistent with current policies.

16.28.010 Authority and purpose.
A.    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of the Subdivision Map Act (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute) and may be cited as the City of Folsom Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance. The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate local procedures for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute.

B.    To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.020 Consistency.
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan of the city or which is not permitted by Title 17 or other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.030 Definitions.
A.    Vesting tentative map means a tentative map for a subdivision, as defined in Section 16.08.010, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words vesting tentative map at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.28.050 and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. For purposes of this chapter, vesting tentative map shall include a vesting tentative map prepared in connection with a parcel map.

B.    All other definitions set forth in this title are applicable. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.040 Application.
A.    Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.050 Filing and processing.
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided.

A.    At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.

B.    The filing of a vesting tentative map may be conditioned upon the prior or simultaneous discretionary land use approvals. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.060 Fees.
A.    Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay all fees and/or deposits in accordance with Section 16.04.070.

B.    The planning commission or city council, as the case may be, may require as a condition of its approval that the payment by the subdivider of all development fees required to be paid at the time of the application for, or issuance of, a building permit or other similar permit shall be made at the rate for such fees in effect at the time of such application or issuance. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.070 Expiration.
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by Sections 16.16.110 and 16.24.060 for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.080 Rights of a vesting tentative map.
A.    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

B.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be conditioned or denied if any of the following are determined:

1.    A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both;

2.    The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

C.    The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.28.070. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

1.    An initial time period of 1 year beyond the recording of the final map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this 1 year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of said final maps or parcel maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in Section 16.28.070 or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those parcels for which final maps or parcel maps are not timely recorded;

2.    The 1 year initial time period set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit, if one is required, or for any required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed;

3.    A subdivider may apply to the city council, in the case of final maps, or to the planning commission in the case of parcel maps, for a 1 year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within 10 days in accordance with Section 16.16.100.

4.    If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.

D.    Consistent with subsection A of this section, an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the city from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits necessary for the development. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.090 Amendment to approved vesting tentative map.
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall be made in accordance with Section 16.16.130 or Section 16.24.070, as the case may be. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.28.100 Applications inconsistent with current policies.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 16.28.080 and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under this title, this code, the general plan, any applicable specific plan and other applicable law. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.32
DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
Sections:

16.32.010    Dedications of streets, alleys and other public right-of-way or easements.

16.32.020    Waiver of direct access rights.

16.32.030    DedicationsPublic access easements.

16.32.040    Parkland dedication.

16.32.050    Reservations.

16.32.060    Bridges and major thoroughfares.

16.32.070    Supplemental improvement capacity.

16.32.080    Major facilities fees collection (reserved)

16.32.090    Solar access easements.

16.32.100    Reimbursements to a telephone corporation or cable television system for undergrounding or relocation.

16.32.110    Dedication of lands for elementary schools.

16.32.010 Dedications of streets, alleys and other public right-of-way or easements.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, local transit facilities, public access easements, including access rights and abutters rights, drainage, public greenways, bicycle paths, trails, open space easements, sunlight easements, landscape easements, scenic easements, public utility easements and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters rights, drainage, public greenways, bicycle paths, trails, public utility easements and other public easements.

B.    All dedications and/or all irrevocable offers of dedications shall be necessary to ensure consistency and/or implementation of the general plan, or any applicable specific plan.

C.    Improvements shall be in accordance with Chapter 16.36 of this title. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.020 Waiver of direct access rights.
A.    The city may require as a condition of approval of a tentative map that dedications or offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property within or abutting the subdivision.

B.    Upon acceptance of the dedication, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.030 DedicationsPublic access easements.
A.    All dedications of property to the city for public purposes shall be made in fee title, except that, in the citys discretion, a grant of an easement may be taken for the following purposes: open space easements, landscape easements, scenic easement or public utility easements. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the city, in its discretion, determines would not conflict with the intended ownership and use. The city may elect to accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of dedication of fee title.

B.    All dedications and/or all irrevocable offers of dedications shall be necessary to ensure consistency and/or implementation of the general plan, or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.040 Parkland dedication.
A.    Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this section are in accordance with the parks and recreation element of the general plan of the city, adopted by the city on October 31, 1988.

B.    Requirements. At the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map, the city council shall determine pursuant to subsection D of this section, the land required for dedication and/or in lieu fee payment. As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof or both, at the option of the city, for neighborhood and community park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

C.    General Standard. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that 5 acres of property for each 1,000 persons residing within this city be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational purposes.

D.    Formula for Dedication of Land.

1.    Where a park or recreation facility has been designated in the parks and recreation element, an element of the general plan of the city and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a neighborhood or community park sufficient in size and topography that bears a reasonable relationship to serve the land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following formulas:

Formula Based on Population Estimate

The formula for determining acreage to be dedicated shall be as follows:

Average number of persons/unit



1,000 population

=

minimum acreage dedication

park acreage standard
(from Section 16.32.40(c))

(Example for single-family dwelling unit (DU):

2.77



1,000

=

.0139 acres/DU)

5

The following table of population density has been established pursuant to Section 66477(b) of the Government Code:

Park Land Dedication Formula Table

Types of Dwelling

Average Density/DU

Acreage/DU (5-acre standard)

Single-family

2.92

.0146

Duplex

2.28

.0114

Multifamily

1.94

.0097

Mobile home

1.61

.0080

Dedication of the land shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 16.32.040 K.

2.    For the purposes of this section, the number of new dwelling units shall be based upon the number of parcels indicated on the map when in an area for 1 dwelling unit per parcel. When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for more than 1 dwelling unit per parcel, the number of the proposed dwelling units in the area so zoned shall equal the maximum allowed under that zone. In the case of a condominium project, the number of new dwelling units shall be the number of condominium units. The term new dwelling unit does not include dwelling units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the parcel or final map is filed. The land to be dedicated shall be recommended by the parks and recreation commission for approval by the city council.

E.    Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication.

1.    General Formula. If there is no park or recreation facility designated in the parks and recreation element to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee equal to the value of the land in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection G of this section, such fee to be used for a neighborhood or community park which bears a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future resident of the area being subdivided.

2.    Fees in Lieu of Land, 50 Parcels or Less. If the proposed subdivision contains 50 parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value of the portion of the neighborhood or community park required to serve the needs of residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in subsection D of this section hereof and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection G of this section. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the dedication and acceptance of land for park and recreation purposes in subdivisions of 50 parcels or less, where the subdivider proposes such dedication voluntarily and the land is acceptable to the city council.

3.    Use of Money. The money collected hereunder shall be used only for the purpose of acquiring necessary land and developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood and community park or recreation facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision.

F.    Criteria for Requiring Both Dedication and Fee. In subdivisions of more than 50 parcels, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu thereof in accordance with the following formula:

1.    When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the parks and recreation element as the site for a neighborhood or community park, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provision of subsection G of this section shall be paid for the value of any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection D of this section.

2.    When a major part of the neighborhood or community park or recreation site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portions shall be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provision of subsection G of this section shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection D of this section. Such fees shall be used for the improvement of other neighborhood or community parks and recreation facilities in the area serving the subdivision.

G.    Amount of Fee in Lieu of Land Dedication. When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for dedication pursuant to subsection D of this section. The fee shall be determined by the following formula:

DUs



Pop



5 acres



FMV

=

in lieu fee

DU

1,000 people

buildable

where

 

 

DUs

=

Number of dwelling units as defined in Section 16.32.040 D

Pop

=

population per dwelling unit

DU

 

 

FMV

=

fair market value, as determined by Section 16.32.040 H

Buildable acre

=

A typical acre of the subdivision, with a slope less than 5 percent located in other than an area on which building is excluded because of flooding, easements or other restrictions.

Fees to be collected pursuant to this section shall be recommended by the parks and recreation commission for approval by the city council.

H.    Determination of Fair Market Value. The fair market value shall be determined based upon a written appraisal prepared by an appraiser who is acceptable to both the city and the subdivider. The appraisal shall be based upon the fair market value of the land having final subdivision or parcel map status. The cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the subdivider.

I.    Land and/or Fee. Whether the city council accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

1.    The natural features, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

2.    The size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

3.    The feasibility of dedication;

4.    The compatibility of dedication with the parks and recreation element; and

5.    The location of existing and proposed park sites and trailways.

The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated or whether a fee shall be charged or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

J.    Credit for Private Open Space. No credit shall be given for private open space in the subdivision except as hereinafter provided. Where private open space usable for active recreational purposes is provided in a proposed planned development or real estate development as defined in Sections 11003 and 11003.1 of the Business and Professions Code, partial credit, not to exceed 40 percent, shall be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met:

1.    Yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and

2.    Private park and recreation facilities shall be owned by a homes association composed of all property owners in the subdivision and being an incorporated nonprofit organization capable of dissolution only by a 100 percent affirmative vote of the membership, operated under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner in the neighborhood is automatically a member and each lot is subject to a charge for proportionate share of expenses for maintaining the facilities; and

3.    Use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreation purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor; and

4.    The proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreation purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; and

5.    Facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the parks and recreation element of the general plan; and

6.    The open space for which credit is given is generally a minimum of 3 acres and provides all of the basic elements listed below or a combination of such and other recreation improvements that will meet the specific recreation needs of future residents of the area:

a.    Recreation open spaces, which are generally defined as park area for active recreation pursuits such as soccer, golf, baseball, softball and football and have at least 1 acre of maintained turf with less than 5 percent slope,

b.    Court areas, which are generally defined as tennis courts, badminton courts, shuffleboard courts or similar hard-surfaced areas especially designed and exclusively used for court games,

c.    Recreational swimming areas, which are defined generally as fenced areas devoted primarily to swimming, diving or both. They must also include decks, lawned area, bathhouses or other facilities developed and used exclusively for swimming and diving and consisting of no less than 15 square feet of water surface area for each 3 percent of the population of the subdivision with a minimum of 800 square feet of water surface area per pool together with an adjacent deck and/or lawn area twice that of the pool,

d.    Recreation buildings and facilities designed and primarily used for the recreational needs of residents of the development.

The determination of the city council as to whether credit shall be given and the amount of credit shall be final and conclusive.

K.    Time for Dedication and/or Fee.

1.    At the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map, the city council shall determine pursuant to subsection D of this section the land required for dedication. If the city council requires in-lieu fee payment by the subdivider, the city council will set the amount of land upon which the in-lieu fee will be based at the time of final map approval.

2.    At the time of the final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land as required by the city council. Where the city council has determined that fees shall be paid in lieu of or in addition to the dedication of land, the city council shall set the in-lieu fees based on the land dedication requirements as established at the time of tentative map approval using current land values at the time of final map approval with the formula set forth in subsection G of this section and using the process for determining fair market value as set forth in subsection H of this section. The subdivider shall pay said fees in accordance with the following schedule:

For any subdivision consisting of 10 or more lots, fees shall be paid in their entirety prior to the issuance of any building permit for any building or structure to be located upon any lot in the subdivision;

For any subdivision consisting of 9 or less lots, fees shall be paid on a lot-by-lot basis and prior to the issuance of any building permit for any building or structure to be located upon any 1 of the lots in the subdivision. Open space covenants for private park or recreation facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map or parcel map.

L.    Disposition of Fees. Fees determined pursuant to subsection G of this section shall be paid to the city treasurer and shall be deposited in a special fund. Money in said fund, including accrued interest, shall be expended solely for the purposes enumerated in this section. Collected fees shall be committed by the city council within 5 years after receipt of such fees or within 5 years after the issuance of building permits on 1/2 of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If such fees are not so committed, the fees shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision. The finance director shall render reports to the city council and parks and recreation commission at least quarterly on the fees received, the identity of the subdivision from which they were received, the deadline for commitment thereof, the expenditures made and the fund balance.

M.    Exemptions. Subdivisions containing less than 5 parcels and not used for residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this section; provided, however, that a condition shall be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on 1 or more of the parcels, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit. The provisions of the section do not apply to commercial or industrial subdivision; nor do they apply to condominium projects of stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than 5 years old, when no dwelling units are added.

N.    Subdivider Improvements. The value of park and recreation improvements provided by the subdivider to the dedicated land shall be credited against the fees or dedication of land required by this section. The city council reserves the right, after recommendation from the parks and recreation commission, to approve such improvements prior to agreeing to accept the dedication of land and to require in-lieu fee payments should the land and improvements be unacceptable.

O.    Access. All land offered for dedication shall have access to at least 1 existing or proposed public street. This requirement may be waived by the city council, after recommendation from the parks and recreation commission, if the city council determines that public street access is unnecessary for the maintenance of the park area or use thereof by residents.

P.    Sale of Dedicated Land. If during the ensuing time between dedication of land for park purposes and commencement of first stage of development, circumstances arise which indicate that another site would be more suitable for park or recreational purposes serving the subdivision and the neighborhood (such as receipt of a gift of additional park land or a change in school location), the land may be sold upon the approval of the city council, after input from the parks and recreation commission, with the resultant funds being used for purchase of a more suitable site. (Ord. 741  1, 1992; Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.050 Reservations.
A.    General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, transit facilities, libraries, senior centers, child care centers, historical/cultural resources or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

B.    Standards for Reservation of Land. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, senior center, child care center, historical/cultural resource or other public use is shown on the general plan or an adopted specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the policies and standards contained in the general plan or the adopted specific plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The reserved area shall be consistent with the general plan or the adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

C.    Procedure. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within 2 years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

D.    Payment to Subdivider. The purchase price for the reserved area shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

E.    Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement in accordance with this chapter or having entered said agreement shall fail to perform the same the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.060 Bridges and major thoroughfares.
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act, and in order to implement the transportation and circulation element of the general plan and, in the case of bridges, the transportation provisions thereof.

B.    Payment of Fees Generally.

1.    Prior to filing a final map which includes land within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned to such property pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares.

2.    Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction on any property within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the applicant for such permit shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares, unless such fees have been paid pursuant to subdivision 1 of this subsection.

3.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions 1 and 2 of subsection B of this section:

a.    Payment of bridge fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an existing bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit;

b.    Payment of major thoroughfare fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the area of benefit.

C.    Consideration in Lieu of Fees. Upon application by the subdivider or applicant for a building permit, the city council may accept consideration in lieu of the payment of fees required pursuant to this section; provided that the planning commission first finds, or the public works director, that the substitute consideration has a value equal to or greater than the fee; and provided further that the substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the city council.

D.    Public Hearing. Prior to establishing an area of benefit, a public hearing shall be held by the city council at which time the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated and a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment and the fee to be collected, shall be established. Notice of the public hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 16.16.070 A and shall include preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and the method of fee apportionment.

E.    Amount. The amount of the fees and the areas of benefit established pursuant to this section may be established by resolution, a certified copy of which shall be recorded.

F.    Exemptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection E of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required for:

1.    The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of 1 or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided that the total value, as determined by the building official, of all such alteration, enlargement or construction completed within any 1 year period does not exceed 1/2 of the current market value, as determined by the building official, of all existing buildings on such lot or parcel of land and the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its classification of occupancy as defined by Section 501 of the Uniform Building Code.

G.    Protest.

1.    At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare, any owner of property within the area of benefit may file a protest against the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area to be benefitted by the improvements or against both of them. Such protests must be in writing and must contain a description of the property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify such property and, if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property. All such protests shall be delivered to the city clerk and no other protest or objections shall be considered. Any protest may be withdrawn, in writing, by the owners making such protests, at any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing.

2.    If there is a written protest filed with the city clerk by the owners of more than 1/2 of the area to be benefitted by the improvement and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than 1/2 of that to be benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned and the city council shall not, for 1 year from the filing of that written protest, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement, or that portion thereof so protested against, under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.070 Supplemental improvement capacity.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number or length is for the benefit of property outside within the subdivision, the city shall, subject to the provisions of Sections 66486 and 66487 of the Subdivision Map Act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements.

B.    The city council shall determine the method for payment of the costs required by a reimbursement agreement, which method may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

1.    The collection from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, of a proportionate share of the costs of such improvements;

2.    The contribution to the subdivider of that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and the levy of a charge upon the real property benefitted to reimburse the city for such costs, including administration costs, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider;

3.    The establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefitted.

C.    No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is noticed and held thereon by the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.32.060 E and the city council finds that the charge, area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.

D.    In addition to the notice required by Section 16.32.060 E, written notice of the hearing shall be given to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Such notices shall be mailed by the city clerk at least 10 days prior to the date established for the hearing. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.080 Major facilities fees collection (reserved).
(Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.090 Solar access easements.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed, in accordance with the provisions of Section 66475.3 of the Subdivision Map Act, a requirement that the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the subdivision for any solar energy system, as defined in Section 801.5 of the State Civil Code. In establishing such easements, consideration shall be given to the feasibility, contour and configuration of the parcel to be divided and cost. Required easements shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or a structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time such tentative map is filed.

B.    At the time of tentative map approval, the planning commission or city council, as the case may be, shall specify the following:

1.    The standards for determining the exact dimensions and locations of such easements;

2.    Any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other objects which would obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement;

3.    The terms for conditions, if any, under which an easement may be revised or terminated.

C.    The foregoing provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building where no new structures are added. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.100 Reimbursements to a telephone corporation or cable television system for undergrounding or relocation.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 66473.6 of the Subdivision Map Act, whenever the city imposes as a condition to its approval of a tentative map or a parcel map a requirement that necessitates replacing, undergrounding or permanently or temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation or cable television system, the subdivider shall reimburse the telephone corporation or cable television system for all costs for the replacement, undergrounding or relocation. All these costs shall be billed to the subdivider directly by the telephone corporation or cable television system after they are incurred and shall include a credit for any required advance payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. In no event shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with substantially similar facilities. In no event shall the city be obligated for such reimbursement. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.32.110 Dedication of lands for elementary schools.
A.    Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66478 of the Government Code of the State of California. The dedication of land for elementary school sites is required by this section and in accordance with the school district(s) facility plan(s)

B.    Requirements.

1.    At the time of approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the city may require the dedication of land to the school district(s), as may be deemed to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon such elementary schools as are necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service. In no case shall the city require the dedication of an amount of land which would make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible or which would exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedure of the State Allocation Board.

2.    This section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than 10 years prior to the filing of the tentative maps in accordance with Article 2 (commencing with Section 66452) of Chapter 3 in this division of the Government Code.

3.    The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If, within 30 days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. In the event that the offer is automatically terminated, the subdivider shall notify the community development department director in writing.

4.    The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to 60 days after, the filing of the final map on any portion of the subdivision. The school district shall, in the event that it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

a.    The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

b.    The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school districts offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

c.    Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

5.    If the land is not used by the school district as a school site within 10 years after dedication, the subdivider shall have the option to repurchase the property from the district for the amount paid therefor.

6.    The school district to which the property is dedicated shall record a certificate with the county recorder in the county in which the property is located. The certificate shall contain the following information:

a.    The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property;

b.    A legal description of the real property dedicated;

c.    A statement that the subdivider dedicating the property has an option to repurchase the property if it is not used by the school district as a school site within 10 years after dedication;

d.    Proof of the acceptance of the dedication by the school district and the date of the acceptance. The certificate shall be recorded not more than 10 days after the date of acceptance of the dedication. The subdivider shall have the right to compel the school district to record such certificate, but until such certificate is recorded, any rights acquired by any third party dealing in good faith with the school district shall not be impaired or otherwise affected by the option right of the subdivider.

C.    Appeals. If any subdivider is aggrieved by, or fails to agree to the reasonableness of any requirement imposed pursuant to this section, the subdivider(s) may bring a special proceeding in the superior court pursuant to Section 66499.37 of the Government Code. (Ord. 752  3, 1992)

Chapter 16.36
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

16.36.010    General.

16.36.020    Required improvements.

16.36.030    Deferred improvement agreements.

16.36.040    Design.

16.36.050    Access.

16.36.060    Hillside development standards.

16.36.070    Improvement plans.

16.36.080    Improvement agreement.

16.36.090    Improvement security.

16.36.100    Construction and inspection.

16.36.110    Completion of improvements.

16.36.120    Acceptance of improvements.

16.36.130    Issuance of building permits.

16.36.010 General.
A.    The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, both on and off-site, in accordance with the standard engineering specifications and other approved standards as provided by this chapter and by the city councils resolution or resolutions establishing such standards.

B.    No final map shall be presented to the city council or parcel map to the planning commission for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do the work. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.020 Required improvements.
A.    General.

1.    All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or by city ordinance or resolution, together with, but not limited to, the required improvements set forth below shall be required of all subdivisions.

2.    Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of 4 or less parcels shall be noted on the parcel map or waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map.

3.    Completion of improvements shall be in accordance with Section 16.36.110.

B.    Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric sections, including street structural section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions.

C.    Stormdrainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved stormdrain system. The stormdrain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed and shall be capable of collecting and conveying runoff to city design standards. The stormdrain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development. Off-site stormdrain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement. The stormdrain system may also be required to be designed for water quality control monitoring activities.

D.    Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system, in accordance with the provisions of Title 13 of this code.

E.    Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system, in accordance with the provisions of Title 13 of this code.

F.    Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be capable of being served by natural gas and/or electric and telephone.

G.    Underground Utilities.

1.    All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision and along peripheral streets shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by the public utilities commission regulations. Undergrounding shall be required for overhead lines on either side of peripheral streets.

2.    The developer may request that the under-grounding requirement along peripheral streets be waived by the city council, in the case of subdivisions of 5 or more parcels or by the planning commission, in the case of subdivisions of 4 or less parcels. The city council or planning commission, as the case may be, may at its discretion accept a fee in lieu of the undergrounding. The amount of fee shall be determined by the city engineer and shall be based upon the reasonable estimated cost of that portion of a future undergrounding project attributable to the subdivision. The requirement for undergrounding or payment of an in-lieu fee shall be a condition of approval of the tentative map.

3.    Undergrounding requirements may be waived or modified by the city council or the planning commission, as the case may be, only upon finding:

a.    The subdivision is within an area where existing utilities have not been undergrounded and that deferral will be allowed since undergrounding is impractical due to physical constraints or the surrounding neighborhood is absent of similar improvements;

b.    Overhead utilities will have no significant visual impact;

c.    Overhead utilities will not be inconsistent with the policies, programs and standards of the general plan or any applicable specific plan.

4.    If the undergrounding requirements are waived as allowed by paragraphs a, b and c of subdivision 3 of this subsection, the in-lieu fee as established by the city engineer shall be made a condition of approval of the tentative map.

5.    In-lieu fees shall be deposited in a special undergrounding account to be used as approved by the city council for future undergrounding of utilities throughout the city.

6.    The provisions of this subsection are in addition to and not in substitution for or limitation of, the provisions of Chapter 17.54 of this code.

H.    Fencing. Each parcel or lot within the subdivision that is adjacent to property containing a nonresidential use or public facility shall have an approved fence adequate to prevent unauthorized access between the properties.

I.    Other Improvements. Other improvements including, but not limited to, grading, street lights, fire hydrants, traffic-control devices, traffic signs and markings, traffic signals, street trees and shrubs, landscaping, monuments, bicycle facilities, soundwalls and fences or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall also be required as determined by the city engineer in accordance with this code, the general plan and applicable specific plan and city standards and specifications. Smoke detectors, trails, paths, such other improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which is necessary to ensure consistency and/or implementation of the general plan or any applicable specific plan, shall also be required.

J.    Off-Site Improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the city shall, within 120 days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the city fails to meet the 120-day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be waived. Prior to approval of the final map, the city may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city acquires title or an interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.030 Deferred improvement agreements.
A.    Subdivisions of 4 or Less Parcels.

1.    The frontage improvements along peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the city engineer. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider and/or owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the city, in form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, for the installation of all frontage improvements at a time in the future as specified by the city. The city manager shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city. The agreement shall provide for the following:

a.    Construction of improvements shall commence within 90 days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city and shall be completed within the time specified by Section 16.36.110;

b.    That in the event of a default by the subdivider and/or owner, the city is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid;

c.    That the agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of the subdivider and/or owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment;

d.    That in the event of litigation occasioned by any default of the subdivider and/or owner, the prevailing party shall pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys fees and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

e.    That the terms subdivider and owner shall include, respectively, not only the subdivider and the present owner of the real property but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns thereof, it being the intent of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it;

f.    Any other improvement security as required by Section 16.36.090;

g.    Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this code, this title, the general plan and any applicable specific plan.

2.    The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this code or law. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and all applicable chapters of this code in effect at the time of construction.

B.    Remainders. Where a remainder parcel is made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city to construct improvements within the remainder parcel at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder parcel. The improvements shall be at the subdividers expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final or parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder parcel, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:

1.    The public health and safety;

2.    The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area;

3.    The required construction is necessary to ensure consistency with/or implementation of the general plan, or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.040 Design.
General: The design and layout of all required improvements, both on-site and off-site, private and public, shall conform to generally accepted engineering standards, standard engineering specifications, the Subdivision Map Act, applicable provisions of this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.050 Access.
A.    All lots or parcels created shall have access to a public street improved to the standards set forth in this chapter. Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the city council, in the case of subdivisions of 5 or more parcels, or the planning commission, in the case of subdivisions of 4 or less parcels, determines that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created with access to private streets, such a development may be approved. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment width, grade and material specifications of any proposed private street, the topography and means of access to each lot and the drainage, sewer and water service and fire protection for the lots served by such private street. The private street shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications and any other applicable plans and specifications of the city as approved by the city engineer. Construction of the private street shall be completed prior to the completion of the construction and/or occupancy of the lots. The subdivider shall be required to provide a feasible method for the maintenance of such private streets, which method shall be subject to the prior approval of the city engineer and city attorney.

B.    If flag lots are approved as part of the subdivision, the requirements, including the improvements to the stem of the flag lots, shall be as described for private streets in the preceding paragraph. All lots or parcels created as part of a subdivision, shall have a minimum frontage at the front building setback line, on an approved public or private street as determined by the applicable zoning district.

C.    Reserve strips or non-access at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required by the city. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.060 Hillside development standards.
All applications for a tentative subdivision map or a parcel map shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 14.33 (Hillside Development Standards) of this code. (Ord. 798  1, 1994: Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.070 Improvement plans.
A.    General. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state. Improvement plans shall include, but shall not be limited to, all improvements required pursuant to Section 16.36.020.

B.    Form.

1.    Plans, profiles and details shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. A border shall be made on each sheet providing 1/2 inch at top, bottom and right side and 1-1/2 inches on the left side.

2.    A suitable title block shall be placed in the lower right corner or along the right edge and provide adequate space for approval by the city engineer and for approval of plan revisions.

3.    Plans and profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal the scale of 1 inch equals 40 feet and a vertical scale of 1 inch equals 40 feet, unless approved otherwise by the city engineer. Details shall be drawn to such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed. The scales for various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet.

4.    A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of plans.

5.    A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable.

6.    Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or right edge of the sheet unless approved otherwise by the city engineer.

7.    All lettering shall be 1/8 inch minimum.

8.    If the plans include 3 or more sheets, a cover sheet showing the streets, lots, easements, stormdrains, index and vicinity map shall be included.

9.    The form of all plans shall conform to additional requirements as may be established by the city engineer. The final form of all plans shall be approved by the city engineer.

C.    Contents. The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private, including common areas. Reference may be made to city or State Standard Plans in lieu of duplicating the drawings.

D.    Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, sanitary sewer plans and calculations, soils report, bond or other security estimates and any structural calculations as may be required shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the city engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state and in a form approved by the city engineer.

E.    Review by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit 3 sets of the improvement plans and all computations to the city engineer for review. As a part of city review, the city engineer shall transmit 1 set of the preliminary plans to the various city departments for review. Upon completion of the review, 1 set of the preliminary plans, with any required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider.

F.    Approval by the City Engineer.

1.    After completing any required revisions, the subdivider shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the city engineer for signature.

2.    Upon finding that any required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances and plans, design requirements and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign and date the plans. The subdivider shall provide a reproducible set and 3 copies of plans, acceptable to the city engineer, for use by the city. The originals will be returned to the subdivider.

3.    Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the natural gas, electric, telephone and cable television service construction plans.

4.    Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdividers engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map.

G.    Revision to Approved Plans.

1.    By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer or authorized representative and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable to the city engineer and consistent with the tentative map, the originals shall be submitted to the city engineers office for dating and initialing. The originals shall be returned to the subdivider and the revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the city engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been received and approved by the city engineer.

2.    By City Engineer.

a.    When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect the public health and safety or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider. The subdivider shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the city engineer for initialing and dating within the time specified by the city engineer.

b.    Upon receipt of the initialized and dated originals, the subdivider shall immediately transmit revised drawings to the city engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the city engineer until revised drawings have been submitted.

c.    The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the city engineer to the city council by filing an appeal in writing with the city clerk within 10 days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.

3.    Plan Checking and Inspection Costs for Revisions. Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider based on fees in effect at that time. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised plans and applied toward the fees. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.080 Improvement agreement.
The improvement agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer and approved in a form accepted by the city attorney. The agreement shall provide for:

A.    Construction of all improvements required pursuant to Section 16.36.020, including any required off-site improvements, according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the city engineer;

B.    Completion of improvements within the time specified by Section 16.36.110;

C.    Right of the city to modify plans and specifications and to require the subdivider to pay for modifications;

D.    Warranty by the subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties;

E.    Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the citys resolution;

F.    Payment of in-lieu fees for undergrounding of utilities on peripheral streets;

G.    Payment of planned drainage and sanitary sewer facilities fees;

H.    Improvement security as required by Section 16.36.090;

I.    Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and their causes;

J.    Release and indemnification of the city from all liability incurred in connection with the development and payment of all reasonable attorneys fees that the city may incur because of any legal action or other proceeding arising from the development;

K.    Any other deposits, reimbursements, fees or conditions as required by city ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the city engineer;

L.    Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this code. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.090 Improvement security.
A.    General. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided below. No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the city engineer or recorded until all improvements securities required by this section have been received and approved.

B.    Form of Security. The form of security shall be 1 or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city:

1.    Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the Subdivision Map Act;

2.    A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys;

3.    An instrument of credit or letter of credit from 1 or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment;

4.    Any other form of security as provided in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act.

C.    Amount of Security. A performance bond or other security in the amount of 100 percent of the total estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of 50 percent of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee payment to subdividers contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorneys fees, incurred by the city in enforcing the obligations secured. The estimate of improvements costs shall be as approved by the city engineer and shall provide for:

1.    Not less than 5 percent nor more than 10 percent of the total construction cost for contingencies;

2.    Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction;

3.    All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the city engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation.

D.    Cash Bond. The subdivider shall deposit with the city not less than $1,000 cash for subdivisions of 4 or less parcels and $3,000 for other subdivisions or an additional amount as required by the city engineer, not to exceed 1 percent of the total estimated construction cost. The deposit may be used at the discretion of the city to correct deficiencies and conditions caused by the subdivider, contractor or subcontractors that may arise during or after the construction of the subdivision. Any unexpended amount will be returned to the subdivider at the time all bonds and other security are released.

E.    Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period which shall be the period of 1 year following completion and acceptance of the improvements. The amount of the warranty security shall not be less than 10 percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the 1-year warranty period.

F.    Reduction in Performance Security. The city engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than 10 percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the city engineer; however, in no event shall the city engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by the Subdivision Map Act, this code or the improvement agreement.

G.    Release of Improvement Security.

1.    Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. If a warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released 12 months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.

2.    Material and Labor Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, 6 months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the city, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the city council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given.

3.    Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided:

a.    All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected;

b.    Not less than 12 months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.100 Construction and inspection.
A.    The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard engineering specifications and all other standard plans and specifications of the city.

B.    Construction shall not commence until all required improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. All improvements are subject to inspection by the city engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the citys approved specifications. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.110 Completion of improvements.
A.    Subdivisions of 5 or More Parcels. The improvements for subdivisions of 5 or more parcels shall be completed by the subdivider within 12 months, or such later time as approved by the city engineer, not to exceed 36 months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is granted by the city council. Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city may, by resolution of the city council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

B.    Subdivisions of 4 or Less Parcels. The completion of improvements for subdivisions of 4 or less parcels shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required by a specified date by the city when the completion of the improvements are found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the city engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the subdivision.

C.    Extensions.

1.    The completion date may be extended by the city council, upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made prior to the expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement.

2.    The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. The agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the city council for its consideration. If approved by the city council, the mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city.

3.    In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following may be required:

a.    Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer;

b.    Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer;

c.    Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates;

d.    Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund.

4.    The city council may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements.

5.    The costs incurred by the city in processing the agreement shall be paid by the subdivider at actual cost plus 25 percent of such cost for overhead expenses.

D.    As-Built Plans. Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer a reproducible set of as-built improvement plans and 2 sets of plans on microfilm. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.120 Acceptance of improvements.
A.    General. With respect to all subdivisions, when all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans submitted, the completed subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city engineer for acceptance. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that the public improvements have been accepted for public use. Occupancy of any building within the subdivision will not be granted by the city until such time the city engineer has determined that all the improvements required of the subdivision have been completed.

B.    Acceptance. If the subdivision improvements have been accepted by the city engineer and public improvements have been dedicated on the final map or parcel map, the city clerk shall file an acceptance of public improvements with the county recorder.

C.    Acceptance of a Portion of the Improvements. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the city engineer may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements. Such improvements will be accepted by the city engineer only if the city engineer finds that it is in the public interest to do so and such improvements are for the use of the general public. Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 873  2, 1997; Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.36.130 Issuance of building permits.
A.    No building permit will be issued for the development of any lot within a subdivision until all improvements required of the subdivision are deemed substantially complete by the city engineer. Substantially complete means that all improvements required of the subdivision are complete with the exception of items which, by not being complete, do not pose a health or safety risk to the public, in the judgement of the city engineer.

B.    An exception to subsection A of this section may be granted for building permits issued for model homes provided that all lot corners for the model home lots have been staked and pad elevations and compactions have been certified to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and all-weather access and water system capable of delivering adequate flows for fire suppression have been provided to the lots to the satisfaction of the fire marshal and city engineer. (Ord. 873  3, 1997)

Chapter 16.40
REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Sections:

16.40.010    General.

16.40.020    Initiation of proceedings.

16.40.030    Contents of petition.

16.40.040    Submittal of petition to the city engineer.

16.40.050    City council approval.

16.40.060    Filing with county recorder.

16.40.010 General.
A.    Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66499.11 et seq.) and this chapter. This chapter shall apply to final maps and parcel maps.

B.    Subdivisions may also be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage pursuant to Section 66499.20 1/2 of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.40.020 Initiation of proceedings.
A.    By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 16.40.030 and any other information as required by the city engineer.

B.    By City Council. The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the department to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.40.030 Contents of petition.
The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:

A.    Evidence of title to the real property;

B.    Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property;

C.    Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within 2 years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later;

D.    Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within 5 years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record;

E.    A final or parcel map in the form and with the contents, prescribed by Sections 16.20.040 and 16.20.050 or Section 16.24.090, as the case may be, which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title: The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage;

F.    Fees and/or deposits in accordance with Section 16.04.070. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.40.040 Submittal of petition to the city engineer.
A.    The final or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as required by this chapter, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review.

B.    Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the city engineer shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the city council for its consideration. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.40.050 City council approval.
A.    A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all proposed reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by the city engineer as provided in Section 16.16.070 A. The city engineer may give such other notice that the city engineer deems necessary or advisable.

B.    The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that:

1.    Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

2.    Dedications or offers of dedications to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary to ensure consistency with/or implementation of the general plan or any applicable specific plan; and

3.    Either:

a.    All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion,

b.    None of the improvements required to be made have been made within 2 years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements whichever is later,

c.    No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within 5 years from the date such map was filed for record.

C.    The city council may require as conditions of the reversion:

1.    The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, local transit facilities, public rights-of-way or public access easements, open space easements or landscape easements;

2.    The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title;

3.    Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title or this Code or to ensure consistency with/or to implement the general plan or any applicable specific plan or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.40.060 Filing with county recorder.
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the city clerk shall transmit the final or parcel map, together with the city council resolution approving the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.44
PARCEL MERGERS AND UNMERGERS
Sections:

16.44.010    Mergers required.

16.44.020    Notice of intention to determine status.

16.44.030    Hearing on determination of status.

16.44.040    Determination of merger.

16.44.050    Appeals of planning commission action review.

16.44.060    Determination when no hearing is requested.

16.44.070    Request to merge by property owner.

16.44.080    Unmerged parcels.

16.44.090    Request for determination by owner.

16.44.100    Fee for mergers and unmergers.

16.44.010 Mergers required.
In accordance with the provisions of Sections 66451.10 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act, 2 or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner shall be considered as merged if 1 of the parcels or units does not conform to the minimum parcel or lot size required by Title 17 of this code, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

A.    At least 1 of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued, or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit;

B.    With respect to any affected parcel, 1 or more of the following conditions exists:

1.    Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger,

2.    Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

3.    Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

4.    Does not meet slope stability standards,

5.    Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability,

6.    Its development would create health or safety hazards,

7.    Is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards;

C.    For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the notice of intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to this chapter.

D.    Subsection B of this section shall not apply if any of the conditions stated in Section 66451.11(b) (A), (B), (C) or (D) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.020 Notice of intention to determine status.
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the department shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of intention to determine status to the current record owner of the property. The notice shall state that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this chapter and that, within 30 days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, the owner may request a hearing before the planning commission to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department on the same day that the notice is mailed to the property owner. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.030 Hearing on determination of status.
A.    The owner of the affected property may file a written request for a hearing with the department within 30 days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status. Upon receipt of the request, the department shall set a time, date and place for a hearing before the planning commission and notify the owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted within 60 days following the receipt of the owners request or may be postponed or continued by mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner.

B.    At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger specified in this chapter.

C.    At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of the determination. The notice of determination shall be mailed to the property owner by the department within 5 days of the date of the hearing. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.040 Determination of merger.
If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the decision has been appealed pursuant to Section 16.44.050. The notice of merger shall specify the name of the record owner and a description of the property. The notice of merger under this chapter shall be in a form approved by the city engineer and shall be approved by the city engineer prior to being filed for record with the county recorder.

B.    If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels shall not be merged, a release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within 30 days after the planning commission determination and a clearance letter shall be mailed to the owner by the department. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.050 Appeals of planning commission action review.
The determination of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 16.16.100; provided that the appeal shall be filed within 10 days of the date of the notice of determination and the city council shall hear the appeal within 60 days from the date of appeal. If, after hearing, the city council grants the appeal and determines that the affected property has not been merged pursuant to this chapter, the department shall, within 30 days after the city council determination, file for record with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to determine status and mail a clearance letter to the owner. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.060 Determination when no hearing is requested.
If the owner does not file a request for a hearing within 30 days after the recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the planning commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within 90 days after the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to Section 16.44.020. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.070 Request to merge by property owner.
If the merger of contiguous parcels or units is initiated by the record owner, the owner may waive in writing the right to a hearing before the planning commission and to all notices required by this chapter. Upon receipt of such waiver, the department shall simultaneously file for record with the county recorder a notice of intention to determine status, the waiver of right of hearing and notice and a notice of merger. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.080 Unmerged parcels.
In accordance with the provisions of Sections 66451.30 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act, any parcel which has merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984, and for which a notice of merger had not been recorded on or before that date, shall be unmerged if on that date:

A.    The parcel meets each of the following criteria:

1.    Contains at least 5,000 square feet in area,

2.    Was created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

3.    Meets current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

4.    Meets slope density standards,

5.    Has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability,

6.    Its unmerger and development would create no health or safety hazards,

7.    The unmerged parcel would be consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards; and

B.    With respect to the parcel, none of the conditions stated in Section 66451.30(b) (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.090 Request for determination by owner.
A.    Upon written application made by the owner to the department, the planning commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels have merged or are to be merged. If the planning commission determines that the parcels have not merged, the owner shall be so notified by the department.

B.    If the planning commission determines that the parcels have merged and that they meet the requirements for un-merger in Section 16.44.080, a notice of status, as approved by the city engineer, shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county recorder by the department, which shall identify each parcel and declare that they are unmerged pursuant to this chapter.

C.    If the planning commission determines that the parcels have merged and do not meet the unmerger requirements in Section 16.44.080, a notice of merger specifying the record owner and description of the parcel shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county recorder by the department. The owner may appeal the decision of the planning commission as provided in Section 16.44.050.

D.    The city council may review the planning commissions determination as provided in Section 16.44.050. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.44.100 Fee for mergers and unmergers.
A fee and/or deposit for processing mergers and unmergers at the request of an owner shall be charged to the owner, in accordance with Section 16.04.070. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.48
CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS
Sections:

16.48.010    Requirements.

16.48.020    Form and contents.

16.48.030    Submittal and approval by city engineer.

16.48.040    Filing with the county recorder.

16.48.010 Requirements.
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map:

A.    To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;

B.    To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;

C.    To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

D.    To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments;

E.    To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in location or character or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character;

F.    To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map;

G.    To make modifications when there are changes which make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property and if the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification shall be set for public hearing by the city council, in the case of a final map, or the planning commission in the case of a parcel map, in accordance with Section 16.16.070 or Section 16.24.040 of this title, as the case may be. The city council or planning commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of and action on, the proposed modification. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.48.020 Form and contents.
The amending map or certificate or correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of Sections 16.20.040 and 16.20.050 if a final map, and Section 16.24.090B, if a parcel map. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.48.030 Submittal and approval by city engineer.
A.    The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval.

B.    The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 16.48.010, this fact shall be certified by the city engineer on the amending map or certificate of correction. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.48.040 Filing with the county recorder.
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index, respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

Chapter 16.52
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

16.52.010    Prohibition.

16.52.020    Remedies.

16.52.030    Certificate of compliance.

16.52.040    Notice of violation.

16.52.050    Appeals of planning commission action.

16.52.060    Violation as a misdemeanor.

16.52.070    Action against local agencyLimitation period.

16.52.010 Prohibition.
A.    No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, and has been filed for record by the county recorder.

B.    No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and has been filed for record by the county recorder.

C.    Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder.

D.    This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

E.    Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

F.    Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the construction of model homes subject to the subdivider first securing a permit from the department. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.52.020 Remedies.
A.    Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any heirs, personal representative or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof within 1 year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir or devisee.

B.    Any grantee or successor in interest thereof, of real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act may, within 1 year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

C.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Section 16.52.030 or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording. The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.

D.    This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled and the city or other public agency or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act and/or this title.

E.    The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is either the current owner of record or a vendee thereof with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property. If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.52.030, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.52.030 Certificate of compliance.
A.    Any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request the planning commission to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

B.    If the planning commission determines that the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the city engineer shall file a certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

C.    If the planning commission determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the planning commission may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions in accordance with Section 16.52.020 E. Upon the planning commissions making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the department shall file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the city.

D.    A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

E.    Subject to the provisions of Section 66499.35(e) of the Subdivision Map Act, an official map prepared pursuant to Section 66499.52(b) of the Subdivision Map Act shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels or real property described therein.

F.    A fee and/or deposit shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance in accordance with Section 16.04.070. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.52.040 Notice of violation.
A.    If the department has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the department by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the violation and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also contain an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Section 66412.6(a) or (b) of the Subdivision Map Act. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the planning commission why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

B.    The meeting shall be held no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, within 15 days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the department a written objection to recording the notice of violation, the department shall file the notice of violation for record with the county recorder. If the owner files an objection and if, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the department shall record the notice of violation for record with the county recorder.

C.    The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.52.050 Appeals of planning commission action.
Appeals of any planning commission action pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.100. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.52.060 Violation as a misdemeanor.
A.    In addition to the remedies and procedures provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the regulatory requirements of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.    Except as otherwise provided in this title, each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 702  1 (part), 1991)

16.52.070 Action against local agencyLimitation period.
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the decision of the citys advisory agency, appeal board or legislative body concerning a subdivision, or of any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced and service of summons effected within 90 days after the date of such decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such proceedings, acts or determinations as provided by Government Code Section 66499.37, any such proceedings shall take precedence over all matters of the calendar of the court except criminal, probate, eminent domain and forcible entry and unlawful detainer proceedings. (Ord. 752  4, 1992)

Chapter 16.56
LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Sections:

16.56.010    Purpose.

16.56.020    Functions of the committee.

16.56.030    Membership qualificationsAppointment and terms.

16.56.040    Vacancies and replacement of membership.

16.56.050    Officers.

16.56.060    Meetings.

16.56.070    AgendasOrder of businessVoting.

16.56.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the city of Folsom landscaping and lighting district advisory committee (the committee) is to help establish lines of communication between city staff and elected/appointed city bodies. The citizens committee may also make recommendations to the landscaping and lighting district manager, public works director and the neighborhood services director concerning the maintenance and associated costs to maintain and improve landscaping and lighting districts. (Ord. 1030  2 (part), 2005)

16.56.020 Functions of the committee.
The committee shall have the following functions:

A.    To inform and educate landscaping and lighting district residents as to the necessity and functions of landscaping and lighting districts, and the associated costs to maintain and improve such districts.

B.    To study and make recommendations to the landscaping and lighting district manager, public works director and neighborhood services director on matters related to the Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972. (Ord. 1030  2 (part), 2005)

16.56.030 Membership qualificationsAppointment and terms.
A.    The committee shall be comprised of one person from each landscaping and lighting district. The members shall be registered voters and residents or owners with their respective landscaping and lighting district. The members shall serve for a period of four years.

B.    The mayor shall appoint each of the members, subject to the approval of the city council.

C.    The committee shall be divided into two groups: Group 1 and Group 2.

D.    Four-year appointments will be alternated between Group 1 and Group 2, except for appointments made in 2005, in which appointments will be made in both groups and terms of those representatives will have shortened terms.

E.    The terms of the members for landscaping and lighting districts described as Group 1 shall expire on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in December of 2006 and the terms of the members for landscaping and lighting districts described in Group 2 shall expire on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in December of 2008. All appointments made in subsequent years will be in accordance to this section.

Group 1 will consist of:

 Briggs Ranch

 Hannaford Cross

 Broadstone

 Lake Natoma Shores

 Broadstone Unit 3

 Los Cerros

 Cobble Ridge

 Natoma Station

 Cobble Hills Ridge II/Reflections

 Prairie Oaks

 Folsom Heights/California Hills

 Silverbrook

Group 2 will consist of:

 American River Canyon

 Sierra Estates

 American River Canyon No. 2

 Steeplechase

 Blue Ravine Oaks

 The residences at American River Canyon

 Fieldstone Meadows

 Willow Creek East

 Natoma Valley

 Willow Creek South

 La Collina dal Lago

 Willow Springs

F.    New districts will be added to a group in an alternate manner beginning with Group 1. (Ord. 1030  2 (part), 2005)

16.56.040 Vacancies and replacement of membership.
A.    The mayor may remove any member of the committee at any time, subject to the approval of the city council. No public hearing shall be required prior to removal of any member of the committee and no cause for removal need be shown.

B.    A vacancy in office resulting from death, resignation, removal, disqualification, or any other cause shall be filled by an appointment from the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council.

C.    A committee member is subject to disqualification and removal from the committee if he or she has three unexcused absences from any regularly scheduled meetings. (Ord. 1030  2 (part), 2005)

16.56.050 Officers.
A.    The officers of the committee shall be chairperson and vice chairperson.

B.    The chairperson and the vice chairperson shall be elected by the committee every year by the first meeting in February by majority vote of the committee members. An officer can be replaced by majority vote of the committee at any time. No public hearing shall be required prior to removal of the officer and no cause for removal need be shown.

C.    The chairperson and vice chairperson of the committee, or such other members as may be presiding in the aforementioned positions, shall not be deprived of any of the rights or privileges of any member by reason of his/her occupying the chair and may move, second, and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members.

D.    The chairperson shall preside and preserve order at all regular and special meetings of the committee.

E.    In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall perform the duties and obligations of the office of the chairperson.

F.    Staff support to the committee shall be provided as designated by the city manager or his or her designee. The clerk/secretary of the committee shall serve as clerical support to the committee. Staff designated to support the committee shall not be an officer or member of the committee. (Ord. 1030  2 (part), 2005)

16.56.060 Meetings.
A.    Regular meetings of the committee shall be held at City Hall, 50 Natoma Street, Folsom, California. Regular meetings shall be held on the third Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. The committee shall not meet during the months of July and August. A regularly scheduled meeting may be canceled at any time.

B.    Special meetings may be called in the manner specified by applicable state law.

C.    A quorum shall consist of a simple majority of currently appointed landscaping and lighting representatives. Districts lacking an appointed representative shall not be counted against a valid quorum. When there is no quorum present at a meeting, the chairperson or any member of the committee shall adjourn the meeting until the next regularly scheduled meeting.

D.    The chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall call the committee to order. In the absence of the chairperson and vice chairperson, the neighborhood director or his/her representative shall call the committee to order whereupon a temporary chairperson will be elected from among the representatives present. Upon the arrival of the chairperson or vice chairperson, the temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the item before the committee. (Ord. 1030  2 (part), 2005)

16.56.070 AgendasOrder of businessVoting.
A.    Committee members may place items on an agenda by contacting the chairperson, neighborhood services director or his/her representative. Citizens or interested parties may address the committee during public comment on agenda items or during the business from the floor portion of the meeting. Agendas shall be published as required by state law.

B.    At the regular meetings of the committee, the following shall be the order of business:

1.    Roll call;

2.    Review of summary/minutes (if applicable);

3.    Business from the floor/good of the order;

4.    Agenda items of the landscaping and lighting district advisory committee;

5.    Adjournment.

C.    On all matters acted upon by the committee, the voting shall be a roll-call vote of the representatives present. The ayes and noes of the members shall be recorded upon the summary of the meeting. All actions of the committee shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of the committee present and eligible to vote at the particular meeting where action is to take place.

D.    All rules of order not provided in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order, Revised.

E.    The committee may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment, whether or not a quorum has been established. If a quorum is not established, no business other than adjournment may be transacted. (Ord. 1030  2 (part), 2005)

Chapter 16.60
DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES
Sections:

16.60.010    Title.

16.60.020    Purpose.

16.60.030    Definitions.

16.60.040    Impact fee deferral and processing fee waiver program.

16.60.050    Security.

16.60.060    Deferral, waiver and subordination agreements.

16.60.070    Processing fee waiver cap.

16.60.080    Interest and penalties.

16.60.090    Fee increases.

16.60.110    Fee deferral/waiver application and administrative processing fees.

16.60.120    Recordation costs.

16.60.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Deferral or Waiver of Certain residential Development Fees. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.020 Purpose.
The city council of the city of Folsom desires to encourage the construction of residential projects which will provide units with affordable rents or affordable housing costs for low and very low income households in the city of Folsom. The city council finds that the early payment of certain impact fees for residential development may create a barrier to such development and desires, by the adoption of this chapter, to ease such barrier by deferring the time for payment of certain impact fees. To create further incentive to construct residential projects for very low income households, the city council also desires to waive the payment of certain processing fees or a portion of such fees as set forth in this chapter. The city council finds that this deferral and waiver program is consistent with the policies and goals of the housing element of the General Plan of the city of Folsom and necessary for the health and welfare of the citys residents. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.030 Definitions.
Affordability covenant means a covenant restricting all low income and very low income units to remain affordable to low income and very low income households for no less than 55 years for rental units and no less than 45 years for owner-occupied units.

Affordable housing cost refers to the definition contained in Health & Safety Code section 50052.5, including but not limited to cost limits for low and very low income households in owner-occupied housing, as further defined in Volume 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

Affordable rent refers to the definition contained in Health & Safety Code Section 50023, including but not limited to cost limits for low and very low income households in rental housing, as further defined in Volume 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

Applicant means the owner or owners of record of the real property for which a fee deferral or fee waiver or combination fee deferral and waiver is sought pursuant to this chapter.

Director means the director of the planning, inspections and permitting department or his or her designee.

Fee deferral agreement refers to the agreement by and between the applicant and the city of Folsom that is required for approval of any fee deferral under this chapter and which is in accordance with Section 16.60.070.

Fee deferral and waiver agreement refers to the agreement by and between the applicant and the city of Folsom that is required for approval of a request for both a fee deferral and a fee waiver under this chapter and which is in accordance with Section 16.60.070.

Fee waiver agreement refers to the agreement by and between the applicant and the city of Folsom that is required for approval of any fee waiver under this chapter and which is in accordance with Section 16.60.070.

Fee waiver funds means redevelopment affordable housing 20% set aside funds which have been specifically reserved by resolution of the redevelopment agency to facilitate fee waivers for qualified residential projects.

Impact fees refers to city fees imposed for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to a development project as required by code, ordinance, resolution or other law to be paid as a condition of, or prerequisite to, development of residential uses, as those codes, ordinances, resolutions or other laws may be amended from time to time.

Interest means interest equal to the annual rate of interest earned by the city on the investment of pooled funds computed from the date the impact fees or processing fees, as applicable, would have been due and payable in the absence of a deferral and/or waiver pursuant to this chapter.

Low income households refers to the definition contained in Health & Safety Code section 50079.5, including but not limited to an income limit of 80 percent of area median income, adjusted for family size and revised annually.

Maximum fee deferral period means 15 months from the date of issuance of a building permit for a very low income or low income unit within the qualified residential project for which a fee deferral was approved.

Maximum fee waiver period means 15 months from the date of issuance of a building permit for a very low income or low income unit within the qualified residential project for which a fee waiver was approved.

Penalties means an amount equal to one $100 per unit per month computed from the date deferred fees are due and payable or the date units with an approved waiver are required to be constructed.

Processing fees refers to development processing and administrative fees including, but not limited to, application, processing, plan check and inspection fees required by code, ordinance, resolution or other law to be paid as a condition of, or prerequisite to, development of residential uses, as those codes, ordinances, resolutions or other laws may be amended from time to time.

Qualified residential project means a residential development project which has received all required discretionary development approvals and entitlements and which has been certified by the director, in writing, as including at least 10% of units with affordable rents or affordable housing costs for very low income households or at least 30% of units with affordable rents or affordable housing costs for low income households.

Security instruments means a promissory note secured by a deed of trust encumbering each parcel of record owned by the applicant that is included in the qualified residential project and which has been approved by the city council for a fee deferral, fee waiver or fee deferral and waiver.

Very low income households refers to the definition contained in Health & Safety Code Section 50105, including but not limited to an income limit of 50% of area median income, adjusted for family size and revised annually. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.040 Impact fee deferral and processing fee waiver program.
A.    An applicant with a qualified residential project may file an application with the planning, inspections and permitting department to request deferral of impact fees included in the qualified residential project. The application shall be in a form approved by the director and shall include the following:

1.    Copies of all approvals and entitlements for the development of the project;

2.    A preliminary title report;

3.    A copy of the tentative or final subdivision or parcel map identifying all units for which a deferral and/or waiver is sought (applies to single-family qualified residential projects which plan to sell or rent units both at market rate and for very low income households); and

4.    Any other data and information which may be deemed necessary by the director for proper consideration of the application.

B.    The city council shall approve or deny all applications for impact fee deferrals and/or processing fee waivers. In reviewing the applications, the city council may consider:

1.    The effect of an impact fee deferral on public improvements and planned capital facilities;

2.    The extent to which a deferral or waiver of fees affects the feasibility of a project; and

3.    The demonstrated need for a deferral and/or waiver of fees. Special consideration shall be given to projects including student housing and to mixed use, and to transit-oriented and infill development.

C.    Only impact fees imposed by the city may be approved for deferral. All impact fees imposed by other entities or agencies shall be paid in accordance with applicable statutes, resolutions, ordinances, and regulations. Approved impact fee deferrals for a qualified residential project shall not exceed 75% of the total amount of impact fees applicable to the low income and/or very low income units included in the qualified residential project. Impact fees for each individual low income and/or very low income unit which are not approved for deferral shall be paid at the time of building permit issuance. Said payment shall be in addition to any and all required application, processing, inspection, fee deferral application and administrative processing fees.

D.    Approval of any processing fee waiver is subject to the availability of fee waiver funds as set forth in Section 16.60.070. Approved processing fee waivers for a qualified residential project shall not exceed the total amount of processing fees applicable to the low income and/or very low income units included in the qualified residential project. Processing fees for each individual low income and/or very low income unit shall be paid at the same time as all other processing fees for the project. Said payment shall be in addition to any and all required impact, fee waiver application and administrative processing fees. Processing fees which are approved for waiver shall be refunded to the applicant on a unit by unit basis upon:

1.    Recordation of the documents set forth in subsection E, below;

2.    The issuance of a building permit for each unit approved for a waiver. No impact fees may be waived under this chapter.

E.    Impact fee deferrals and/or processing fee waiver approved by the city council shall be conditional and subject to the recordation, prior to the issuance of any building permits for the qualified residential project or within 60 days of approval, whichever is earlier, of the following documents:

1.    The required security instruments;

2.    The agreement required pursuant to Section 16.60.060; and

3.    The affordability covenants.

F.    Fees that are approved for deferral for a single-family qualified residential project shall be due and payable at the close of escrow of each individual very low income or low income units within the project or upon the expiration of the maximum fee deferral period, whichever is earlier. Fees that are approved for deferral for a multi-family qualified residential project pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable upon the close of permanent loan financing or upon the expiration of the maximum fee deferral period, whichever is earlier. If the deferred fees are not paid when due, interest and penalties shall apply pursuant to Section 16.60.080.

G.    A fee waiver shall be valid for the maximum fee waiver period. If the very low or low income units of a qualified residential project are not constructed and certificates of occupancy issued within the maximum fee waiver period, all waived fees shall be immediately due and payable and interest and penalties shall apply pursuant to Section 16.60.080.

H.    The approval of an impact fee deferral and/or a processing fee waiver for a qualified residential project shall not be transferable to another project regardless of whether the applicant is the same for both projects or whether the other project is also a qualified residential project. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.050 Security.
Execution and recordation of security instruments, in a form satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney, shall be required for all impact fee deferrals and/or processing fee waivers. The security instruments shall secure the total amount of deferred and/waived fees, including interest and penalties. Said security instruments shall be recorded prior to the issuance of any building permits for the qualified residential project and shall be secondary only to deeds of trust associated with acquisition or construction financing. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.060 Deferral, waiver and subordination agreements.
The applicant shall enter into a fee deferral or waiver agreement or a single agreement for both with the city in a form satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney. Such agreement shall, at a minimum, be:

1.    Site and project specific;

2.    Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter;

3.    Bind applicants successors in interest; and

4.    Be recorded with the Sacramento county recorders office.

A separate agreement shall be entered into for each qualified residential project whether or not the applicant is the same for multiple projects. In addition, the applicant shall execute a separate subordination agreement for each encumbrance or deed of trust other than one which secures repayment of acquisition or construction financing existing at the time of execution of the deferral or waiver or deferral and waiver agreement. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.070 Processing fee waiver cap.
A.    The amount of processing fee waivers approved pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed the amount of fee waiver funds reserved and available for use within any given fiscal year. Subject to the redevelopment agencys adoption of a resolution reserving such funds, the fee waiver funds for the first 5 years (beginning with fiscal year 20022003) shall not exceed a total of $1 million with expenditure of such monies being averaged over such 5 year reservation period (average yearly reserved amount$200,000/year). If the total amount of fee waivers approved in years 1, 2, 3 or 4 is less than the average yearly reserved amount for the given fiscal year, the remaining average yearly reserved amount shall be rolled over to the next fiscal year. If the amount of fee waivers approved in years 1, 2, 3 or 4 exceeds the average yearly reserved amount for the given fiscal year, the amount over and above the average yearly reserved amount for the given fiscal year, the amount over and above the average yearly reserved amount shall be credited to the subsequent years. However, in no event shall the total amount of fee waivers exceed $1 million for such 5 year period. After the expiration of the initial 5 year period, the amount of redevelopment affordable housing 20% set aside funds reserved as fee waiver funds for each fiscal year shall be determined by resolution of the redevelopment agency on an annual basis. Failure to reach the fee waiver fund cap in a particular fiscal year shall not result in a rollover of the surplus fee waiver funds to the next fiscal year.

B.    The date an application for a fee waiver or fee deferral and waiver is deemed complete by the director shall establish application priority for fee waiver funds in any given fiscal year. Applicants failure to record the security instruments, fee waiver agreement or fee deferral and waiver agreement, and affordability covenants prior to issuance of any building permits for the project or within 60 days of city council approval of a fee waiver or fee waiver and deferral, whichever is earlier, shall result in the automatic termination of the fee waiver or fee waiver and deferral and the loss of application priority. Any subsequent request by applicant for a fee waiver or fee deferral and waiver for the same project shall require the resubmittal of an application for the project including the payment of the application and processing fees set forth in Section 16.60.110. Such resubmitted application shall not be given priority over new applications and shall be subject to the cap on fee waiver funds in the same manner as any other new application in a given fiscal year.

C.    The failure of a particular applicant to satisfy the requirements for a fee waiver or fee deferral and waiver shall not result in the rollover of unused fee waiver funds to the next fiscal year. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.080 Interest and penalties.
A.    Except as otherwise set forth herein, no interest shall accrue during the period of deferral of impact fees.

B.    Failure of applicant to pay deferred impact fees, when due, shall subject applicant to interest and penalties with such interest and penalties being assessed until such deferred impact fees, including applicable interest and penalties, are paid in full.

C.    Failure of applicant to construct and obtain a certificate of occupancy within the maximum fee waiver period for a very low or low income unit for which a processing fee waiver was approved shall subject applicant to interest and penalties with such interest and penalties being assessed until such unit is constructed; a certificate of occupancy is obtained; and applicable interest and penalties are paid in full. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.090 Fee increases.
Fees which qualify for a fee deferral or waiver or a combination fee deferral and waiver shall not be subject to fee increases which may occur from the date of recordation of the agreement required pursuant to Section 16.60.060 to the end of the maximum deferral or maximum waiver period. However, subsequent applications for the same qualified residential project shall be subject to the fee rates in effect at the time of submittal of the subsequent application. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.110 Fee deferral/waiver application and administrative processing fees.
A non-refundable fee deferral/waiver application fee of $200.00 is hereby established and shall be paid at the time of application for a fee deferral or fee waiver or fee deferral and waiver pursuant to this chapter. A non-refundable administrative processing fee of $75.00 is hereby established for payment at the time of each individual building permit issuance for the purpose of funding the costs of administering the fee deferral/waiver program established by this chapter. These fees may from time to time be amended by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

16.60.120 Recordation costs.
All costs of recordation of documentation required pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 960  1 (part), 2002)

Chapter 16.70
STUDIO APARTMENT FEES
Sections:

16.70.010    Purpose.

16.70.020    Definitions.

16.70.030    Studio apartment unit fee reduction program.

16.70.040    Standards for the reduction of impact fees.

16.70.050    Appeal procedure.

16.70.010 Purpose.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to further the policies, goals and programs of the housing element of the citys general plan and to help facilitate the development of affordable and senior housing within the city. Specifically, Program 19m of the housing element provides that the city will revise its ordinances to allow two studio apartments to be counted as one unit for purposes of paying development impact fees.

B.    The city council finds that providing a variety of housing options to people of all income levels is socially and economically beneficial to the city and its residents. Providing alternative housing options will help enable young adults, seniors and other people of limited means to live and work in the city of Folsom, thereby reducing transportation and air quality impacts and furthering a jobs-housing balance within the community.

C.    The city council of the city of Folsom further desires to encourage the construction of residential projects, which will provide units with affordable rents or affordable housing costs for low and very low income households in the city of Folsom. The city council finds that the payment of certain impact fees for residential development may create a barrier to such development and desires, by the adoption of this chapter, to ease such barrier by reducing the payment of certain impact fees for studio apartment units. The city council finds that this fee reduction program is consistent with the policies and goals of the housing element of the general plan of the city of Folsom and necessary for the health and welfare of the citys residents. (Ord. 1027  1 (part), 2005)

16.70.020 Definitions.
A.    Applicant means the owner or owners of record of the real property and/or developers of real property for which a fee reduction is sought pursuant to this chapter.

B.    Director means the director of the community development department or his or her designee.

C.    Impact fees refers to city fees imposed for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to a development project as required by code, ordinance, resolution or other law to be paid as a condition of, or prerequisite to, development of residential uses, as those codes, ordinances, resolutions or other laws may be amended from time to time.

D.    Multifamily residential project means a residential development project with units in duplex, halfplex, or greater intensity that is proposed for construction on land planned or zoned for other than single-family residential.

E.    Studio apartment unit means a single, one-room residential apartment unit without a separate bedroom in which the total interior square footage does not exceed six hundred thirty square feet. (Ord. 1027  1 (part), 2005)

16.70.030 Studio apartment unit fee reduction program.
A.    An applicant with a multifamily residential project may file an application with the community development department to request a reduction in impact fees applicable to the studio apartment units in the multifamily residential project. The application shall be in a form approved by the director and shall be filed at the same time as any applications for all required discretionary development approvals and entitlements. The application shall specify the size, number and location of all units in the multifamily residential project, including the studio apartment units and any other data and information which may be deemed necessary by the director for proper consideration of the application.

B.    The director shall review the request and approve it if all the requirements of this chapter are met. The director shall advise the developer, in writing, whether the request is granted or denied, no later than the date the project is to be reviewed or acted upon by the planning commission.

C.    Any reduction in impact fees shall conform with the provisions of Section 16.70.040.

D.    Only impact fees imposed by the city may be approved for reduction. All impact fees imposed by other entities or agencies shall be paid in accordance with applicable statutes, resolutions, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 1027  1 (part), 2005)

16.70.040 Standards for the reduction of impact fees.
A.    Studio apartment units that are approved for a reduction in impact fees shall be required to pay fifty percent of the impact fees otherwise applicable to the unit. Impact fees shall be paid at the time and in the manner required by applicable city ordinances or resolutions.

B.    A reduction in impact fees shall only be approved for up to thirty-five percent of the total number of units within a multifamily residential project. (Ord. 1027  1 (part), 2005)

16.70.050 Appeal procedure.
A.    A denial of a request pursuant to this section may be appealed to the city manager or designee as provided in this code.

B.    No official action such as the issuance of a building permit, license or other type of permit shall be taken while an appeal is pending. (Ord. 1027  1 (part), 2005)

Chapter 16.80
TEMPORARY DEFERRAL OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Sections:

16.80.010    Findings and purpose.

16.80.020    Definitions.

16.80.030    Deferral of development impact fees for residential projects.

16.80.040    Deferral of development impact fees for commercial projects.

16.80.050    Cost recovery.

16.80.060    Default.

16.80.070    Applicability.

16.80.010 Findings and purpose.
The city council finds that the challenges facing the real estate industry in an unstable and fluctuating market pose a significant concern for growth and economic development within the city. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a limited duration temporary economic stimulus incentive to new development projects within the city by allowing eligible applicants to defer certain development impact fees. (Ord. 1165  2 (part), 2012)

16.80.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:

Code means the Folsom Municipal Code.

Commercial means those business activities which are permitted or allowed in the appropriate zoning districts as set forth in Title 17, as well as those similar commercial zoning districts in the Folsom plan area specific plan.

Director means the director of the community development department of the city.

Residential means those activities which are permitted or allowed in the appropriate zoning districts as set forth in Title 17, as well as those similar residential zoning districts in the Folsom plan area specific plan.

Subject property means the real property upon which the citys development impact fees are sought to be deferred. (Ord. 1165  2 (part), 2012)

16.80.030 Deferral of development impact fees for residential projects.
A.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, some or all of the citys development impact fees imposed on new residential projects with subdivision maps of ten lots/units or more may, at the request of the developer or the property owner, be deferred on a case-by-case basis without incurring interest, based upon an eligibility criteria established by the director of the community development department with concurrence of the city manager, until the date of the final inspection or at the close of escrow on the affected parcel, whichever first occurs, but in no event later than twelve months from the date of issuance of the building permit.

B.    No deferral shall be effective until developer and property owner execute an agreement in a form acceptable to the city attorney, approved by the city manager and recorded as a lien against the subject property, with a deed of trust in favor of the city, until all deferred impact fees are paid. Deferral agreements may defer fees for no more than fifteen units at any one time. The term of the deferral agreement may not exceed three years from the date of the recordation of the first final map or the effective date of the agreement, whichever comes first. (Ord. 1165  2 (part), 2012)

16.80.040 Deferral of development impact fees for commercial projects.
A.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, some or all of the citys development impact fees imposed on new commercial buildings and structures with a minimum of five thousand square feet in interior space may, at the request of the developer or the property owner, be deferred on a case-by-case basis based upon an eligibility criteria established by the director of the community development department with concurrence of the city manager, until the date of the final inspection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy on the affected commercial project, whichever first occurs, but in no event later than twelve months from the date of issuance of the building permit.

B.    No deferral shall be effective until developer and property owner execute an agreement in a form acceptable to the city attorney, approved by the city manager and recorded as a lien against the subject property, with a deed of trust in favor of the city, until all deferred impact fees and accrued interest are fully paid.

C.    Interest on unpaid fees for commercial projects shall accrue from the date of the building permit until the deferred impact fees and all accrued interest is paid, at a rate not less than the annual rate of interest which the city earns on its investment of pooled funds. (Ord. 1224  2, 2015: Ord. 1165  2 (part), 2012)

16.80.050 Cost recovery.
All noncity costs and/or fees incurred (or that will be incurred) by the city in processing the fee deferral request shall be borne and paid for by the applicant at the time of the request. (Ord. 1165  2 (part), 2012)

16.80.060 Default.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, should the deferred impact fees not be paid at the time when they become due and payable:

A.    All remaining and unpaid impact fees shall be accelerated and become immediately due and payable; and

B.    Regardless of the type of the project (residential or commercial), interest on unpaid fees subject to the fee deferral agreement shall accrue from the date of issuance of the initial building permit until the deferred impact fees and all accrued interest is paid, at the annual rate of interest which the city earns on its investment of pooled funds; and

C.    An additional one thousand dollars shall be added to the unpaid amount to cover the initial administrative costs incurred in processing the fee deferral application; and

D.    The city may pursue collection through all available legal and administrative means including, but shall not be limited to, judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of the recorded lien against the subject property and/or civil judgment against the developer and/or the property owner for breach of the fee deferral agreement and/or the security provided hereunder. (Ord. 1165  2 (part), 2012)

16.80.070 Applicability.
This chapter and the incentives derived hereunder shall apply only to new development projects that have not obtained a building permit from the city at the time this chapter is adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1224  3, 2015: Ord. 1165  2 (part), 2012)

Title 17
ZONING
Chapters:

17.02    Definitions

17.03    Enforcement

17.04    Planning Commission

17.06    Design Review

17.08    Zoning Plan and Adoption of Districts

17.10    Designation of Districts

17.11    R-1-L, Residential, Single-Family Dwelling, Large Lot District

17.12    R-1-ML, Residential, Single-Family Dwelling, Medium Lot District

17.13    R-1-M, Residential, Single-Family Dwelling, Small Lot District

17.14    R-2, Two-Family Residence District

17.16    R-3, Neighborhood Apartment District

17.17    R-M, Residential, Multifamily Dwelling District

17.18    R-4, General Apartment District

17.22    Commercial Land Use Zones

17.23    MU, Mixed-Use Zones

17.24    Adult Related Businesses

17.27    Bed and Breakfast Inn

17.28    M-1, Light Industrial District

17.30    M-2, General Industrial District

17.32    M-L, Limited Manufacturing District

17.34    MF, Industrial Frontage District

17.35    A-1-A, Agricultural-Reserve District

17.36    AV, Airport Districts

17.37    SP, Specific Plan District

17.38    PD, Planned Development District

17.39    OSC, Open Space and Conservation District

17.40    A, Agricultural Combining District

17.41    HCD, Habitat Conservation District

17.42    B, Special Building Site Combining District

17.44    F, Special Highway Frontage Combining District

17.46    H, Special Height Combining District

17.48    CD, Special Civic District Combining District

17.52    H-D, Historic District

17.54    UUD, Underground Utility District

17.56    E-1, E-2, Estate Districts

17.57    Parking Requirements

17.58    General Provisions and Exceptions

17.59    Signs

17.60    Use Permits

17.61    Home Occupations

17.62    Variances

17.64    Nonconforming Uses

17.66    Certificates of Use and Occupancy

17.68    Amendments

17.70    Reports of Residential Buildings

17.72    Service Stations

17.74    RMH, Trailers and Trailer Parks

17.90    Residential Construction Tax

17.95    Drainage Facility Improvement Charges

17.97    Surface Mining and Reclamation

17.98    Wetland and Riparian Habitat Management

17.100    School Facilities Financing Plan for New Development

17.102    Density Bonus and Other Developer Incentives

17.104    Inclusionary Housing

17.105    Second Dwelling Units

17.108    Emergency Shelters

17.110    Condominium Conversion

17.112    Medical Marijuana Dispensaries

17.113    Commercial Nonmedical Marijuana Use

17.114    Marijuana Cultivation

17.116    Reasonable Accommodation

Chapter 17.02
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

17.02.010    Definitions generally.

17.02.020    Accessory building.

17.02.030    Accessory use.

17.02.040    Agency.

17.02.050    Alley.

17.02.060    Apartment house.

17.02.070    Basement.

17.02.080    Boarding house.

17.02.090    Building.

17.02.100    Building coverage.

17.02.110    Building height.

17.02.120    Building site.

17.02.125    Community development director/community development department.

17.02.127    Covered parking space.

17.02.128    Day care center.

17.02.130    Dwelling.

17.02.140    Dwelling group.

17.02.150    Dwelling, multiple-family.

17.02.160    Dwelling, two-family.

17.02.170    Dwelling unit.

17.02.180    Family.

17.02.190    Garage, commercial.

17.02.200    Garage parking.

17.02.210    Garage, private.

17.02.220    Helicopter port.

17.02.230    Home occupation.

17.02.240    Hotel.

17.02.250    Junk yard.

17.02.255    Large family day care home.

17.02.260    Lot.

17.02.270    Lot, corner.

17.02.280    Lot width.

17.02.281    Microbrewery.

17.02.285    Mobilehome.

17.02.290    Nonconforming building.

17.02.330    Parking lot.

17.02.340    Parking space.

17.02.343    Planning director/planning department.

17.02.345    Real estate tract sales office.

17.02.350    Service station.

17.02.360    Setback line.

17.02.370    Servants quarters.

17.02.380    Stable, commercial.

17.02.390    Stable, private.

17.02.400    Structure.

17.02.410    Story.

17.02.420    Street.

17.02.430    Structural alterations.

17.02.435    Surface mining operations, reclamation and related definitions.

17.02.440    Tourist court.

17.02.450    Trailer.

17.02.460    Trailer court.

17.02.470    Yards.

17.02.480    Yard, front.

17.02.490    Yard, rear.

17.02.500    Yard, side.

17.02.510    Group home.

17.02.520    Single room occupancy units.

17.02.525    Small family day care home.

17.02.530    Supportive housing.

17.02.540    Transitional housing.

17.02.010 Definitions generally.
Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word building includes the word structure, and the word shall is mandatory and not directory. The term city council means the city council of Folsom, and planning commission means the planning commission of Folsom. The word city means the incorporated area of the city of Folsom. (Prior code  3104.01)

17.02.020 Accessory building.
Accessory building means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot, or to the use of the land. (Prior code  3104.02)

17.02.030 Accessory use.
Accessory use means a use or building incidental or subordinate to the principal use of building located upon the same lot. (Prior code  3104.03)

17.02.040 Agency.
Agency means an office or commercial establishment in which goods, material or equipment is received for servicing, treatment or processing elsewhere. (Prior code  3104.04)

17.02.050 Alley.
Alley means a public or permanent private way or lane less than 36 feet in width which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. (Prior code  3104.05)

17.02.060 Apartment house.
Apartment house means any building or portion thereof which is designed and built for occupancy by three or more families. (Prior code  3104.06)

17.02.070 Basement.
Basement means a space partly or wholly underground and having more than one-half its height, measured from its floor to its finished ceiling, below the average adjoining grade. If the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above grade at any point, such basement shall be considered a story. (Prior code  3104.10)

17.02.080 Boarding house.
Boarding house means a residence or dwelling, other than a hotel or state-licensed small group home, wherein three or more rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities, are rented to individuals under separate rental agreements or leases, either written or oral, whether or not an owner, agent, or rental manager is in residence. (Ord. 1105  2 (part), 2008: prior code  3104.11)

17.02.090 Building.
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns and/or by walls and intended for the housing or shelter of any person, animal or chattel. (Prior code  3104.12)

17.02.100 Building coverage.
Building coverage means the land area covered by all buildings on a lot, including all projections except eaves. (Prior code  3104.13)

17.02.110 Building height.
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of the roof, ridge or parapet wall. (Prior code  3104.14)

17.02.120 Building site.
Building site means the land area occupied or capable of being covered by all structures permissible under this title. (Prior code  3104.15)

17.02.125 Community development director/community development department.
Community development director means the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting. Community development department means the department of planning, inspections and permitting. (Ord. 858  2 (part), 1997)

17.02.127 Covered parking space.
Covered parking space means a fully enclosed parking structure consisting of exterior materials, colors, and an architectural design that match the primary residence. The space shall be directly accessible from a street, paved driveway, or maneuvering area along a paved surface or similar hardscape as specified in Section 17.57.080. (Ord. 1187  2, 2013)

17.02.128 Day care center.
Day care center means any child care facility of any capacity, other than a small family day care home or a large family day care home, in which less than twenty-four-hour-per-day nonmedical care and supervision are provided to children in a group setting operating under a license from the California Department of Social Services under the standards of state law. (Ord. 1218  2, 2015)

17.02.130 Dwelling.
Dwelling means a building designed for and/or occupied by one or more persons of a family. (Prior code  3104.21)

17.02.140 Dwelling group.
Dwelling group means two or more detached one- or two-family dwellings, other than a commercial tourist or motor court, located upon a building site, together with all open spaces as required by this title. (Prior code  3104.20)

17.02.150 Dwelling, multiple-family.
Multiple-family dwelling means a building designed and/or used to house three or more families, living independently of each other, including all necessary employees of each such family. (Prior code  3104.24)

17.02.160 Dwelling, two-family.
Two-family dwelling means a building containing not more than two kitchens, designed and/or used to house not more than two families, living independently of each other, including all necessary employees of each such family. (Prior code  3104.23)

17.02.170 Dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit means a building or part of a building designed for one family, and containing one kitchen. (Prior code  3104.25)

17.02.180 Family.
Family shall mean one person living alone or two or more persons living together in a dwelling unit with common access to, and common use of, all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit. (Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: prior code  3104.26)

17.02.190 Garage, commercial.
Commercial garage means a building, other than private garage used for the parking, repair or servicing of motor vehicles. (Prior code  3104.31)

17.02.200 Garage, parking.
Parking garage means a public garage designed and/or used on a commercial basis for the storage only of vehicles. (Prior code  3104.32)

17.02.210 Garage, private.
Private garage means an accessory building or portion of a building, designed and/or used only for the shelter or storage of vehicles by the occupants of the dwelling, including covered parking space or carport. (Prior code  3104.30)

17.02.220 Helicopter port.
Helicopter port means land improved and intended to be used for the landing and taking off of helicopters or vertical flying aircraft. (Prior code  3104.35)

17.02.230 Home occupation.
Home occupation means any business related use carried on within a dwelling or accessory structure thereto, primarily by the inhabitants thereof, which use is secondary to the residential use of the dwelling. The home occupation must not substantially or materially change the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 804  1 (part), 1994: prior code  3104.36)

17.02.240 Hotel.
Hotel means any building or portion thereof containing 6 or more guest rooms used or intended or designed to be used, let or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied by 6 or more guests, whether the compensation for hire be paid directly or indirectly in money, goods, wares, merchandise, labor or otherwise and includes hotels, lodging and rooming houses, dormitories, turkish baths, bachelor hotels, studio hotels, public and private clubs and any such building of any nature whatsoever so occupied, designed or intended to be so occupied, except jails, hospitals, asylums, sanitariums, orphanages, prisons, detention homes and similar buildings where human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. (Prior code  3104.37)

17.02.250 Junk yard.
Junk yard means any area of 200 square feet or more used for the storage of junk or scrap materials, or for the wrecking or dismantling of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery. (Prior code  3104.40)

17.02.255 Large family day care home.
Large family day care home means a family day care home under Section 1597.465 of the Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time, providing care for more than eight children and up to and including fourteen children operating with a license from the California Department of Social Services under the standards of state law, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day while the childrens parents or guardians are away. Large family day care homes do not require a use permit but require an administrative permit (refer to Chapter 5.100 for the administrative permit requirements). (Ord. 1218  3, 2015)

17.02.260 Lot.
Lot means a parcel of land under one ownership used or capable of being used under the regulations of this title, and including both the building site and all required yards and other open spaces and frontage as defined herein. (Prior code  3104.41)

17.02.270 Lot, corner.
Corner lot means a lot located at the junction of 2 or more intersecting streets, with a boundary line bordering on each of such streets. The shortest such street frontage constitutes the front of the lot. (Prior code  3104.42)

17.02.280 Lot width.
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the front yard building line. (Prior code  3104.43)

17.02.281 Microbrewery.
Microbrewery means an alcoholic beverage manufacturing facility that produces fifteen thousand barrels of beer per year or less on site in accordance with a valid alcohol production license from the state of California, and may include an on-site restaurant and/or bar that serves its locally crafted beer. (Ord. 1236  2, 2015)

17.02.285 Mobilehome.
A mobilehome is a structure which is transportable in 1 or more sections and designed for human habitation or occupancy. A mobilehome does not include a recreation vehicle as defined in the Vehicle Code of the state. A mobilehome also includes a manufactured home. (Ord. 445 Exh. A (part), 1981)

17.02.290 Nonconforming building.
Nonconforming building means a building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time this title became effective, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. (Prior code  3104.45)

17.02.330 Parking lot.
Parking lot means an area of land, a yard or other open space lot used for or designed for use by standing motor vehicles. A parking lot or parking area includes the parking space, maneuvering area and related landscape areas. (Ord. 509  1, 1983: prior code  3104.50)

17.02.340 Parking space.
Parking space means land or space, covered or uncovered, laid out for, surfaced and used or designed for use by a standing motor vehicle, that is directly accessible from a street, driveway or maneuvering area as specified in Section 17.57.080. (Ord. 509  2, 1983: prior code  3104.51)

17.02.343 Planning director/planning department.
Planning director means the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting. Planning department means the department of planning, inspections and permitting. (Ord. 858  2 (part), 1997)

17.02.345 Real estate tract sales office.
Real estate tract sales office means a residential structure or a portion thereof which is utilized on a temporary basis as an office for the first-time sale or rental of newly constructed dwellings or dwelling units which are situated within the subdivision in which the office is located. Advertising signs located upon the lot or parcel upon which the office is located are also permitted, provided that the sign or signs (wall and/or freestanding) shall not exceed 6 square feet in area nor 4 feet in height and shall be in addition to those permitted under Section 17.58.090. No more than 1 office permitted under Section 17.58.090 shall be permitted within any subdivision unit and the use shall be discontinued as soon as all lots or parcels within the subdivision have been sold or rented. Ten days prior to the opening of a real estate tract sales office, the selling agency shall notify the planning department of the city of the location of the real estate tract sales office it intends to use, the name of the subdivision which it serves and furnish a description of the size, location, color and wording of its proposed advertising signs. (Ord. 567  1, 1986)

17.02.350 Service station.
Service station means a retail business establishment supplying gasoline and oil, and minor accessories and services for automobiles. (Prior code  3104.60)

17.02.360 Setback line.
Setback line means a line established by this title to govern the placement of buildings with respect to streets and alleys. This section governs setback lines on the particular streets and public ways set forth herein:

A.    Along Prairie City Road, between the intersections of U.S. Highway #50 and Bidwell Street, sixty-two feet from centerline of Prairie City Road in R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts; and ninety-two feet from centerline in all other zonings;

B.    Along Bidwell Street from the intersection of Riley Street to the most easterly city limits, sixty-two feet from centerline of Bidwell Street in R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts; and ninety-two feet from centerline in all other zonings;

C.    Along Natoma Street, from Stafford Street to the most easterly city limits, sixty-two feet from the centerline of Natoma Street in R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts, and ninety-two feet from the centerline in all other zonings;

D.    Along Baldwin Dam Road, its entire length, sixty-two feet from centerline of Baldwin Dam Road in R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts, and ninety-two feet from centerline in all other zonings;

E.    Along Folsom-Auburn Road, its entire length within the city, one hundred feet from centerline of Folsom-Auburn Road, in all zonings;

F.    Along Oak Avenue, its entire length within the city, sixty-two feet from centerline in R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 zonings and ninety-two feet from centerline in all other zonings. (Ord. 1246  2, 2015: Ord. 275  1, 1971: prior code  3104.61)

17.02.370 Servants quarters.
Servants quarters means a secondary dwelling or apartment without any kitchen facilities designed for and used only by persons or the families of persons regularly employed on the property. (Prior code  3104.62)

17.02.380 Stable, commercial.
Commercial stable means a stable for horses to be let, hired or used on a commercial basis. (Prior code  3104.63)

17.02.390 Stable, private.
Private stable means a stable for horses to be used by the owners thereof. (Prior code  3104.64)

17.02.400 Structure.
Structure means anything constructed or erected upon the ground or attached to a structure having location on the ground. (Prior code  3104.65)

17.02.410 Story.
Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the top-most floor and the ceiling or roof thereof. If the finished floor level directly above the basement is more than six feet above grade at any point, such basement shall be considered a story. (Prior code  3104.66)

17.02.420 Street.
Street means a public or permanent private way thirty-six feet or more in width which affords a primary means of access to property. (Prior code  3104.67)

17.02.430 Structural alterations.
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building, as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders and the floor joists, ceiling joists or roof rafters. (Prior code  3104.68)

17.02.435 Surface mining operations, reclamation and related definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to surface mining and reclamation under Chapter 17.97:

A.    Exploration or prospecting means the search for minerals by geological, geophysical, geochemical or other techniques, including, but not limited to: sampling, assaying, drilling, or any surface or underground works needed to determine the type, extent, or quantity of minerals present.

B.    Mined lands means the surface, subsurface, and ground water of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located.

C.    Minerals means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.

D.    Mining waste means the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other material or property directly resulting from or displaced by surface mining operations.

E.    Operator means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations himself, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his behalf.

F.    Overburden means soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal by surface mining operations.

G.    Permit means a use permit issued under Chapter 17.60.

H.    Person means any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization, or partnership, or any city, county, district, or the state or any department or agency thereof.

I.    Reclamation means the process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

J.    State Board means the State Mining and Geology Board, in the Department of Conservation, State of California.

K.    State Geologist means the individual holding office as structured in Section 677 of Article 3, Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the Public Resources Code.

L.    Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 or the Act means California Public Resources Code Section 2710 et seq.

M.    Surface mining operations means all or any part of the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to:

1.    In-place distillation, retorting or leaching.

2.    The production and disposal of mining wastes.

3.    Prospecting and exploratory activities. (Ord. 527  1, 1984)

17.02.440 Tourist court.
Tourist court means a group of buildings designed for use by tourists or transients with living or sleeping rooms, garages, parking spaces and related facilities advertised or offered on a commercial basis, including an auto court and motor court. (Prior code  3104.70)

17.02.450 Trailer.
Trailer means a vehicle designed, equipped and/or used as a dwelling or for living or sleeping purposes. (Prior code  3104.71)

17.02.460 Trailer court.
Trailer court means a lot or parcel of land used or designed or intended to be used for the accommodation of two or more trailers. (Prior code  3104.72)

17.02.470 Yards.
Yards means land unoccupied or unobstructed, except for such encroachments as may be permitted by this title, surrounding a building site. (Prior code  3104.80)

17.02.480 Yard, front.
Front yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot measured between the street line (or the lot line connected to a street by legal access) and the nearest line of the main building or enclosed or covered porch. The front yard of a corner lot is the yard adjacent to the shorter street frontage. (Prior code  3104.81)

17.02.490 Yard, rear.
Rear yard means a yard extending between the side yards of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building or enclosed or covered porch nearest the rear line of the lot. (Prior code  3104.82)

17.02.500 Yard, side.
Side yard means a yard on either side of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear lot line, the width of each yard being measured between the side line of the lot and the nearest part of the main building or enclosed porch. (Prior code  3104.83)

17.02.510 Group home.
Group home shall mean a dwelling unit licensed or supervised by any federal, state, or local health/welfare agency that provides twenty-four-hour care of unrelated persons who are in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family-like environment. (Ord. 1144  2 (part), 2011)

17.02.520 Single room occupancy units.
Single room occupancy (SRO) units shall mean multi-unit housing that typically consists of a single room and shared bath and also may include a shared common kitchen and common activity area. SROs may be restricted to seniors or be available to persons of all ages. Subsidized versions may be supervised by a governmental housing agency. (Ord. 1144  2 (part), 2011)

17.02.525 Small family day care home.
Small family day care home means a family day care home providing care for up to eight children and operating with a license from the California Department of Social Services under the standards of state law. (Ord. 1218  4, 2015)

17.02.530 Supportive housing.
Supportive housing shall mean housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing units are residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. (Ord. 1144  2 (part), 2011)

17.02.540 Transitional housing.
Transitional housing shall mean rental housing operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months, and in no case more than two years. Transitional housing units are residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. (Ord. 1144  2 (part), 2011)

Chapter 17.03
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

17.03.010    Enforcement.

17.03.020    Penalties.

17.03.030    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

17.03.010 Enforcement.
A.    This title shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    Unless otherwise set forth in this title, the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting, or his/her designee, shall enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 858  3 (part), 1997)

17.03.020 Penalties.
The following penalties shall apply to any violation of a provision of this title, unless a different penalty is otherwise established by the city council and specifically set forth by ordinance:

A.    A violation of any provision of this title shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this title shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    In addition to the criminal penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, based upon the standards for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of any provision of this title shall be deemed a Level E violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(5). (Ord. 858  3 (part), 1997)

17.03.030 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this title, the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive. The rights to judicial review set forth in Article IV of Chapter 1.09 shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct or stop order shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023.

1.    Unless otherwise set forth in this title, if the violation that is the subject of the notice to correct concerns the failure to apply for and/or obtain a valid permit, the time allowed for application for a permit shall be no less than seven calendar days and no more than thirty calendar days. A stop order shall accompany the notice to correct, and shall remain in effect pending the review of and decision on any permit application.

2.    Unless otherwise set forth in this title, if the violation that is the subject of the notice to correct concerns: (a) the failure to comply with conditions placed on a permit or other entitlement issued by the city, or (b) a violation of any provision of this title, the time allowed to correct the violation shall be a minimum of twenty-four hours and a maximum of ninety calendar days, depending upon the type of action that will be necessary to correct the violation. If the violation creates a potential risk of harm to persons or property, a stop order may accompany the notice to correct, and shall remain in effect until the violation has been remedied to the satisfaction of the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting.

C.    If the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting determines that there has been a good faith effort to correct the violation(s) set forth in a notice to correct, the director may extend the deadline for compliance for a reasonable period of time. Any such extension shall be memorialized in writing and a copy shall be sent by first class mail to all responsible persons.

D.    A notice of administrative violation may be issued pursuant to the procedures established in Section 1.09.024. (Ord. 858  3 (part), 1997)

Chapter 17.04
PLANNING COMMISSION*
Sections:

17.04.010    CreatedMembership.

17.04.020    MembersTermsTransition to Charter form of government.

17.04.024    Eligibility for office.

17.04.026    Vacancies in office.

17.04.028    Removal from office.

17.04.030    Director of planning appointment.

17.04.040    MembersCompensation.

17.04.050    Master plan.

17.04.060    Board of zoning adjustmentCreated.

17.04.070    Board of zoning adjustmentConditional use permit issuance.

17.04.080    Board of zoning adjustmentVariance granting.

17.04.090    Board of zoning adjustmentPermit review.

17.04.100    Board of zoning adjustmentAppeal procedure.

17.04.110    AppealHearing.

17.04.120    AppealDecision.

17.04.130    Fees, general.

*    See also Title 2, Administration and Personnel.

17.04.010 CreatedMembership.
There shall be a planning commission of 7 members. The commission shall consist of 5 members appointed by council-members. Each councilmember shall appoint 1 commission member whose term shall run concurrently with that of the councilmember so appointing. Two members shall be appointed by the council for 2-year terms. (Ord. 710  1, 1990: prior code  3000)

17.04.020 MembersTermsTransition to charter form of government.
All terms of planning commission members, including membership on the board of zoning adjustment, shall end when the city councilmembers elected in the November 6, 1990, election are sworn into office. Thereafter, in accord with the terms of Section 4.05 of the City Charter, each city councilmember shall appoint 1 planning commission member whose term shall run concurrent with that of the councilmember so appointing. Two additional members shall be appointed by the council for 2-year terms. (Ord. 710  2, 1990: prior code  3001)

17.04.024 Eligibility for office.
A person is not eligible to hold office as a planning commissioner unless he or she is at the time of appointment, a resident and registered voter of the city. If, during his or her term of office, a member of the planning commission moves his or her residence outside the city limits, or ceases to be a registered voter of the city, such members office shall immediately become vacant. (Ord. 710  3, 1990)

17.04.026 Vacancies in office.
If the office of a member of the planning commission appointed by a councilmember becomes vacant, the appointing councilmember shall fill the vacancy by appointing a planning commission member whose term shall run concurrent with that of the appointing councilmember. If the office of a member of the planning commission appointed by the council becomes vacant, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointing a planning commission member whose term shall run for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 710  4, 1990)

17.04.028 Removal from office.
The members of the planning commission who are appointed by a councilmember and the members of the planning commission appointed by the city council serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office by the vote of a majority of the members of the council. No public hearing need be held prior to removal and no cause for removal need be shown. The removal of a person as a member of the planning commission shall also terminate such persons membership on the board of zoning adjustment. (Ord. 710  5, 1990)

17.04.030 Director of planning appointment.
The city manager may appoint a director of planning and may employ or contract with planning consultants and specialists for such services as are required. The compensation paid such director, consultants, specialists or other employees shall be set by the council by resolution. (Ord. 487  11, 1982: prior code  3002)

17.04.040 MembersCompensation.
Members of the commission shall receive such compensation for attendance upon meeting and reasonable traveling expenses as the council directs by resolution. (Prior code  3003)

17.04.050 Master plan.
The planning commission shall, as soon as practicable, prepare and adopt a master or general plan, and precise plans in accordance with the conservation and planning law, and shall recommend to the council a comprehensive zoning ordinance in accordance with the general and precise plans. (Prior code  3004)

17.04.060 Board of zoning adjustmentCreated.
The planning commission shall act as a board of zoning adjustment within the meaning of Article 2, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code, and shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities vested therein. (Prior code  3005)

17.04.070 Board of zoning adjustmentConditional use permit issuance.
The board of zoning adjustment may issue permits for conditional uses of property within the city. (Prior code  3006)

17.04.080 Board of zoning adjustmentVariance granting.
The board may grant applications for variance from the terms of any zoning ordinance. (Prior code  3007)

17.04.090 Board of zoning adjustmentPermit review.
The planning commission, acting as the board of zoning adjustment shall review all applications for building or other permits required by the city which directly affect, in any manner, master or general plans, precise plans, zoning ordinances, or subdivision restrictions and the clerk or other official charged with the issuance of such permits shall not issue such permit without the favorable recommendation of the commission or if any appeal is taken by the applicant to the council, without the approval of the council. The city clerk or other officer may, in matters of urgency, issue such permits prior to approval of the commission or council, where the value of such improvement or the cost of construction does not exceed $400, but shall at the next meeting of the commission and council submit, in writing to such bodies an explanation of such action. At such time as the commission has an adequate staff it may delegate such functions of approval to its employees, retaining the power of appeal over decisions of its employees. (Prior code  3008)

17.04.100 Board of zoning adjustmentAppeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the commission acting as a board of zoning adjustment may have the acts reviewed by the city council. To obtain such review, the person aggrieved shall file with the city clerk a written statement, as set by resolution of the city council, setting forth:

A.    The particular act or determination of the commission objected to;

B.    The nature of the interest of the person aggrieved;

C.    The relief desired of the city council;

D.    The reasons for granting such relief. (Ord. 466 Exh. A (part), 1981; prior code  3009)

17.04.110 AppealHearing.
Upon the receipt of such appeal, the clerk shall notify the commission and receive therefrom a statement in writing of the reasons for the actions of the commission. Upon receipt of the statement or if no statement is presented by the commission within 10 days after notice from the clerk, the clerk shall schedule the matter for hearing at the next regular or special meeting of the city council and give the appellant, and the commission oral or written notice that the matter will be heard at that time. Any appeal from the acts of the commission must be filed with the clerk within 10 days of notice of the commissions action, or the council will not entertain the appeal. (Prior code  3010)

17.04.120 AppealDecision.
At the hearing scheduled for hearing the appeal all persons interested may appeal and give such evidence or testimony, or make such statements as are pertinent to the appeal. The planning commission may appear in opposition to the appeal or may give such explanation of the action as it deems advisable. The council may continue the hearing from time to time as suits the convenience of the council and appellant, in order to give all parties an opportunity to present all matters necessary to a fair determination of the appeal. Any appeal, however, which is not finally decided within 60 days from the date of filing with the clerk, and within such additional time as is consented to by the appellant shall be deemed denied by the council. (Prior code  3011)

17.04.130 Fees, general.
Fees to defray the cost of processing applications pursuant to this title shall be established by resolution of the city council. No part of such fees are refundable. (Ord. 446 Exh. A (part), 1981)

Chapter 17.06
DESIGN REVIEW
Sections:

17.06.010    Purpose.

17.06.020    Definitions.

17.06.030    Application reviewPlanning commission.

17.06.040    Application reviewCommunity development director.

17.06.050    Projects exempt from design review process.

17.06.060    Design review submittal requirements.

17.06.070    Posting of the site.

17.06.080    Plan evaluation.

17.06.090    Approval process.

17.06.100    Expiration and extension of approval.

17.06.110    Appeals and appeal fee.

17.06.120    Appeal hearings.

17.06.130    Actions on appeals.

17.06.140    ViolationPenalty.

17.06.150    Chapter application.

17.06.010 Purpose.
It is the intent of the city council in enacting this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing such procedures and providing such regulations as are deemed necessary to preserve existing areas of natural beauty and cultural importance; to assure that buildings, structures, or other developments are in good taste, good design, harmonious with surrounding developments and in general contribute to the preservation of Folsoms reputation as a place of beauty, spaciousness and quality; to prevent the development of structures or uses which do not meet applicable design standards, are of inferior quality, or are likely to have a depreciating effect on the local environment or surrounding area by reason of appearance or value; to eliminate conditions, or structures, which by reason of their effect tend to degrade the health, safety or general welfare of the community; to provide a continuing source of programs and means of improving the citys overall appearance; and to streamline the overall design review process. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.020 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions listed in Chapter 17.02, the following definitions apply specifically to this chapter.

A.    Design guidelines means project-specific guidelines prepared under the planned development permit process outlining comprehensive design criteria to ensure consistency in buildout of the project.

B.    Master home plans means a layout of subdivision lots indicating placement of the various model units and elevations on individual lots.

C.    Model homes means homes within a subdivision constructed on designated lots to serve as representations of homes that are available for individual purchase.

D.    Production homes means homes that are reproduced throughout the subdivision, built for individual sale. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.030 Application reviewPlanning commission.
A.    The design and architecture of the following projects must be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval under the provisions of this chapter:

1.    Office, industrial, and commercial development of one thousand square feet or greater in size;

2.    Significant exterior modifications to existing office, industrial, and commercial structures including but not limited to:

a.    Design changes to building facades (cornices, parapets, trellises, etc.).

b.    Structural modifications to buildings.

c.    Introduction of new building materials (veneer, wainscoting, brick, siding, etc.).

d.    Alteration or relocation of building entryways.

e.    Changes in roof design and materials;

3.    Multifamily residential projects containing more than two units;

4.    Single-family residential projects which are a part of a planned development or a tentative subdivision map;

5.    Proposed project design guidelines and standards and revisions to existing design guidelines and standards.

B.    The determination by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 17.06.110(B). (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.040 Application reviewCommunity development director.
A.    The design and architecture of the following projects must be submitted to the community development director for review and approval under the provisions of this chapter:

1.    Office, industrial, and commercial development less than one thousand square feet in size;

2.    Minor exterior modifications to existing office, industrial, and commercial structures including but not limited to:

a.    Replacement of existing building materials with similar materials.

b.    Replacement of existing doors and windows with similar or compatible doors and windows.

c.    Modifications to the exterior color schemes.

d.    Replacement of roof materials with similar roof materials;

3.    Installation of landscaping and irrigation systems associated with new development projects, with the exception of single-family residential projects containing one unit that are not part of a planned development permit or tentative subdivision map;

4.    Residential master home plans including elevation variations for production homes, placement of model homes on lots, and distribution of master home plans indicating placement throughout the subdivision previously approved by the planning commission;

5.    Custom single-family homes;

6.    Residential additions and exterior alterations that require a building permit;

7.    A single-family residential unit that is not part of a planned development permit or tentative subdivision map;

8.    Multifamily residential projects containing no more than two units.

B.    The determination by the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Section 17.06.110(A). (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.050 Projects exempt from design review process.
The following types of projects are considered exempt from the design review process under this chapter:

A.    All structures located within the area of the historic district which shall follow the guidelines of said district and be subject to design review process under Section 17.52.300;

B.    Any development proposals located in the RMH zoning district;

C.    Residential additions and exterior modifications that do not require a building permit;

D.    Minor residential modifications including but not limited to: replacement of existing roof materials, replacement of existing windows and doors, changes to exterior building colors, additions of one hundred twenty square feet or less, patio covers and trellises, privacy fencing and walls, aboveground spas and hot tubs, and outdoor cooking facilities. (Ord. 1286  2, 2018: Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.060 Design review submittal requirements.
The applicant shall file the following information with the community development department for review by the community development director or the planning commission:

A.    Completed and signed application form including applicants name, address, telephone number, and agent authorization from the property owner if the applicant is not the property owner;

B.    Application fee as established by resolution of the city council;

C.    Site plan;

D.    Building elevations and design plan;

E.    Material samples and color board;

F.    Recent photographs of the project site taken within thirty days prior to the submittal which accurately depict the project location;

G.    Other material and information as requested by the community development director and/or the planning commission. (Ord. 1286  3, 2018: Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.070 Posting of the site.
A.    Upon application for design review of a project, the project site shall be posted five calendar days prior to the community development department director or planning commission review, with a notice, eleven inches by seventeen inches in size and visible to the public, indicating the project description and the time and place of the meeting or staff review.

B.    Notice for design review of a project that either requires, or is part of a submittal that requires, public hearing shall also be given in accordance with the Folsom Municipal Code and state planning law.

C.    Once a decision is issued pursuant to Section 17.06.090, a notice shall be posted on the citys website not less than ten calendar days, stating the decision and the right to file an appeal under Section 17.06.110. (Ord. 1286  4, 2018: Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.080 Plan evaluation.
A.    In reviewing projects, the community development director or the planning commission shall consider the following criteria:

1.    Siting of all structures and improvements as designated upon a scaled site plan, including all existing trees and easements on the project site;

2.    Landscaping, fencing, and other screening as designated on a landscape and/or sprinkler plan featuring all existing trees and shrubs and proposed plantings, which shall comply with the tree preservation ordinance under Chapter 12.16;

3.    Design of all circulation for automobiles, service and delivery vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles;

4.    Design of parking and loading facilities;

5.    Screening of refuse and shopping cart storage facilities;

6.    Details of fencing, and location of public works items such as curb cuts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sidewalk design, drainage, and fire hydrants;

7.    Location, design, and intensity of all on-site exterior lighting;

8.    Location and design of addressing system and/or graphics and mail delivery system;

9.    Design of all open space areas;

10.    Exterior elevations and/or perspective drawings of structures featuring building height, description of all building materials, building colors, screening of utility meters and mechanical equipment;

11.    Design, placement, dimension, colors of all proposed signs and exterior graphics. This shall include building materials, lighting systems and intensity of signs and temporary signs and shall apply to all temporary as well as permanent signing;

12.    Additions to patio area including, but not limited to, awnings, sunshades, and trellis;

13.    Grading plans (minor or engineered) that meet with the requirements of the grading ordinance under Chapter 14.29 and are also consistent with the hillside development standards under Chapter 14.33;

14.    Location of all easements including but not limited to: access easements, utility easements, drainage easements, reciprocal use easements, and open space/conservation easements;

15.    Location of necessary firebreaks and fire apparatus access roads for the project site consistent with the requirements of the Folsom Fire Code under Chapter 8.36;

16.    Review design and placement of facilities for disabled access;

17.    Photographs of the project site and any surrounding properties potentially impacted by the proposed project;

18.    Location and screening of roof-, ground-, and wall-mounted mechanical and telecommunications equipment, emergency generators, and similar equipment;

19.    Any outdoor physical feature that could potentially impact the existing design of a structure on a project site.

B.    In approving, conditionally approving, or denying an application for design review under this chapter, the community development director or the planning commission shall make the following findings:

1.    Project compliance with the general plan and any applicable specific plans and zoning ordinances;

2.    Conformance with any adopted city-wide design guidelines;

3.    Conformance with any project-specific design guidelines and standards approved through the planned development permit process or similar review process;

4.    Compatibility of building materials, textures and colors with surrounding development and consistency with the general design theme of the neighborhood. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.090 Approval process.
The community development director or the planning commission, in exercising their design review authorities under this chapter, shall make the decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application with findings based on the criteria established in Section 17.06.080. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.100 Expiration and extension of approval.
A.    A design review approval shall be null and void unless the applicant submits a complete application for a building permit within two years of the approval.

B.    The community development director or the planning commission, in exercising their design review authorities under this chapter, may extend an approval for an additional six months for minor projects (projects subject to Section 17.06.040) and one year for major projects (projects subject to Section 17.06.030) upon receipt of a written request accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council. Requests for approval extension must be received before the original approval expires. (Ord. 1286  5, 2018: Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.110 Appeals and appeal fee.
A.    Any person dissatisfied with any action of the director of the community development department pertaining to projects in Section 17.06.040 may appeal to the planning commission within ten days after written notice of the directors decision is sent to the applicant. The appeal is taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the director which specifies reasons for the appeal, and grounds asserted for relief.

B.    Any person dissatisfied with any action of the planning commission pertaining to projects in Section 17.06.030, or its decision under subsection A of this section, may appeal to the city council within ten days after the rendition of the decision of the planning commission. The appeal is taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of the community development department which specifies reasons for the appeal, and grounds asserted for relief.

C.    The city council shall, by resolution, adopt and, from time to time, amend a fee for the filing of appeals. Such fee shall be for the sole purpose of defraying costs incurred for the administration of appeals. The fee for an appeal shall be paid at the time of and with the filing of an appeal. No appeal shall be deemed valid unless the prescribed fee has been paid.

D.    If appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed in this section, the right to review of the action against which the complaint is made shall be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.120 Appeal hearings.
After filing an appeal within the time and in the manner prescribed by Section 17.06.110, the appropriate hearing body shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether the appeal should be granted. Written notice of the time, date, and place of hearing shall be given to the appellant, the project applicant, property owners within three hundred feet of the subject property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to any other persons who have filed a written request for notice. Such notices shall be mailed to the appellant and the applicant at least ten days prior to said hearing. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.130 Actions on appeals.
A.    The planning commission or the city council, as designated under Section 17.06.110, shall review the entire proceeding or proceedings relating to the act or decision being appealed, de novo, and may make any order it deems just and equitable, including the approval of the application. Any hearing may be continued from time to time.

B.    At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing body shall prepare a written decision which either grants or denies the appeal and contains findings of fact and conclusions. The written decision, including a copy thereof, shall be provided to the appellant and the project applicant. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.140 ViolationPenalty.
A person who violates this chapter shall be subject to the administrative penalties set forth in Chapter 17.03 of this title. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

17.06.150 Chapter application.
Design review under this chapter shall apply only to the exterior architecture and design, and not to any interior portion, of a structure. (Ord. 1109  2 (part), 2008)

Chapter 17.08
ZONING PLAN AND ADOPTION OF DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.08.010    Zoning planAdopted.

17.08.020    Zoning planPurpose.

17.08.030    Zoning planContent.

17.08.040    Zoning planApplication.

17.08.050    DistrictsApplication.

17.08.070    Zoning mapBoundaries.

17.08.010 Zoning planAdopted.
There is adopted a zoning enabling plan for the city, which constitutes a precise plan based upon the adopted master plan of the city. (Prior code  3101.01)



























17.08.020 Zoning planPurpose.
The plan is adopted to provide reasonable protective regulations designed to promote and protect the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and:

1.    To protect the established character and the social and economic stability of agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial and other types of improved areas; and

2.    To assist in providing a definite comprehensive plan for sound and orderly development, and to guide and regulate such development in accordance with the master plan and the objectives and standards set forth therein. (Prior code  3101.02)

17.08.030 Zoning planContent.
The zoning plan consists of the establishment of various districts, primary areas, and subareas within some, all, or none of which shall it be lawful, and within some, all or none of which it shall be unlawful, to erect, construct, alter, move, locate or maintain certain buildings or to carry on certain trades or occupations or conduct certain uses of land or of buildings; within which the height and bulk of future buildings shall be limited; within which certain open spaces shall be required about future buildings and consisting further of appropriate additional regulations to be enforced in such districts, primary areas, and subareas, all as set forth in this title. (Ord. 1286  6, 2018: prior code  3101.03)

17.08.040 Zoning planApplication.
The zoning plan is intended to apply to all private, public, quasipublic, institutional, and public utility properties and all other lands, buildings and structures within the incorporated area of the city. (Prior code  3101.04)

17.08.050 DistrictsApplication.
The classes of districts, primary areas and subareas and certain combinations thereof as designated in Chapters 17.10 and 17.52 and the regulations pertaining thereto are applied to the land areas, and the land areas designated therein shall be subject to the provisions and regulations of this title. (Ord. 1286  7, 2018: prior code  3103.01)

17.08.070 Zoning mapBoundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as described as aforesaid or as shown on the sectional district maps, the following rules shall apply:

1.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines, such street and alley lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;

2.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;

3.    In unsubdivided property and where a district boundary divides a lot the location of a district boundary may be adjusted within a single lot by application of the variance procedure of this title;

4.    In case further uncertainty exists, the planning commission, upon written application or upon its own motion, shall determine the location of such boundaries. (Prior code  3103.02)

Chapter 17.10
DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.10.010    Established.

17.10.020    Special districts established.

17.10.010 Established.
The several classes of general districts established and into which the city is divided are designated as follows:

A.    R-1-L, R-1-ML, R-1-M, single-family residence districts;

B.    R-2, two-family residence district;

C.    R-3, neighborhood apartment district;

D.    R-4, general apartment district;

E.    C-1, neighborhood business district;

F.    C-2, central business district;

G.    C-3, general commercial district;

H.    CH, highway service commercial district;

I.    CM, commercial-manufacturing district;

J.    M-1, light industrial district;

K.    M-2, general industrial district;

L.    M-L, limited industrial district;

M.    MF, industrial frontage district;

N.    PD, planned development district;

O.    R-M, residential, multifamily dwelling district;

P.    BP, business and professional office district. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3102.01)

17.10.020 Special districts established.
In addition to the foregoing classes of districts, certain combining districts are established and are designated as follows:

A.    A, special agricultural district;

B.    B, special building site district;

C.    F, special highway frontage district;

D.    P, special parking district;

E.    H, special height limit district;

F.    CD, special civic district. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: Ord. 239  1, 1969; prior code  3102.02)

Chapter 17.11
R-1-L, RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING, LARGE LOT DISTRICT
Sections:

17.11.010    Intent.

17.11.020    Permitted uses.

17.11.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.11.040    Lot area.

17.11.050    Lot width.

17.11.060    Building coverage.

17.11.070    Front yard.

17.11.080    Side yard.

17.11.090    Rear yard.

17.11.100    Parking.

17.11.110    Building height limit.

17.11.010 Intent.
The specific regulations and general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all R-1-L districts. It is intended that this district classification be applied in areas intended for low-density, large-lot residential living. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1-L district:

A.    One-family dwelling, including private garages, accessory buildings and uses;

B.    Underground utility installations, and aboveground utility installations for local service, except that substations and gas holders must be approved by the planning commission prior to construction, and the route of any proposed transmission line shall be discussed with the planning commission prior to acquisition;

C.    Public parks, schools, playgrounds, libraries, firehouses and other public buildings and uses;

D.    Real estate tract sales offices;

E.    Group homes of six or fewer persons;

F.    Small family day care homes;

G.    Large family day care homes with an administrative permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.100. (Ord. 1218  5, 2015: Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: Ord. 567  2, 1986: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

A.    Private and religious schools, nursery schools and day care centers;

B.    Churches;

C.    Golf and country clubs;

D.    Tract construction offices and equipment yards. (Ord. 1218  6, 2015: Ord. 804  1 (part), 1994; Ord. 567  3, 1986: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.040 Lot area.
Lot area requirements are fourteen thousand five hundred square feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.050 Lot width.
Lot width required in the R-1-L district is seventy-five feet for interior lots; seventy-five feet for corner lots. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.060 Building coverage.
Maximum main building coverage in the R-1-L district is thirty percent of lot area. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.070 Front yard.
The front yard requirement in the R-1-L district is thirty-five feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.080 Side yard.
The side yard requirement is five feet on one side of the lot and eleven feet on the other side of the lot at the option of the owner, developer or subdivider, except that the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall be not less than twenty percent of the lot width, but need not exceed sixteen feet; however, it cannot be less than eleven feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.090 Rear yard.
The rear yard requirement is twenty percent of lot depth; may not be less than fifteen feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.100 Parking.
The automobile parking requirement is two covered parking spaces for each single-family detached dwelling unit. Required parking is to be provided outside required front yard and street side yard setbacks and must be directly accessible along a paved surface or similar hardscape. Refer to Chapter 17.57 for parking requirements for other uses. (Ord. 1187  3, 2013: Ord. 509  3, 1983: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.11.110 Building height limit.
Building height limit requirement is two stories, but not to exceed thirty-five feet. (Ord. 681  1, 1990: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

Chapter 17.12
R-1-ML, RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, MEDIUM LOT DISTRICT
Sections:

17.12.010    Purpose.

17.12.020    Permitted uses.

17.12.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.12.040    Lot area.

17.12.050    Lot width.

17.12.060    Building coverage.

17.12.070    Front yard.

17.12.080    Side yard.

17.12.090    Rear yard.

17.12.100    Parking.

17.12.110    Building height limit.

Prior legislation: Ords. 259 and 263.

17.12.010 Purpose.
The specific regulations and general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all R-1-ML districts. It is intended that this district classification be applied in areas intended for medium-low density, medium-lot residential living. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.01)

17.12.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1-ML district:

A.    One-family dwelling, including private garages, accessory buildings and uses;

B.    Underground utility installations, and aboveground utility installations for local service, except that substations and gas holders must be approved by the planning commission prior to construction, and the route of any proposed transmission line shall be discussed with the planning commission prior to acquisition;

C.    Public parks, schools, playgrounds, libraries, firehouses and other public buildings and uses;

D.    Real estate tract sales offices;

E.    Group homes of six or fewer persons;

F.    Small family day care homes;

G.    Large family day care homes with an administrative permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.100. (Ord. 1218  7, 2015: Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: Ord. 567  4, 1986: Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.02)

17.12.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

A.    Private and religious schools, nursery schools and day care centers;

B.    Churches;

C.    Golf and country clubs;

D.    Tract construction offices and equipment yards. (Ord. 1218  8, 2015: Ord. 804  1 (part), 1994; Ord. 567  5, 1986: Ord. 378 (part), 1979: Ord. 323  30, 1975: Ord. 281  1, 1972: prior code  3105.03)

17.12.040 Lot area.
Lot area requirements are ten thousand square feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.11)

17.12.050 Lot width.
Lot width required in the R-1-ML district is sixty feet for interior lots; seventy-five feet for corner lots. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.12)

17.12.060 Building coverage.
Maximum main building coverage in the R-1-ML district is thirty-five percent of lot area. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.13)

17.12.070 Front yard.
The front yard requirement in the R-1-ML district is twenty feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.14)

17.12.080 Side yard.
The side yard requirement is five feet on one side of the lot and eleven feet on the other side of the lot at the option of the owner, developer or subdivider, except that the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall be not less than twenty percent of the lot width, but need not exceed sixteen feet; however, it cannot be less than eleven feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: Ord. 323  24 (part), 1975; Ord. 311 (part), 1974: prior code  3105.15)

17.12.090 Rear yard.
The rear yard requirement is twenty percent of lot depth; may not be less than ten feet, need not exceed twenty feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: Ord. 323  24 (part), 1975; Ord. 311 (part), 1974: prior code  3105.16)

17.12.100 Parking.
The automobile parking requirement is two covered parking spaces for each single-family detached dwelling unit. Required parking is to be provided outside required front yard and street side yard setbacks and must be directly accessible along a paved surface or similar hardscape. Refer to Chapter 17.57 for parking requirements for other uses. (Ord. 1187  4, 2013: Ord. 509  4, 1983: Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.17)

17.12.110 Building height limit.
Building height limit requirement is two and one-half stories, but not to exceed thirty-five feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979: prior code  3105.18)

Chapter 17.13
R-1-M, RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, SMALL LOT DISTRICT
Sections:

17.13.010    Purpose.

17.13.020    Permitted uses.

17.13.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.13.040    Lot area.

17.13.050    Lot width.

17.13.060    Building coverage.

17.13.070    Front yard.

17.13.080    Side yard.

17.13.090    Rear yard.

17.13.100    Parking.

17.13.110    Building height limit.

17.13.010 Purpose.
The specific regulations and general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all R-1-M districts. It is intended that this district classification be applied in areas intended for medium-density, small-lot residential living. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1-M district:

A.    One-family dwelling, including private garages, accessory buildings and uses;

B.    Underground utility installations, and aboveground utility installations for local service, except that substations and gas holders must be approved by the planning commission prior to construction, and the route of any proposed transmission line shall be discussed with the planning commission prior to acquisition;

C.    Public parks, schools, playgrounds, libraries, firehouses and other public buildings and uses;

D.    Real estate tract sales offices;

E.    Group homes of six or fewer persons;

F.    Small family day care homes;

G.    Large family day care homes with an administrative permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.100. (Ord. 1218  9, 2015: Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: Ord. 567  6, 1986: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

A.    Private and religious schools, nursery schools and day care centers;

B.    Churches;

C.    Golf and country clubs;

D.    Tract construction offices and equipment yards. (Ord. 1218  10, 2015: Ord. 804  1 (part), 1994; Ord. 567  7, 1986: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.040 Lot area.
Lot area required in the R-1-M district is six thousand square feet for interior lots; seven thousand five hundred square feet for corner lots. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.050 Lot width.
Lot width required in the R-1-M district is sixty feet for interior lots; seventy-five feet for corner lots. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.060 Building coverage.
Maximum main building coverage in the R-1-M district is thirty-five percent of lot area. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.070 Front yard.
The front yard requirement in the R-1-M district is twenty feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.080 Side yard.
The side yard requirement is five feet on one side of the lot and eleven feet on the other side of the lot at the option of the owner, developer or subdivider, except that the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall be not less than twenty percent of the lot width, but need not exceed sixteen feet; however, it cannot be less than eleven feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.090 Rear yard.
The rear yard requirement is twenty percent of lot depth; may not be less than ten feet, need not exceed twenty feet. (Ord. 378 (part) 1979)

17.13.100 Parking.
The automobile parking requirement is two covered parking spaces for each single-family detached dwelling unit. Required parking is to be provided outside required front yard and street side yard setbacks and must be directly accessible along a paved surface or similar hardscape. Refer to Chapter 17.57 for parking requirements for other uses. (Ord. 1187  5, 2013: Ord. 509  5, 1983: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.13.110 Building height limit.
Building height limit requirement is two and one-half stories, but not to exceed thirty-five feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

Chapter 17.14
R-2, TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Sections:

17.14.010    Intent.

17.14.020    Permitted uses.

17.14.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.14.040    Lot area.

17.14.050    Lot width.

17.14.060    Building coverage.

17.14.070    Front yard.

17.14.080    Side yard.

17.14.090    Rear yard.

17.14.100    Parking.

17.14.110    Building height limit.

17.14.010 Intent.
The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all R-2 districts. It is intended that this district classification be applied where two-family dwellings are or are intended to be the dominant use. (Prior code  3106.01)

17.14.020 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted in the R-2 district are:

A.    Uses as permitted in R-1 districts (Section 17.12.020);

B.    Two-family dwellings. (Prior code  3106.02)

17.14.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are the same as the uses permitted in R-1 districts (Section 17.12.030). (Prior code  3106.03)

17.14.040 Lot area.
Lot area requirement is six thousand square feet for interior lots; seven thousand five hundred square feet for corner lots. (Prior code  3106.11)

17.14.050 Lot width.
Lot width requirement is sixty feet for interior lots; seventy-five feet for corner lots. (Prior code  3106.12)

17.14.060 Building coverage.
Maximum main building coverage requirement is forty percent of lot area. (Prior code  3106.13)

17.14.070 Front yard.
The front yard requirement is twenty feet. (Prior code  3106.14)

17.14.080 Side yard.
The side yard requirement is five feet on one side of the lot and ten feet on the other side of the lot at the option of the owner, developer or subdivider, except that the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall be not less than twenty percent of the lot width, but need not exceed fifteen feet; however it cannot be less than ten feet. (Ord. 311 (part), 1974: prior code  3106.15)

17.14.090 Rear yard.
Rear yard requirement is twenty percent of lot depth; may not be less than ten feet, need not exceed twenty feet. (Prior code  3106.16)

17.14.100 Parking.
The automobile parking requirement is two covered spaces for each unit in single-family detached and two-family dwellings. Required parking is to be provided outside required front yard and street side yard setbacks and must be directly accessible along a paved surface or similar hardscape. Refer to Chapter 17.57 for parking requirements for other uses. (Ord. 1187  6, 2013: Ord. 509  6, 1983: prior code  3106.17)

17.14.110 Building height limit.
The building height limit in the R-2 district is the same as specified for R-1 district, Section 17.12.110. (Prior code  3106.18)

Chapter 17.16
R-3, NEIGHBORHOOD APARTMENT DISTRICT
Sections:

17.16.010    Intent.

17.16.020    Permitted uses.

17.16.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.16.040    Lot area.

17.16.050    Lot width.

17.16.060    Building coverage.

17.16.070    Front yard.

17.16.080    Side yard.

17.16.090    Rear yard.

17.16.100    Distances between buildings.

17.16.110    Parking.

17.16.120    Building height limit.

17.16.130    Exceptions.

17.16.010 Intent.
The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all R-3 districts. It is intended that this district classification be applied in areas where homes and small apartments are the desirable uses. (Prior code  3107.01)

17.16.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 district:

A.    Uses as permitted in the R-1 and R-2 districts except:

1.    Standard single-family detached dwelling units;

2.    Small family day care homes, unless in single-family detached dwelling units; and

3.    Large family day care homes, unless in single-family detached dwelling units and with an administrative permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.100;

B.    Three- or four-family dwellings and apartments, not to exceed four units per lot;

C.    Boarding and lodging houses;

D.    Private garages, or parking lots uncovered and screened by suitable walls or planting, when operated by or in conjunction with a permitted use;

E.    Incidental and accessory buildings and uses on the same lot with and necessary for the operation of any permitted use;

F.    Advertising signs pertaining directly to a permitted nonresidential use on the property, and not to exceed one sign of a maximum area of six square feet for any such use;

G.    Emergency shelters in accordance with Chapter 17.108. (Ord. 1286  8, 2018: Ord. 1218  11, 2015: Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: Ord. 904  2 (part), 1999; prior code  3107.02)

17.16.030 Uses requiring use permits.
A.    Uses requiring a use permit in R-1 districts (Section 17.12.030);

B.    Motels, hospitals, rest homes, group homes of more than six individuals, day care centers, sanitariums, and professional offices for doctors, dentists, architects, engineers, accountants, artists, authors, attorneys, real estate and insurance offices, medical and dental clinics, and other uses which, in the opinion of the planning commission, are similar to the foregoing; and clubs, lodges and fraternities, except those operated as a business or for profit. (Ord. 1218  12, 2015: Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: prior code  3107.03)

17.16.040 Lot area.
Lot area requirements are six thousand square feet for interior lots; seven thousand five hundred square feet for corner lots. (Prior code  3107.11)

17.16.050 Lot width.
Lot width requirements are sixty feet for interior lots; seventy-five feet for corner lots. (Prior code  3107.12)

17.16.060 Building coverage.
The maximum main building coverage requirement is fifty percent of lot area. (Prior code  3107.13)

17.16.070 Front yard.
The front yard requirement is twenty feet. (Prior code  3107.14)

17.16.080 Side yard.
The side yard requirement is five feet on one side of the lot and ten feet on the other side of the lot at the option of the owner, developer or subdivider, except the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall be not less than twenty percent of the lot width, but need not exceed fifteen feet; however, it cannot be less than ten feet as measured from the overhang of the building. (Ord. 323  24 (part), 1975; Ord. 311 (part), 1974: prior code  3107.15)

17.16.090 Rear yard.
Rear yard requirement is twenty percent of lot depth; may not be less than ten feet, need not exceed twenty feet as measured from the overhang of the building. (Ord. 323  24 (part), 1975; prior code  3107.16)

17.16.100 Distances between buildings.
Distances between main buildings on same lot requirements are:

A.    Group dwellings in a single row side-to-side series facing a side lot line: side yards to the rear of buildings, eight feet; side yards in front of buildings, fourteen feet; distance between buildings, ten feet;

B.    Group dwellings in a double row side-to-side series facing a central court: side yards to the rear of buildings, eight feet; width of central court, twenty-four feet; distance between buildings, ten feet;

C.    The rear yard on a lot on which a dwelling group is constructed may be reduced to not less than twelve feet. No building in a group dwelling development shall have the rear thereof abutting on a street. (Prior code  3107.17)

17.16.110 Parking.
Parking requirements are set forth in Chapter 17.57 and summarized for major uses in this district as follows:

2 spaces/units:

single-family detached and two-family dwellings. Covered parking spaces shall be required and shall be provided outside the required front yards and required street side yards;

 

 

1.5 spaces/unit:

multiple-family structures and complexes;

 

 

1 space/200 square feet gross floor area, minimum of 5 spaces for offices.

(Ord. 1187  7, 2013: Ord. 509  7, 1983: prior code  3107.18)

17.16.120 Building height limit.
The building height limit is two stories, but not to exceed thirty-five feet. (Prior code  3107.19)

17.16.130 Exceptions.
Notwithstanding Section 17.16.110, where any residential unit or group constructed upon any building lot consists of four or more residential units, there shall be provided one and one-half times the parking required by Section 17.16.110. (Prior code  3107.20)

Chapter 17.17
R-M, RESIDENTIAL, MULTIFAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.17.010    Intent.

17.17.020    Permitted uses.

17.17.025    Uses requiring use permits.

17.17.030    Lot area.

17.17.040    Front yard.

17.17.050    Side yard.

17.17.060    Rear yard.

17.17.070    Distances between buildings.

17.17.080    Lot width.

17.17.090    Building coverage.

17.17.100    Parking.

17.17.110    Loading area.

17.17.120    Building height limit.

17.17.130    Exception.

17.17.010 Intent.
The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all R-M zones. The R-M zone is intended to be applied in areas where group dwellings and apartments are a logical and desirable use. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.020 Permitted uses.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, enlarged or maintained, except for the following permitted uses:

A.    Single-family zero lot or patio dwellings consistent with General Plan Figure 21-1 and Table 21-5;

B.    Two-family dwellings;

C.    Multiple dwellings or group dwellings;

D.    Apartment houses;

E.    Parks, playgrounds or community center owned and operated by a governmental agency;

F.    Public and private schools, churches and religious institutions;

G.    Libraries and public utility buildings;

H.    Incidental and accessory buildings and uses on the same lot with and necessary for the operation of any permitted use;

I.    Rest homes or convalescent hospitals;

J.    Public parks, schools, playgrounds, libraries, firehouses and other public buildings and uses;

K.    Small family day care homes in single-family detached dwelling units;

L.    Large family day care homes in single-family detached dwelling units, with an administrative permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.100. (Ord. 1218  13, 2015: Ord. 904  2 (part), 1999; Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.025 Uses requiring use permits.
Use permit is required for operating a day care center in the R-M zoning district. (Ord. 1218  14, 2015)

17.17.030 Lot area.
Minimum lot area six thousand square feet for interior lots and seven thousand five hundred square feet for corner lots. One thousand seven hundred square feet or more is required per dwelling unit or guest room. (Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.040 Front yard.
There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.050 Side yard.
There shall be a side yard of not less than eleven feet on one side of the lot and not less than five feet on the other side of the lot, except that the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall be not less than sixteen feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.060 Rear yard.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty percent of the average lot depth and need not exceed twenty feet but shall not be less than ten feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.070 Distances between buildings.
Distances between main buildings on same lot: ten feet.

A.    Group dwellings in a single row side-to-side series facing a side lot line: side yards to the rear of buildings, eight feet; side yards in front of buildings, fourteen feet;

B.    Group dwellings in a double row side-to-side series facing a central court: side yards to the rear of buildings, eight feet; width of central court, twenty-four feet; distance between buildings, ten feet;

C.    The rear yard on a lot on which a dwelling group is constructed may be reduced to not less than twelve feet. No building in a group dwelling development shall have the rear thereof abutting upon a street. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.080 Lot width.
Every lot shall have a minimum width of sixty feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.090 Building coverage.
Maximum main building coverage is sixty percent of lot area. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.100 Parking.
Parking requirements are set forth in Chapter 17.57 and are summarized for the major uses in this district as follows:

2 spaces/unit:

single-family attached and two-family dwellings. Covered parking spaces shall be required and shall be provided outside the required front yards and required street side yards;

 

 

1.5 spaces/unit:

multiple-family structures and complexes.

(Ord. 1187  8, 2013: Ord. 509  8, 1983: Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.110 Loading area.
Loading area requirements are as specified in use permit. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.120 Building height limit.
Building height limit requirement is four stories, but not to exceed fifty feet. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

17.17.130 Exception.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.17.100, where any residential unit or group constructed upon any building lot consists of four or more residential units, there shall be provided one and one-half times the parking required by Section 17.17.100. (Ord. 378 (part), 1979)

Chapter 17.18
R-4, GENERAL APARTMENT DISTRICT
Sections:

17.18.010    Intent.

17.18.020    Permitted uses.

17.18.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.18.040    Lot area.

17.18.050    Lot width.

17.18.060    Building coverage.

17.18.070    Front yard.

17.18.080    Side yard.

17.18.090    Rear yard.

17.18.100    Distances between buildings.

17.18.110    Parking.

17.18.120    Loading area.

17.18.130    Building height limit.

17.18.140    Exception.

17.18.010 Intent.
The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all R-4 districts. It is intended that this district classification be applied in areas where group dwellings and apartments are the logical and desirable use. (Prior code  3108.01)

17.18.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-4 district:

A.    Multiple-family dwellings;

B.    Group dwellings. For purposes of this chapter, a group dwelling means one of a group of two or more detached buildings, each of which is used as a dwelling and one or more of which has a site without a frontage to a public road;

C.    Apartments;

D.    Uses as permitted in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts except the following:

1.    Standard single-family detached dwelling units;

2.    Small family day care homes, unless in single-family detached dwelling units;

3.    Large family day care homes, unless in single-family detached dwelling units and with an administrative permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.100;

E.    Uses for which use permits are required in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts;

F.    Parks, playgrounds, public and private schools, churches, and religious institutions, libraries, day care centers and public utility buildings;

G.    Emergency shelters in accordance with Chapter 17.108. (Ord. 1286  9, 2018: Ord. 1218  16, 2015: Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: Ord. 904  2 (part), 1999; prior code  3108.02)

17.18.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are hotels, group homes of more than six individuals, single room occupancy (SRO) units, mortuaries, trailer courts and day care centers. (Ord. 1218  17, 2015: Ord. 1144  3 (part), 2011: prior code  3108.03)

17.18.040 Lot area.
Lot area requirements are six thousand square feet for interior lots; seven thousand five hundred square feet for corner lots. (Prior code  3108.11)

17.18.050 Lot width.
Lot width requirements are sixty feet for interior lots; seventy-five feet for corner lots. (Prior code  3108.12)

17.18.060 Building coverage.
Maximum main building coverage is sixty percent of lot area. (Prior code  3108.13)

17.18.070 Front yard.
Front yard requirement is twenty feet. (Prior code  3108.14)

17.18.080 Side yard.
The side yard requirement is five feet on one side of the lot and ten feet on the other side of the lot at the option of the owner, developer or subdivider, except that the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall be not less than twenty percent of the lot width, but need not exceed fifteen feet; however, it cannot be less than ten feet. (Ord. 311 (part), 1974: prior code  3108.15)

17.18.090 Rear yard.
Rear yard requirement is twenty percent of lot depth, may not be less than ten feet and need not exceed twenty feet. (Prior code  3108.16)

17.18.100 Distances between buildings.
Distances between main buildings on same lot: ten feet.

A.    Group dwellings in a single row side-to-side series facing a side lot line: side yards to the rear of buildings, eight feet; side yards in front of buildings, fourteen feet;

B.    Group dwellings in a double row side-to-side series facing a central court: side yards to the rear of buildings, eight feet; width of central court, twenty-four feet; distance between buildings, ten feet;

C.    The rear yard on a lot on which a dwelling group is constructed may be reduced to not less than twelve feet. No building in a group dwelling development shall have the rear thereof abutting upon a street. (Prior code  3108.17)

17.18.110 Parking.
Parking requirements are set forth in Chapter 17.57 and are summarized for major uses in this district as follows:

2 spaces/unit:

single-family detached and two-family dwellings. Covered parking spaces shall be required and shall be provided outside the required front yards and required street side yards;

1.5 spaces/unit:

multiple-family structures and complexes;

1 space/200 square feet gross floor area, minimum of 5 spaces, for offices.

(Ord. 1187  9, 2013: Ord. 509  9, 1983: prior code  3108.18)

17.18.120 Loading area.
Loading area requirements are as specified in use permit. (Prior code  3108.19)

17.18.130 Building height limit.
Building height limit requirement is four stories, but not to exceed fifty feet. (Prior code  3108.20)

17.18.140 Exception.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.18.110, where any residential unit or group constructed upon any building lot consists of four or more residential units, there shall be provided one and one-half times the parking required by Section 17.18.110. (Prior code  3108.21)

Chapter 17.22
COMMERCIAL LAND USE ZONES
Sections:

17.22.010    Purpose.

17.22.020    Prohibition.

17.22.030    Commercial zones.

17.22.040    Special condition requirements for commercial zones.

17.22.050    Commercial zone development standards table.

*    Editors NoteChapter 17.22 adopted in prior code  3110, as amended, was repealed in its entirety and reenacted by Ord. 537.
Prior ordinance historyOrds. 537 and 733.

17.22.010 Purpose.
The commercial land use zones established in this chapter are designed to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The city council in establishing these zones finds that these zones with the uses and regulations provided in this chapter are consistent and compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the city general plan; and are adopted for the following purposes:

A.    To create an environment in which the success of commercial development is enhanced through appropriate location, design, and operation, taking into consideration surrounding uses and the community as a whole.

B.    To provide space appropriate to satisfy the needs of modern local retail development and the citys expected future economy.

C.    To accommodate a variety of transportation modes which may access the commercial sites in a manner to achieve business and community goals, including congestion management and parking.

D.    To provide standards which uphold community design objectives and project commercial, industrial and residential development from incompatible and hazardous adjacent elements.

E.    To acknowledge the differences in needs and impacts of varying kinds of businesses by use of standards which vary according to zone. (Ord. 887  2 Exh. A (part), 1998)

17.22.020 Prohibition.
No building, structure, vehicle, sign, or area in any commercial land use zone shall be used, nor shall any building, structure, sign, or vehicle be erected, altered, moved, enlarged, or stored in any commercial land use zone except as hereinafter specifically provided in this chapter or elsewhere in this code; nor shall any area, building, structure, vehicle, or sign be used in any manner so as to create problems inimical to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or so as to constitute a public nuisance. Any building, structure, vehicle, sign, or lot, or the use of any building, structure, vehicle, or lot in any commercial land use zone shall be regulated and governed by the provisions of this chapter and Title 17. (Ord. 887  2 Exh. A (part), 1998)

17.22.030 Commercial zones.
A.    Commercial Use Table. The purpose of the commercial use table is to designate the uses permitted within the buildable area and within the yard areas in each of the following zones.

1.    C-1, neighborhood business zone as further regulated in Section 17.22.050 of this chapter. The purpose of the C-1 zone is to designate areas suitable for low-intensity retail commercial activities oriented to serving nearby residential areas. Uses typically will be small retail services oriented activities including small shopping centers. The C-1 zone should be located on major arterials or secondary streets.

2.    C-2, central business zone as further regulated in Section 17.22.050 of this chapter. The purpose of the C-2 zone is to designate areas appropriate for a wide range of commercial activities serving the entire community. The C-2 zone will include all sizes of shopping centers. Only manufacturing, warehousing, and the heaviest commercial uses are excluded. The C-2 zone should be located on major arterials and thoroughfares.

3.    C-3, general commercial zone as further regulated in Section 17.22.050 of this chapter. The purpose of the C-3 zone is to designate areas appropriate for heavy commercial activities. While all types of commercial activities are permitted, the C-3 zone is intended for the highest-intensity commercial activities, which include heavy auto and truck traffic. The C-3 zone should be located on major arteries and thoroughfares.

4.    BP, business professional zone as further regulated in Section 17.22.050 of this chapter. The intent of the BP zone is to designate areas suitable for business and professional offices. Uses in the BP zone are intended to be low-intensity commercial uses and compatible with higher-intensity residential uses. Retail commercial activities are discouraged. The BP zone may serve as a buffer between retail commercial and residential areas. The BP zone should be located along major arterials or have direct access to one via a collector street.

B.    Permitted Uses Within the Buildable Area of Commercial Lots. A checkbox indicates that the described use is permitted in the zone represented by the described symbol appearing at the top of the column. An N indicates that the described use is not permitted in the zone represented by the symbol appearing at the top of the column. A number indicates that the described use is permitted in that zone upon continuing compliance of the special condition referenced by the corresponding number in Section 17.22.040 of this chapter. The special condition requirements govern the described use.

C.    Similar and Like Uses. If a proposed use is not listed in the commercial use table, the planning, inspections, and permitting director may determine whether the characteristics of the proposed use are sufficiently similar to a listed use to justify a finding that the proposed use should be allowed either principally or conditionally within any of the respective zones. If a finding of similarity is made, then the proposed use is to be allowed as a similar use listed in the commercial use table.

The planning, inspections and permitting director may determine that any proposed use should be reviewed by the planning commission for a finding of similarity with other uses.

Any determination that a proposed use is sufficiently similar to a listed use, whether made by the planning commission or the planning, inspections and permitting director, shall be in writing and shall contain the facts which support the determination. All such determinations shall be kept in a binder available to the general public at the planning, inspections and permitting counter, and one copy shall be provided to the offices of the city attorney and city clerk.

D.    Requirement for Planned Development Permit Review. Although a use may be permitted outright within a particular commercial zone, (and not require a conditional use permit issued by the planning commission) the land upon which a prospective use may be located, may have a planned development (PD) overlay zoning designation. This designation requires a review by the planning commission for design review purposes. In cases where a property has a use requiring a conditional use permit and design review, both entitlements will be processed concurrently at the planning commission where possible.

E.    Commercial Use Table.

Commercial Use Table (17.22.030E) 

 

Zone

 

Use, service or facility

C-1

C-2

C-3

BP

1

Addressing and mailing services

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

2

Advertising business

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

3

Alarm/warning systemsales and/or service

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

4

Ambulance service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

5

Armored car service

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

6

Amusement arcade

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

7

Antique store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

8

Appliance repair shop with outdoor storage

2

checkbox

checkbox

N

9

Appliance repair shop, with no outdoor storage

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

10

Appliance store (no outdoor storage)

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

11

Art gallery

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

12

Art studio

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

13

Assemblylight manufacturing

N

N

1

N

14

Athletic club, indoor

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

15

Athletic equipment and sporting goods store (with no outdoor storage)

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

16

Auto sales, new and used

N

1

1

N

17

Auto rental or lease agency including limousine service

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

18

Auto wholesaler, office only (no on-site storage of vehicles)

1

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

19

AUTO MINOR SERVICEREPAIRREPLACEMENT

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

a) Automatic transmission

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

b) Auto tire, sales/service

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

c) Auto seat covers, reupholstery shop

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

d) Auto battery and ignition

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

e) Auto radio, stereo, CB

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

f) Auto radiator, replacement/service

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

g) Auto muffler replacement/service

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

h) Auto electric (starter-gen)

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

i) Auto brake, replacement/service

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

j) Auto minor repair, service, adjustments

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

k) Auto trailer hitch installation

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

l) Auto diagnosis and tune-up

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

m) Auto detailing (servicing and cleaning for resale)

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

n) Auto glass installation and sales

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

 

o) Auto smog inspection (no repair)

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

20

AUTO, MAJOR

N

1

1

N

 

a) Automajor repair

N

1

1

N

 

b) Auto transmission rebuild

N

1

1

N

 

c) Auto radiators rebuild

N

1

1

N

 

d) Auto starter-gen rebuilding

N

1

1

N

 

e) Auto body repair

N

1

1

N

 

f) Auto paint shop

N

1

1

N

 

g) Auto machine shop

N

1

1

N

21

Auto service station

14

14

11

N

22

Auto storageantique (indoor only)

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

23

Auto parts and accessory store

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

24

Auto wash, self-service or automatic

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

25

Automatic teller machines (ATMs)

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

26

Bakery, pastry shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

27

Bakery, wholesale only, no manufacturing

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

28

Bank, savings and loan, finance, loan, credit office

5

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

29

Bar, tavern

1

6

6

1

30

Bar, tavern in conjunction with, and accessory to, a restaurant and represents less than 10% of the floor area of the restaurant

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

30.5

Bar, tavern in conjunction with, and accessory to, a restaurant and represents more than 10% of the floor area of the restaurant

14

14

checkbox

N

31

Barber shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

32

Bath house: sauna, Turkish, steam, spa, and tanning

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

33

Beauty shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

34

Bed and breakfast inn

1

1

1

1

35

Beverage bottling works

N

1

checkbox

N

36

Bicycle sale, rent, service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

37

Billboard sign agencyservice yard and/or workshop

N

N

1

N

38

Blacksmith shop

N

N

1

N

39

Blueprinting/photostating service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

40

Boat building and major repair of boats

N

N

1

N

41

Boat parts and accessories store, no outside storage

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

42

Boat sale, rent, service

N

1

1

N

43

Book/record store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

44

Bookstore adult

N

14

14

N

45

Bottled gas sale and related storage

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

46

Building material and lumber sales

N

1

checkbox

N

47

Building trades service yard and workshop

N

N

1

N

48

Bus depot

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

49

Business or professional office

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

50

Butcher and meat market

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

51

Butcher, wholesale, excluding slaughterhouse

N

N

checkbox

N

52

Cabinet shop

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

53

Camper shellsales, repair, rent

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

54

Candy store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

55

CardroomSee Chapter 5.20

N

13

13

N

56

Carpet cleaning plant

N

N

checkbox

N

57

Catering service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

58

Child care center for more than six

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

58.5

Child care center for six or less

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

59

Church

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

60

Circus/carnival

10

10

10

N

61

Citizens improvement club/community center

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

62

Clinic, child/family guidance

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

63

Clinic, physical therapy

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

64

Clothing and apparel store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

65

Coin-operated dispenser

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

66

Cold storage/frozen food locker

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

67

Computer programming/software and system design

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

68

Computer sales, rental and lease

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

69

Computer service and training

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

70

Concession, temporary

10

10

10

N

71

Concrete batch plant

N

N

14

N

72

Convenience store/neighborhood market

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

73

Costume shopsale and rent

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

74

Creamery

N

N

checkbox

N

75

Curio/novelty shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

76

Dance hallballroomdiscotheque

N

1

checkbox

N

77

Live entertainment as an incidental use in a bar or restaurant

1

1

checkbox

N

78

Data processing service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

79

Dating service (computerized video matching)

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

80

Delicatessen

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

81

Delivery service

1

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

82

Disinfecting/fumigating service

1

1

checkbox

N

83

Drafting service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

84

Dressmaker

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

85

Drive-in restaurant/fast food, cafe, dairy, food market or stand

1

1

checkbox

N

86

Drug store, pharmacy

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

87

Drug storeNon-prescriptive drugs and sundries

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

88

Egg processing facility

N

N

checkbox

N

89

Electronic equipment store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

90

Eyeglasses, frames, and contact lens sales and service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

91

Equipment rental agency

N

1

1

N

92

Equipment rental agencyoffice related uses only

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

93

Farm equipmentrental and incidental storage

N

1

checkbox

N

94

Farmers market

10

10

10

N

95

Firewoodsales with special screening and fire protection

N

1

1

N

96

Floor covering, drapery or upholstery store

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

97

Florist

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

98

Food market ancillary to service station

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

99

Freight depot, excluding draying and truck terminal

N

N

checkbox

N

100

Furniture rental agency

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

101

Furniture cleaning, refinishing and reupholstery shop

4

checkbox

checkbox

N

102

Furniture store

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

103

Funeral establishment

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

104

Garage equipment and tool sales with outside storage

N

1

1

N

105

Garage equipment and tool sales with no outside storage

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

106

Gardening/landscapingservice yard and workshop

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

107

Gardening/landscaping supply store

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

108

General glass sales, services, inside building; no outdoor storage

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

109

Gift-card shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

110

Grindingsharpening service inside building

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

111

Grooming service, such as poodle grooming

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

112

Gunshop/gunsmith

1

6

6

N

113

Hang glidersales and service

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

114

Hardware store with outside storage

1

1

checkbox

N

115

Hardware store with inside storage

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

116

Hay, seed, and grain store

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

117

Hearing aid sales and service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

118

Hospital

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

119

Hotel

N

checkbox

checkbox

1

120

Hotel/restaurant equipment sales

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

121

Moving and storage service

N

N

checkbox

N

122

Ice cream, yogurt store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

123

Ice manufacturing plant

N

N

checkbox

N

124

Insurance office

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

125

Interior decorators service yard and workshop

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

126

Interior design center

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

127

Janitorial service

9

checkbox

checkbox

N

128

Jewelry storesales, repair

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

129

Kennel, cattery, boarding/training

N

1

1

N

130

Labor union

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

131

Laboratory, materials testing, inside building only

N

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

132

Laboratory; medical, dental, or optical

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

133

Laboratory; research, analysis

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

134

Lapidary shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

135

Laundromat, self-service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

136

Laundry or cleaning agency, retail (on-site cleaning permitted)

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

137

Laundry or cleaning pick-up station

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

138

Laundry or cleaning plant, wholesale facility

N

N

checkbox

N

139

Lawn mower engine and garden power toolsales, service, repair

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

140

Library

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

141

Alcohol sales

14

6

checkbox

N

142

Live theater

N

1

1

N

143

Live theater, adult

N

N

14

N

144

Locksmithkey and lock shop, repair shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

145

Lodgefraternal hall

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

146

Machine shop

N

N

checkbox

N

147

Mail or delivery service pick-up station

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

148

Mail order business

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

149

Massage establishment that employs or uses persons not certified under Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

1

1

1

N

150

Massage establishment that employs or uses persons certified under Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

151

Medical or dental office

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

152

Medical equipment store

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

153

Messenger service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

153.5

Microbrewery

N

14

14

N

154

Military surplus store

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

155

Mini-storage

1

1

1

N

156

Motel

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

157

Motion picture theater

N

1

1

N

158

Motion picture theater, adult

N

N

14

N

159

Motorcycle, sports cycles, trail bikes, jet skis, snowmobiles, mopedsales, rent service, repair and dismantling

N

1

checkbox

N

160

Moved building storage, temporary (7 days or less)

10

10

10

N

161

Museum

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

162

Music store, including instrument repair

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

163

Newspaper/magazine stand

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

164

Nursery, plants

1

1

checkbox

N

165

Office machines and equipment sales and minor repair

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

166

Reserved

 

 

 

 

167

Ornamental rock sales and related storage

N

1

checkbox

N

168

Paint and wallpaper store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

169

Parking lot or garages primary use

N

1

1

N

170

Pawn shop

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

171

Pest control service

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

172

Pet store, no kennel

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

173

Photocopy service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

14

174

Photographic supply/camera store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

175

Photographic processing plant, wholesale facility

N

N

checkbox

N

176

Photography studio, including incidental processing

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

177

Picture framing shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

178

Pool table sale and repair service

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

179

Power toolssales, repair

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

180

Prescription pharmacy

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

181

Print shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

182

Printing plant

N

N

1

N

183

Privately owned uses within public and government-owned buildings, facilities and grounds

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

184

Psychiatric facility

1

1

1

1

185

Public and government-owned building and facility, federal, state, and local

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

186

Public and government uses within privately owned buildings, facilities and grounds, federal, state and local

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

187

Public auction or flea market

N

1

checkbox

N

188

Public relations or advertising office

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

199

Public utility and public service facility

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

200

Race track

N

N

1

N

201

Real estate office

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

202

Recreation facility, indoor

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

203

Recreation facility, outdoor

1

1

1

1

204

Recreational vehicle and boat storage

N

1

1

N

205

Recycling center

N

1

checkbox

N

205.5

Remote caller bingo

N

1

1

N

206

Residence of a caretaker, proprietor or owner of a permitted use

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

207

Residential care homes for adults or children, over six persons

1

1

1

1

207.5

Residential care homes for adults or children, six persons or fewer

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

208

Resorts

N

1

checkbox

N

209

Restaurant/coffee shop/cafeteria

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

7

209.1

Outdoor dining facility operated as ancillary use to a permitted restaurantno alcohol served (encroachment permit may be required)

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

209.2

Outdoor dining facility operated as ancillary use to a permitted restaurantalcohol served (encroachment permit may be required)

N

14

14

14

210

Saddlery shop

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

211

Sanitarium

N

1

1

N

212

SCHOOLS

 

 

 

 

 

a) Business school

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

 

b) Charm, cultural school

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

 

c) College, university

1

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

 

d) Driving school

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

 

e) Medical related school

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

 

f) Other private school

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

 

g) Private K-12 school

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

 

h) Public K-12 school

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

 

i) Vocational school

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

213

Self-defense, judo, boxing, gymnastics, swimming or similar activities

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

214

Senior citizens residential complex

1

1

1

1

215

Shoe repair shop, shoeshine store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

215a

Single room occupancy (SRO) units

N

checkbox

1

N

216

Social rehabilitation center

1

6

6

1

217

Soda fountain/ice cream parlor

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

218

Snack bar incidental to a park, boat dock, other water-oriented use

10

10

10

N

219

Stadiums

N

1

1

N

220

Stamp/coin store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

221

Stationery store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

222

Stenographic service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

223

Studiodance, voice, music

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

1

224

Studioradio, television, recording

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

225

Supermarket/food store

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

226

Swimming pool, spasales and service

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

227

Tackle shop

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

228

Tailor

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

229

Tattoo establishment/body art

N

1

1

N

230

Taxi cab service and storage facility

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

231

Taxidermist

1

checkbox

checkbox

N

231.1

Telecommunication towernew equipment or accessory building not colocating on existing tower or equipment

14

14

14

14

231.2

Telecommunication towercolocation of equipment and accessory building on existing tower and equipment

1

1

1

1

232

Telephone answering service

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

233

Television and radio repair shop, sales

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

234

Tobacco shop, smoke lounge, electronic cigarette retail store or lounge and similar activities

1

6

6

N

235

Tool reconditioning

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

236

Towed vehicles storage (operable and/or inoperable) vehicles

N

1

1

N

237

Towing serviceno storage of any vehicles

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

238

Toy store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

239

Trade school

1

checkbox

checkbox

1

240

Travel agency

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

241

Travel trailer/mobilehome, motorhome, campersale, rent, storage

N

1

1

N

242

Travel trailer park

N

1

12

N

243

Tree service

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

244

Trophy/emblem store

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

245

Truck sale or rent

N

1

checkbox

N

246

Truck service stations, excluding truck terminal

N

N

checkbox

N

247

Utility trailerrental, service, sales

N

1

checkbox

N

248

Utility trailer or truck, rent or storage as ancillary to service stations

N

1

checkbox

N

249

Veterinariananimal hospital/clinic

8

checkbox

checkbox

N

250

Video store, sales and rental

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

251

Warehousing and storage

N

N

checkbox

N

252

Watchessale, repair

checkbox

checkbox

checkbox

N

253

Water recreation equipmentrental, sales

8

8

checkbox

N

254

Wedding chapel

N

checkbox

checkbox

N

255

Welding shop

N

N

checkbox

N

256

Wholesale distributors service facility

N

N

checkbox

N

257

Winery sales facility/tasting room

1

6

checkbox

N

(Ord. 1236  3, 2015; Ord. 1209  2, 2014; Ord. 1169  2, 2012; Ord. 1144  4, 2011; Ord. 1138  3, 2010; Ord. 1060  2, 3, 4, 2006; Ord. 887  2 Exh. A (part), 1998)

17.22.040 Special condition requirements for commercial zones.
The following special condition requirements apply to the uses indicated by the corresponding numbers on the commercial use table described in Section 17.22.030.

1.    Permitted only upon the issuance of a minor conditional use permit by the planning commission or the historic district commission.

2.    Permitted as an incidental service function intended to satisfy the normal operating needs of a permitted retail use on the property. An independent servicing facility oriented toward generating its trade from the general public is not permitted in this zone.

3.    Reserved.

4.    Permitted use only if the entire operation, including parking and storage of vehicles used in connection with the operation, is conducted within a completely enclosed building or behind a solid six-foot fence on the buildable area of the lot. Fence is to be approved by the community development department before commencement of proposed use.

5.    Permitted use within the zone, but must not have a drive-up or remote tellers.

6.    Permitted use within the zone when the commercial structure is located five hundred feet or more from a residential use and one thousand feet from the property line of any public or private school (kindergarten to twelfth grade), and as long as the operating hours are between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. If not within the prescribed conditions as described above, the use is subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit.

7.    Permitted use within the zone when located as one tenant in a building and not occupying more than fifteen percent of the total floor area of the building. If the use occupies more than fifteen percent of the total floor area of the building or is a freestanding use, a conditional use permit is required.

8.    Permitted use in the zone only when there is no outdoor storage and the gross area of the use does not exceed two thousand five hundred square feet. If the gross area of the use is larger than two thousand five hundred square feet, the use is subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit.

9.    Permitted use if the entire operation is conducted within a completely enclosed building.

10.    A temporary use permit is required in this zone issued by the community development department.

11.    All proposed service stations within the C-3 zone require the issuance of a conditional use permit with the exception of proposed service stations on property contiguous to Highway 50 and that are within one thousand five hundred feet of an existing interchange/overcrossing as determined and measured by the community development department.

12.    Proposed use is permitted on property contiguous to Highway 50 and within one thousand five hundred feet of an existing interchange/overcrossing as determined and measured by the community development department. If not within the prescribed area stated above, the use is allowed subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit.

13.    Proposed cardrooms require the issuance of a permit to operate by the city council pursuant to Chapter 5.20, in addition to a major conditional use permit.

14.    Proposed use shall be accompanied with a major use permit processing fee and is permitted only upon the issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1244  2, 2015; Ord. 1169  3, 2012: Ord. 887  2 Exh. A (part), 1998)

17.22.050 Commercial zone development standards table.
Commercial Zone Development Standards Table 

Zone

Standard

C-1

C-2

C-3

BP

Lot area

(7)

(7)

(7)

6000 s.f.(1)

Lot width

(7)

(7)

(7)

60'(2)

Building coverage

(7)

(7)

(7)

60%

Setbacks:

 

 

 

 

Front yard

15'

(7)

(7)

20'

Side yard

(7)*

(7)*

(7)*

(6)

Rear yard

15'

12'(3)

12'(3)

20'

Building height limit

(4)

(5)

(5)

(4)

NOTE:

(1)    Corner lots are minimum of 7,500 square feet lot area.

(2)    Corner lots are minimum of 75 feet lot width.

(3)    Building may project over rear yard area; provided, that 14 feet clear vertical distance from ground level is maintained. The building code and other regulations shall apply.

(4)    Height limit is 2 stories not exceeding 35 feet. May be increased to 4 stories, subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

(5)    The building height limitation is 4 stories but not to exceed 50 feet.

(6)    Interior lots. A minimum of 1 5-foot side yard and 1 10-foot side yard shall be provided.

    Corner lots. Interior side yard shall be a minimum of 5 feet. Street side yard shall be 20 percent of the lot width but shall not be less than 10 feet and need not exceed 15 feet.

(7)    N/A = Not Applicable

*    Per Uniform Building Code (UBC) or other standard.

(Ord. 1060  5, 2006; Ord. 887  2 Exh. A (part), 1998)

Chapter 17.23
MU, MIXED-USE ZONES
Sections:

17.23.010    Purpose.

17.23.020    Prohibition.

17.23.030    Mixed-use zones.

17.23.040    Special condition requirements for mixed-use zones.

17.23.050    Mixed-use zone development standards table.

17.23.060    Mixed-use zone site and architectural design standards.

17.23.010 Purpose.
The mixed-use land use zones established in this chapter are designed to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The city council in establishing these zones finds that these zones with the uses and regulations provided in this chapter are consistent and compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the City General Plan and are adopted for the following purposes:

A.    To establish the mixed-use (MU) zones to allow for mixture of uses that are mutually compatible near public transportation routes by encouraging a variety of high quality and innovative site design conducive to economic, social, and cultural vitality, unique identity, and safety of the district.

B.    To provide for diverse employment, housing, and transportation options to all segments of population by allowing a greater degree of flexibility in design, development standards, and practices.

C.    To promote efficient land use consistent with the SACOGs Blueprint principles and conservation of natural resources by reducing vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and greenhouse gas emissions by locating clusters of mutually supportive uses adjacent to public transportation hubs. (Ord. 1158  2 (part), 2012)

17.23.020 Prohibition.
No building, structure, vehicle, sign, or area in any mixed-use land use zone shall be used, nor shall any building, structure, sign, or vehicle be erected, altered, moved, enlarged, or stored in any mixed-use land use zone except as hereinafter specifically provided in this chapter or elsewhere in this code; nor shall any area, building, structure, vehicle, or sign be used in any manner so as to create problems inimical to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or so as to constitute a public nuisance. Any building, structure, vehicle, sign, or lot, or the use of any building, structure, vehicle, or lot in any mixed-use land use zone shall be regulated and governed by the provisions of this chapter and Title 17. (Ord. 1158  2 (part), 2012)

17.23.030 Mixed-use zones.
A.    Mixed-Use Zoning District Use Table. The purpose of the mixed-use zoning district use table is to designate the uses permitted within the buildable area and within the yard areas in each of the following zones.

1.    MU, general mixed-use overlay zone as further regulated in Section 17.23.050. The purpose of the MU zone is to designate areas suitable for mixed uses that are mutually compatible and supportive. The purpose of the MU zone is to create a vibrant mix of retail, dining, personal service, professional office, and residential uses, including live/work studios.

2.    MU-TCOZ, mixed-use town center overlay zone as further regulated in Section 17.23.050. The MU-TCOZ zone is intended to provide for a mix of municipal, recreation, retail, dining, personal service, professional office, and residential components that will become the focal point of the neighborhood.

3.    MU-EDOZ, mixed-use entertainment district overlay zone as further regulated in Section 17.23.050. The MU-EDOZ zone is intended to contain a mix of entertainment, dining, retail, personal services, and lifestyle components to create a synergistic leisure destination with an intrinsically appealing blend of local, regional, and national merchandisers. A greater concentration of high intensity and vibrant uses are allowed than are allowed in other mixed-use zones.

B.    Permitted Uses Within the Buildable Area of Mixed-Use Lots. A ? indicates that the described use is permitted in the zone represented by the described symbol appearing at the top of the column. All development within any of the mixed-use zones shall require a planned development (PD) permit. In cases where a proposed use requires a conditional use permit, design review, and/or other entitlement process, both entitlements may be processed concurrently at the planning commission where possible.

C.    An N indicates that the described use is not permitted in the zone represented by the symbol appearing at the top of the column. A number indicates that the described use is permitted in that zone upon continuing compliance of the special condition referenced by the corresponding number in Section 17.23.040. The special condition requirements govern the described use.

D.    Similar and Like Uses. If a proposed use is not listed in the mixed-use zoning district use table, the community development department (CDD) director may determine whether the characteristics of the proposed use are sufficiently similar to a listed use to justify a finding that the proposed use should be allowed either principally or conditionally within any of the respective zones. If a finding of similarity is made, then the proposed use is to be allowed as a similar use listed in the mixed-use zoning district use table. Uses that are generally considered incompatible with residential uses due to noise, odor, vibration, and glare shall be prohibited in any of the mixed-use zones.

E.    The CDD director may determine that any proposed use should be reviewed by the planning commission for a finding of similarity with other uses. Any determination that a proposed use is sufficiently similar to a listed use, whether made by the planning commission or the CDD director, shall be in writing and shall contain the facts which support the determination. All such determinations shall be kept in a binder available to the general public at the CDD counter, and one copy shall be provided to the offices of the city attorney and city clerk.

F.    Mixed-Use Zoning District Use Table.

Mixed-Use Zoning District Use Table
 

Use

Zone

MU

MU-TCOZ

MU-EDOZ

Education, Recreation and Public Assembly

1

Cardroom

N

N

1

2

Club, lodge, private meeting hall

?

?

?

3

Conference/convention facility

N

?

?

4

Fitness/health facility

?

?

?

5

Golf/country club

N

N

N

6

Library

?

?

?

7

Park

?

?

?

8

Pre-school facility

?

?

?

9

Religious facilities

1

1

1

10

Recreation facilityindoor (private/public)

?

?

?

11

Recreation facilityoutdoor (private/public)

1

1

1

12

School facilities (elementary, middle, high school)

N

N

N

13

Studioart, dance, martial arts, music, etc.

?

?

?

14

Sports and entertainment assembly

N

1

?

15

Theater, cinema, performing arts

?

?

?

16

Trade/specialized school or training facility

1

1

1

17

University/college campus

N

N

N

Industry, Manufacturing and Processing

18

Catering service, as a primary use

?

?

?

19

Bakery, butcher, delicatessen as a primary use

?

?

?

20

Furniture and fixtures manufacturing, cabinet shop

1

1

N

21

Laundry, dry cleaning services

1

1

1

22

Manufacturing/processinglight

N

N

N

23

Media production

1

?

?

24

Printing and publishing

?

?

?

25

Recycling center

N

N

N

26

Recycling facilityscrap and dismantling yard

N

N

N

27

Research and development

N

N

N

28

Storage yardoutside

N

N

N

29

Storagewarehouse, indoor storage

N

N

N

30

Wholesale and distribution

N

N

N

Lodging

31

Bed and breakfast inn

1

1

1

32

Lodginghotel/motel

?

1

?

Retail

33

Adult-oriented business

N

N

N

34

Artisan shop

?

?

?

35

Auto/recreational vehicle wash and detailing

N

N

N

36

Bar, tavern, night club

1

1

?

37

Building and landscape materialsindoor

?

N

N

38

Building and landscape materialsoutdoor

N

N

N

39

Brewery/winery with restaurant service

1

1

?

40

Eatery, restaurant, cafe, coffee shop

?

?

?

41

Gas station

1

N

N

42

Grooming/beauty/general wellness shops

?

?

?

43

General retail

?

?

?

44

Groceries/specialty foods 50,000 sq. ft. or less

?

?

?

45

Groceries/specialty foods more than 50,000 sq. ft.

N

N

N

46

Pharmacies/drug stores 25,000 sq. ft. or less

?

?

?

47

Plant nursery

N

N

N

48

Vehicle parts sales

N

N

N

49

Vehicle sales and rental

N

N

N

50

Vendors, kiosks

1

?

?

ServicesBusiness, Financial, Professional

51

ATM

?

?

?

52

Bank, financial services

?

?

?

53

Laboratorymedical

?

?

1

54

Health care facility

1

N

N

55

Medical servicesmajor

N

N

N

56

Medical servicesminor

?3

?3

?3

57

Officebusiness, service or government

?

?

1

58

Officeheadquarter or processing 50,000 sq. ft. or less

1

1

1

59

Officeprofessions, administrative

?

?

?

ServiceGeneral

60

Assisted living facility

1

N

N

61

Adult day care facilities

1

N

N

62

Child care facility

1, 5

1, 5

1, 5

63

Kennel, animal boarding

N

N

N

64

Maintenance/repair servicesequipment, appliances

N

N

N

65

Mortuary, funeral home

N

N

N

66

Personal services

?4

?4

?4

67

Public safety facility

?

?

?

68

Vehicle servicesmajor repair/body work

N

N

N

69

Vehicle servicesmaintenance and minor service

N

N

N

70

Veterinary clinic, animal hospital

1

N

N

Residential

71

Accessory building/structure (nonresidential)

2

N

N

72

Single-family (SF) dwellings

 

 

 

 

SF detached

N

N

N

 

SF zero-lot-line

N

N

N

 

SF patio

N

N

N

73

Two-family dwellings

 

 

 

 

Duplexes

N

N

N

 

Half-plexes

N

N

N

74

Multiple-family dwellings

 

 

 

 

Townhouses

?

?

?

 

Condominiums

?

?

?

 

Garden Apartments

?

1

1

 

Apartments

?

?

?

75

Second dwelling units

N

N

N

76

Live/work studios

?

?

?

77

Home occupations

2, 6

2, 6

2, 6

78

Covered, uncovered parking lots

2

?

?

Transportation, Communication, Infrastructure

79

Alternative energy technologies

1

1

1

80

City water facility

N

N

N

81

City wastewater facility

N

N

N

82

Parking facility (private/public)

?

?

?

83

Off-site parking facility (ancillary use)

2

2

2

84

Storm drainage facilities

?

?

?

85

Underground utilities

?

?

?

86

Utility facilities

?

?

?

87

Wireless communication facilities

1

1

1

88

Temporary tract construction office

?

N

N

89

Temporary tract construction equipment yard

?

N

N

(Ord. 1158  2 (part), 2012)

17.23.040 Special condition requirements for mixed-use zones.
The following special condition requirements apply to the uses indicated by the corresponding numbers on the mixed-use zoning district use table described in Section 17.23.030.

1.    Permitted only upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission.

2.    Permitted only upon the issuance of an accessory use permit by the CDD director.

3.    Minor medical services are defined as outpatient services including, but not limited to, Lasik surgery offices, dentistry office, same day clinics, and medical offices.

4.    Personal services are defined as intellectual or manual work performed by a service provider in serving a customer including, but not limited to, consulting services, massage therapy, weight counseling, and personal concierge services.

5.    Child care facilities connected to office/professional businesses will be considered as an ancillary use.

6.    Home occupation permit shall be required as per Chapter 17.61. (Ord. 1158  2 (part), 2012)

17.23.050 Mixed-use zone development standards table.
Mixed-Use Zone Development Standards Table
 

Lot Configuration

Site Area

0.5 acre min.

Buffers

Appropriate buffers by means of decorative walls or evergreen shrubs shall be provided within setback areas to minimize impacts on adjacent single-family residential uses.

Residential Density

Minimum Residential Density Required

12 units per acre in MU

 

20 units per acre in MU-TCOZ and MU-EDOZ

Maximum Residential Density Permitted

30 units per acre except as provided by density bonus as permitted in Chapter 17.102

Location of Commercial Use

Buildings fronting a major commercial corridor

Commercial use required on the ground floor

Buildings not fronting a major commercial corridor

Residential use may be permitted on the ground floor. Residential tenant space on the ground floors shall be constructed in a way that can accommodate a commercial use in the future without significant structural change to the space including the ceiling height.

Setbacks (measured at back of sidewalk)

Front Yard Setback

 

Primary Structure

0 ft. min.1

Courtyard/Porch/Plaza

0 ft. min.1

Side Yard Setback

 

Interior Side Yard

0 ft. min., 10 ft. min. between buildings

Street Side Yard

0 ft. min.

Accessory Structures (interior lot lines)

3 ft. min.

Rear Yard Setback

 

Main Building

0 ft. min.1

Accessory Structure

0 ft. min.

Landscape Coverage

 

10% min. of entire site including, but not limited to, entries, parking areas, and plazas

Building Height

Main Building

50 ft. max., unless parking is provided underneath buildings

Accessory Structure

15 ft. max.

Off-Street Parking

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

A parking study is required demonstrating sufficient parking would be provided for the proposed project.

Location of Parking

Parking lots shall be located to the rear or side of buildings only. See Figure 4 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

 

Parking lots shall be adequately landscaped and screened from adjacent properties and public streets to minimize the visual impact of parked cars and pavement. See Figure 5 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

NOTE: (1) Setbacks may vary through planned development permit review process by the city. New buildings shall be located as close to the fronting streets as practically possible.

(Ord. 1158  2 (part), 2012)

17.23.060 Mixed-use zone site and architectural design standards.
A.    The best design of the times shall be utilized in the mixed-use zones. Urban design principles associated with form-based codes, transit-oriented development (TOD), or smart growth, complete streets design, crime prevention through environmental design (CPED) and/or other innovative urban design standards shall be utilized. See Figures 1 through 3 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

B.    Orientation, location, size, height, design, material, color, and lighting of the new buildings shall be carefully determined by considering not only the site characteristics and anticipated uses, but also the characteristics of adjacent properties and public realms including connectivity for pedestrians and bicyclists and public views.

C.    Vertical mixed-use, where two or more different uses occupy the same building, is generally encouraged as opposed to integrated horizontal mixed-use, where two or more different types of uses are located within one parcel, but each of the buildings is occupied by only one use. See Figure 6 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

D.    Horizontal mixed-use development shall meet all of the following standards:

1.    Horizontal mixed-use development shall be discouraged on parcels that front on a major commercial corridor.

2.    The site and parking design shall maximize opportunities for shared parking, access entries, and driveways to minimize the number of curb cuts.

3.    Zero setbacks shall be required for all new nonresidential buildings along both the main and secondary frontages unless pedestrian-friendly amenities, such as plazas or courtyards, including appropriate street furniture seating, trash receptacles, bike racks, and other similar elements are provided between the buildings and the applicable property line(s).

4.    Weather protection such as awnings and canopies shall be required along at least seventy percent of all new nonresidential building facades facing a public street. See Figure 7 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

5.    Permeable surface including windows, display windows, and building entrances shall consist of at least seventy percent of the ground floor facade, between thirty inches and eight feet above grade, of all new nonresidential buildings facing a public street. Permeable surface shall consist of at least fifty percent of the facade of upper floors of all new nonresidential buildings facing a public street. See Figure 7 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

6.    Parking lots shall be located to the rear of buildings only. Parking lots shall not be located on the corner of the lot.

E.    Clearly marked, decorative driveways and pedestrian pathways shall be constructed to facilitate safe and efficient pedestrian movement on the site. Separation of uses by parking areas shall be minimized as much as practically possible. Safe and attractive pedestrian connection shall also be provided between new buildings and adjacent existing commercial and residential sites. See Figure 8 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

F.    Pedestrian-friendly amenities, such as plazas or courtyards, including appropriate street furniture seating, trash receptacles, bike racks, and other similar elements shall be provided on the street side(s) of lots, including corner lots, that front on a major commercial corridor. Special treatments, such as a rounded or angled facet, should be provided to corner buildings.

At least two of the following gathering elements shall be provided for each block, or every one hundred fifty linear feet, of all lot frontage.

    Patio/seating areas;

    Pedestrian plaza with benches;

    Landscaped open space area;

    Public art plaza;

    Kiosk area;

    Water feature.

G.    Buildings shall have a distinct bottom, middle, and top. Primary building entries shall be accented with strong architectural features. High quality and durable building materials shall be utilized. See Figure 9 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

H.    In general, building materials that should be used include, but are not limited to:

    Smooth or sand stucco finishes;

    Style-appropriate stone;

    Wood;

    Metal;

    Brick;

    Stone;

    Glass;

    Concrete;

    Plaster;

    Wrought iron;

    Canvas awnings;

    Wood trellises;

    Tile roof elements;

    Wood columns and beams in key locations;

    Pre-cast stone trims, head, and sills;

    Metal roof elements;

    Decorative sheet metal gutters, downspouts, and collectors, if and where appropriate;

    Wood shutter elements;

    Individually articulated window elements;

    Tile-up construction that utilizes imaginative forming techniques to add texture and shadow to otherwise unarticulated walls.

I.    In general, the building materials that should be prohibited include:

    Heavy knock-down or Spanish lace stucco finishes;

    Contrived stone veneers;

    Unfinished tilt-up wall panels;

    Exposed concrete block walls;

    Exposed aggregate walls.

J.    Projects shall generally consist of smaller, multiple buildings with varied massing rather than a few large buildings to provide visual interest and human scale urban character. Design details that can be used to help break large buildings into smaller-scaled components include, but are not limited to:

    Enhanced entry elements or entry plazas;

    Atriums and interior courts;

    Upper floor setbacks;

    Dynamic building and roof forms;

    Cornices, parapets, and eaves;

    Awnings, balconies, trellises;

    Distinctive window patterns;

    Accent lighting;

    Landscaping components.

See Figure 10 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

K.    Vertical and horizontal offsets shall be used to provide building modulation or articulation features. Building bay widths should be generally twenty-five to fifty feet. Articulation should add three-dimensional interest to the facade and not rely on false detailing. See Figure 10 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

L.    Each retail establishment shall have clearly defined, highly visible, and distinctive customer entrances.

M.    Flat or shallow-pitched roofs shall be ornamented with shaped parapets or cornice treatments.

N.    Mirrored, opaque, and deeply tinted glass are strongly discouraged for retail uses, but may be used as an architectural element.

O.    Exterior building colors should be compatible with surrounding buildings. In general, building colors should not be garish. Color should be used to enhance the overall site and building design.

P.    Any building walls or parking structures shall be attractively screened by means of evergreen trees or shrubs, trellis, art, stoops, or other architectural elements from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way.

Q.    Use of stoops shall be prohibited along the primary frontage and may be permitted only along the secondary frontage. Stoops shall generally meet the dimensional standards as depicted in Figure 11 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

R.    Ample and attractive landscaping shall be provided in areas visible from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way including on-site parking lots in a way that complements the overall design of the site and buildings.

Street trees shall be required and distinguish the development site from the surrounding community through species, color, order, scale, or shape. Large potted plants in groupings shall be encouraged to be interspersed along walkways to add another level of detail and interest to the streetscape.

S.    Use of low impact development (LID) techniques, Energy Star features, Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standards, and other sustainable development techniques shall be utilized as much as practically possible. See Figures 12 and 13 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

T.    Commercial and way-finding signs, kiosks, public art, thematic street furniture, water elements, and streetscape lighting shall be designed in a way that complements the overall design of the site and buildings. See Figures 14 through 16 of the City of Folsom Mixed-Use Handbook.

U.    Service/loading areas, garbage receptacles, utility meters and mechanical and electrical equipment shall be located away from public view and fully screened from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. The method of screening of these areas shall be integrated into the overall building and site design.

V.    For phased developments, landscaping shall be installed along the entire street frontage of all subject properties. All undeveloped portions of each occupied or developed lot shall be maintained as landscaped area and irrigated until those areas are developed.

W.    A uniform signage program (USP) is required for every mixed-use project. USPs shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission prior to installation of any sign for the project. All signs shall be designed to enhance the overall sign and building design and contribute to the pedestrian-friendly characteristics.

X.    Through the planned development permit review process, the review authority may impose conditions intended to help implement the goals and policies of the MU zoning district on a case-by-case basis. Such conditions shall be in writing and based on written findings. (Ord. 1158  2 (part), 2012)

Chapter 17.24
ADULT RELATED BUSINESSES
Sections:

17.24.010    Definitions.

17.24.020    Location of adult related businesses.

17.24.030    Development and operational standards.

17.24.040    Violations.

17.24.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.

Adult live entertainment theater means any place, building, enclosure or structure, partially or entirely used for live adult entertainment, as defined in this section, performances or presentations characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, displaying, or describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity for observation by patrons or customers therein. Live adult entertainment means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer(s) expose to public view without opaque covering specified anatomical areas or appear in a state of nudity or a state of partial nudity for any form of consideration.

Adult motion picture or video arcade means any business where coin, paper, note, or token-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to four or fewer persons per machine, at any one time, and where the predominant character or theme of the images so displayed is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity. For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an NC17 rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture or video arcade.

Adult motion picture theater means any business, other than a hotel or motel which regularly provides closed-circuit viewing to each individual room as a secondary service to its hotel or motel customers, with the capacity for five or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions in which the predominant character and theme is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity as defined in this section, are regularly shown. This includes, without limitation, showing any such slides, motion pictures or videos by means of any video tape system which has a display, viewer, screen, or a television set. For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an NC17 rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture theater.

Adult related business means any establishment, business or concern which, as a regular course or conduct of the business, offers or engages in the display of specified anatomical areas, specified sexual activity, or men and/or women in a state of nudity, or state of partial nudity, as defined in this section, by patrons, employees or anyone on the premises, and includes without limitation the following types of establishments:

1.    Adult Related Book and Video Store. An adult related book and video store means an establishment, business or concern with more than twenty-five percent of its display area devoted to and offering for sale or rent, stock-in-trade consisting of adult related book and video products, or an establishment where twenty-five percent or more of the retail or wholesale value of merchandise displayed or offered for sale or rent consists of adult related book and video products. The term adult related book and video products means books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, paintings, sculptures, photographs, drawings, motion pictures, slides, films, tapes, video cassettes, records, DVD, CD-ROM, or other visual or audio representations or any material in digital format, which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

2.    Adult Related Sexual Device Store. An adult related sexual device store means an establishment, business or concern which sells, rents, displays, exhibits or offers for sale any of the following products:

a.    Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed or reasonably intended to be used in connection with specified sexual activities; or

b.    Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate specified anatomical areas, or goods designed or reasonably intended to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas or reasonably intended to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities. Such goods include, but are not limited to, devices that are physical representations of the human genital organs, and devices with non-sex related utility being marketed or offered for sale or rent in a manner promoting sexual or sadomasochistic uses, including, but not limited to, leather whips, straps, harnesses, restraints and ligatures.

The following items are expressly not included within the definitions in this section: (1) devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy; (2) candles and incense; (3) body oils, creams and lotions; (4) lingerie, stockings and undergarments; (5) massage devices that are not replicas of human genital organs; (6) health care or personal hygiene products; and (7) food products.

Chief of police means the chief of police or his/her designee.

City manager means the city manager or his/her designee.

Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

Establish means and includes any of the following:

A.    The opening or commencement of any adult related business as defined in this section;

B.    The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult related business, to any adult related business as defined in this section;

C.    The relocation of any adult related business; or

D.    The addition of any of the adult related businesses defined in this section to any other existing adult related business.

Exceptions. An adult related business shall not include:

A.    Bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical and psychological personnel with necessary medical or professional credentials for the treatment of patients; or

B.    Persons depicting specified anatomical areas in a modeling class operated:

1.    By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue;

2.    By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; or

3.    In a structure operated either as a profit or not-for-profit facility which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, and where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class.

Figure modeling or modeling studio means any business featuring a live person displaying specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity, as defined in this section, for compensation, whether monetary or any other form of consideration and for the purpose of being observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted. Figure modeling or a modeling studio does not include an artist studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists which is not open to the public and does not provide, permit or make available for viewing specified sexual activities on the premises.

Nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or anus, with less than a fully opaque fabric covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque fabric covering of any part of the nipple and areola, or the showing of completely or opaquely covered (by fabric) male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

Operate means to own, lease (as lessor or lessee), rent (as landlord or tenant or as agent for the purpose of representing a principal in the management, rental or operation of the property of such principal), manage, conduct, or direct an adult related business.

Operator means and includes the owner, custodian, manager or person in charge of any adult related business.

Partial nudity means a state of dress in which clothing covers less than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks and nipple, areola and lower portion below the lowest point of the areola of the female breast. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.

Regularly features, regularly shown, regular basis or regularly means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the business.

Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship, religious education incidental thereto and related religious activities.

School means any public or private educational facility primarily attended by minors, including large family day care homes, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, and special education schools, and includes school grounds.

Specified anatomical area includes the following:

A.    Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, and/or the female nipple and breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

B.    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

Specified sexual activity includes the following:

A.    Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, sodomy, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism;

B.    Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;

C.    Human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation;

D.    Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast;

E.    Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain;

F.    Erotic or lewd touching, lewd fondling or other lewd contact with an animal by a human being; or

G.    Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigations.

Zoning district means the zoning designation on the city zoning map or the corresponding designation on the general plan land use map. (Ord. 1031  2 (part), 2005; Ord. 999  2 (part), 2003)

17.24.020 Location of adult related businesses.
In order to fulfill the purposes of this chapter and to avoid a concentration of adult related business uses, adult related businesses are permitted in the central business (C-2), general commercial (C-3), light industrial (M-1), and general industrial (M-2) zoning districts subject to the following location restrictions. Distance is measured in a straight line from the closest point of the closest property line of an adult related business to the closest point of the closest property line of one of the locations listed below.

A.    Adult related businesses shall not be located within one thousand feet of any existing residential zoning district or use whether in the city, in an adjoining city or unincorporated area.

B.    Adult related businesses shall not be located within one thousand feet of any religious institution.

C.    Adult related businesses shall not be located within one thousand feet of any school site (developed or designated).

D.    Adult related businesses shall not be located within one thousand feet of any other existing adult related business.

E.    Adult related businesses shall not be located in any temporary or portable structures.

F.    Adult related businesses shall not be located within one thousand feet of any public park, or recreational area, or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by the city, including but not limited to park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, athletic field or facility, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city.

G.    If the property upon which the adult related business is to operate is subject to a planned development permit, then the adult related business must comply with the requirements of this code in the same manner as any other business seeking to operate on the property. (Ord. 999  2 (part), 2003)

17.24.030 Development and operational standards.
In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district and in addition to other provisions of this code, the following development and operational standards apply to adult related businesses.

A.    Signs. Signs, advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials showing specific sexual activities or men or women in a state of nudity or partial nudity or displaying specified anatomical areas shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult related business is conducted.

B.    Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult related business for amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult related business is conducted.

C.    Parking Lot Lighting. All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the adult related business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on parking surfaces and walkways.

D.    Landscaping. No landscaping shall exceed thirty inches in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet above the ground.

E.    Trash Enclosures. Trash dumpsters shall be enclosed by a screening enclosure and locked at all times so as not to be accessible to the public.

F.    Access. Each adult related business shall have a business entrance separate from any other non-adult related business located in the same building. All building openings, entries, and windows for an adult related business shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent viewing of men or women inside the premises in a state of partial nudity or displaying specified anatomical areas from any area open to the general public.

G.    Posting Age Restrictions. The building entrance to the adult related business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded from entering the premises.

H.    Manager Stations. All indoor areas of the adult related business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view within a direct line of sight at all times by the management from a designated manager station that shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area. Manager stations may include video monitoring of the adult related business, but all areas of the business must be visible by a direct line of sight as described in this subsection.

I.    Individual Viewing Areas. No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. Individual viewing area shall mean a viewing room in which visual displays of specified anatomical areas and specified sexual activities are regularly shown and which is less than one hundred square feet in area. Individual viewing areas of the adult related business shall be operated and maintained without any hole or other opening or means of direct communication or visual or physical access between the interior space of two or more individual viewing areas. (Ord. 999  2 (part), 2003)

17.24.040 Violations.
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an adult related business in violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, patron or employee to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or an administrative violation punishable as follows:

A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement as set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Notwithstanding the procedure for administrative violations provided in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, no notice to correct as provided in Section 1.09.023 shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of administrative violation.

C.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of this chapter.

D.    Based on the criteria for the imposition of administrative violations set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter committed by a patron or a non-management employee shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. Based on the criteria for the imposition of administrative violations set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of a provision of this chapter committed by an owner or manager shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A).

E.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day that any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly.

F.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the adult related business for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises knowingly, or through negligent supervision of the employee, allowed such act to occur on the premises.

Nothing in this section shall be deemed or constituted to prevent the city from commencing any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration and/or abatement of a public nuisance. (Ord. 999  2 (part), 2003)

Chapter 17.27
BED AND BREAKFAST INN
Sections:

17.27.010    Bed and breakfast inn defined.

17.27.020    Where allowedPermit required.

17.27.030    Findings.

17.27.040    Special requirements.

17.27.010 Bed and breakfast inn defined.
Bed and breakfast inn means any building used in whole or in part for sleeping and living facilities of not more than five guest units, available to the public for hire on an overnight or limited-term basis. Such use may also include meal service, if limited to guests. (Ord. 529  1 (part), 1984)

17.27.020 Where allowedPermit required.
Bed and breakfast inns shall be permitted in any residential, business and professional, historical, or commercial zone, provided a use permit is obtained pursuant to Chapter 17.60. (Ord. 529  1 (part), 1984)

17.27.030 Findings.
No use permit shall be granted unless the following findings are made:

A.    The conversion of an existing building to a bed and breakfast inn will not damage any significant historical features or character of such building.

B.    Adequate off-street parking can be provided equivalent to one space per guest unit, plus two spaces for the inn-keeper or caretaker. Such parking spaces shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.57 of this code.

C.    The bed and breakfast and permitted ancillary uses will be compatible with adjacent uses. (Ord. 529  1 (part), 1984)

17.27.040 Special requirements.
The following special requirements shall be complied with:

A.    Building Standards. Buildings proposed for conversion to a bed and breakfast inn shall be required to comply with residential building code standards upon conversion, provided that where meal service is to be provided, higher standards may be applied to kitchen facilities where necessary to protect the public health and safety.

B.    Ancillary Activities. The use permit may authorize limited ancillary activities such as weddings, receptions, fund raisers or similar events attended by non-guests, subject to conditions which are necessary to satisfy Section 17.20.030C, including, but not limited to, restrictions upon the frequency and time of holding events, duration thereof, and the maximum number of persons attending. Unless expressly authorized in the use permit, such ancillary activities are prohibited. (Ord. 831  1 (part), 1995; Ord. 529  1 (part), 1984)

Chapter 17.28
M-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Sections:

17.28.010    Regulations.

17.28.020    Permitted uses.

17.28.025    Uses requiring use permits.

17.28.030    Lot area, width, coverage and front yard.

17.28.040    Side yard.

17.28.050    Rear yard.

17.28.060    Parking.

17.28.070    Loading area.

17.28.080    Building height limit.

17.28.010 Regulations.
The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all M-1 districts. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3113.01)

17.28.020 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted are:

1.    Uses permitted in C-3 districts, except that dwellings, as defined herein, and hotels are not permitted. Uses permitted in C-3 districts with use permit from the planning commission are permitted in this district after securing a use permit from the planning commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no use permit shall be required for the following uses, when conducted within a building or enclosed within a solid wall or fence of a type approved by the planning commission, not less than six feet in height:

a.    Microbrewery;

b.    Billboard sign agencyservice yard and workshop;

c.    Building trades service yard and workshop;

d.    Garage equipment and tool sales with or without outside storage;

e.    Assemblylight manufacturing;

2.    Home occupation for a nonconforming residential use;

3.    The following uses of land and buildings, which shall be permitted only in M-1 and M-2 districts:

a.    Assembly and storage of goods, materials, liquids and equipment (except storage of flammable or explosive matter or materials which create dust, odors or fumes).

Permitted uses include:

i.    Wholesale and storage warehouses

ii.    Feed and fuel yards,

b.    Manufacturing, processing, fabricating, refining, repairing, packaging or treatment of goods, material or produce by electric power, oil or gas (except operations involving fish fats and oils, bones and meat products, or similar substances commonly recognized as creating offensive conditions in the handling thereof).

Permitted uses include:

i.    Dyeing and dry cleaning plants

ii.    Rug cleaning plants

iii.    Laundries

iv.    Veterinary hospitals

v.    Cabinet shops

vi.    Construction and material yards (except gravel, rock and cement material yards),

c.    The following, when conducted within a building or enclosed within a solid wall or fence of a type approved by the planning commission, not less than 6 feet in height:

i.    Body and fender repair shops, auto painting shops

ii.    Cooperage and bottling works

iii.    Sheet metal shops, welding shops

iv.    Truck terminals

v.    Retail lumber yards. (Ord. 1272  2, 2017; Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 858  9, 1997; prior code  3113.02)

17.28.025 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

1.    Residence of a caretaker, proprietor or owner of a permitted use.

2.    Emergency shelters in accordance with Chapter 17.108. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 733  1 (part), 1992)

17.28.030 Lot area, width, coverage and front yard.
There are no lot area, width, coverage and front yard requirements. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3113.11)

17.28.040 Side yard.
There are no side yard requirements except as required by building code or other regulations. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3113.12)

17.28.050 Rear yard.
The rear yard requirements are the same as specified for C-2 districts. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3113.13)

17.28.060 Parking.
A.    The general parking requirement for industrial uses is the greater of the following:

1.    One space per employee and each company-operated vehicle based at the facility;

2.    One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area and each company-operated vehicle based at the facility.

B.    Other industrial space requirements are set forth in Section 17.57.040; loading requirements are in Section 17.57.060. Refer to Chapter 17.57 for other general requirements for parking. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 509  16, 1983: prior code  3113.14)

17.28.070 Loading area.
The loading area requirement is private off-street space for the handling of all materials and equipment. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3113.15)

17.28.080 Building height limit.
Building height limit requirements are the same as specified for C-2 districts. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3113.16)

Chapter 17.30
M-2, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Sections:

17.30.010    Regulations.

17.30.020    Permitted uses.

17.30.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.30.040    Lot area, width, coverage and front yard.

17.30.050    Side yard.

17.30.060    Rear yard.

17.30.070    Parking.

17.30.090    Building height limit.

17.30.010 Regulations.
The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all M-2 districts. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3114.01)

17.30.020 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted are:

1.    Uses permitted in M-1 districts, except that dwellings, as defined herein, and hotels are not permitted. Uses permitted in C-3 districts with use permit from the planning commission are permitted in this district after securing a use permit from the planning commission;

2.    Home occupation for a nonconforming residential use;

3.    The following specific uses which shall be permitted only in M-2 districts:

a.    Wholesale lumber yards, lumber mills,

b.    Pottery kilns and ceramic works of heavy industrial types,

c.    Concrete batching plants,

d.    Blacksmith shops, casting foundries,

e.    The following when enclosed within a solid wall or fence not less than 6 feet in height, and of a type approved by the planning commission:

i.    Building material storage yard, contractors storage yard,

ii.    Junkyard, auto wrecking yard. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 858  10, 1997; prior code  3114.02)

17.30.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

1.    Lawful uses not otherwise provided for in this title;

2.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no junkyard or auto wrecking yard shall be operated within the city without having first obtained a use permit, which shall be conditioned upon the maintenance and operation of such junkyard or auto wrecking yard, in a neat and sanitary manner, and under such conditions as to not cause a nuisance or otherwise disturb the neighborhood from burning or unsightly accumulation of junk or auto parts;

3.    Residence of a caretaker, proprietor or owner of a permitted use.

4.    Emergency shelters in accordance with Chapter 17.108. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 733  1 (part), 1992; prior code  3114.03)

17.30.040 Lot area, width, coverage and front yard.
There are no lot area, width, coverage and front yard requirements. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3114.11)

17.30.050 Side yard.
There are no side yard requirements except as required by building code or other regulations. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3114.12)

17.30.060 Rear yard.
There are no rear yard requirements. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3114.13)

17.30.070 Parking.
A.    The general parking requirement for industrial uses is the greater of the following:

1.    One space per employee and each company-operated vehicle based at the facility;

2.    One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area and each company-operated vehicle based at the facility.

B.    Other industrial space requirements are set forth in Section 17.57.070; loading requirements are in Section 17.57.060. Refer to Chapter 17.57 for other general requirements for parking. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 509  17, 1983: prior code  3114.14)

17.30.090 Building height limit.
Building height limit requirements are the same as specified for C-2 districts. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3114.16)

Chapter 17.32
M-L, LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.32.010    Intent.

17.32.020    Regulations.

17.32.030    Permitted uses.

17.32.040    Lot area.

17.32.050    Front yard.

17.32.060    Side yards.

17.32.070    Rear yard.

17.32.080    Parking and loading.

17.32.100    Building height limit.

17.32.120    Uses requiring use permits.

17.32.130    Expiration.

17.32.010 Intent.
This district is designed to accommodate a limited group of business, professional, research and technical manufacturing uses which may have unusual requirements for space, light and air, and the operations of which are clean and quiet. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.01)

17.32.020 Regulations.
The specific regulations and general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all M-L districts. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.02)

17.32.030 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted are:

A.    Commercial and professional offices;

B.    The following and similar uses from which noise, smoke, dust, odors and other such offensive features are confined to the premises of each such use:

1.    Research institutes and laboratories,

2.    Small electronic and plastic products manufacturing,

3.    Electrical products and instrument manufacturing,

4.    Bookbinding, printing and lithography,

5.    Cartography,

6.    Editorial and designing,

7.    Garment manufacturing, paper products manufacturing;

C.    Underground utility installations and aboveground utility installations for local service, except that substations, generating plants, and public utility communication buildings, and gas holders must be approved by the planning commission prior to construction and the route of any proposed transmission line shall be discussed with the planning commission prior to acquisition. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.03)

17.32.040 Lot area.
The lot area requirement is 10,000 square feet. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.11)

17.32.050 Front yard.
The front yard requirement is 20 feet. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.12)

17.32.060 Side yards.
The side yards requirement is 20 feet. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.13)

17.32.070 Rear yard.
The rear yard requirement is 20 feet. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.14)

17.32.080 Parking and loading.
A.    The general parking requirement for industrial-office parks is 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area for manufacturing areas, 1 space per 2,000 square feet of floor area for storage areas, and 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for offices and accessory retail sales area. In the event that the structure is constructed on speculation, parking shall be provided at the ratio of 1 space per 275 square feet of gross floor area.

B.    Other industrial space requirements are set forth in Section 17.57.070; loading requirements are in Section 17.57.060. Refer to Chapter 17.57 for other general requirements for parking. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 509  19, 1983: prior code  3115.15)

17.32.100 Building height limit.
Building height limit is 2 stories, but not to exceed 40 feet. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: prior code  3115.17)

17.32.120 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

1.    Eating establishments such as cafes or delicatessens.

2.    Accessory uses incidental to the permitted uses in the zone as deemed appropriate by the planning commission.

3.    Emergency shelters in accordance with Chapter 17.108.

4.    Canine kennels for boarding and training.

5.    Veterinarian hospitals. (Ord. 1186  2, 2013: Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 554  1, 1985)

17.32.130 Expiration.
Unless a building permit has been issued for the development within 1 year after the granting of the planned development permit or such further time as the commission shall allow, then without further action the planned development permit shall be null and void. (Ord. 975  2 (part), 2002)

Chapter 17.34
MF, INDUSTRIAL FRONTAGE DISTRICT
Sections:

17.34.010    Permitted uses.

17.34.010 Permitted uses.
Within any MF industrial frontage district no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the following uses:

A.    Use.

1.    Business, administrative and professional offices,

2.    Research laboratories and institutions,

3.    Display buildings for products produced or processed on premises,

4.    Off-street parking, landscaping,

5.    Outdoor advertising and exterior advertising pertaining directly to the operation, goods, or services conducted or offered on the premises, and not to exceed in total more than 1 square foot for each front foot on site,

6.    Public utility buildings and structures as permitted in M-L districts;

B.    Height. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected to exceed 2 stories or 35 feet, except appurtenances necessary to the operation of the industry when approved by the city planning commission;

C.    Area, Yards, Parking. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected unless the following are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:

1.    Minimum site area, 5,000 square feet; minimum width, 50 feet,

2.    Front yard, 25 feet,

3.    Side yards, 10 feet on each side of site,

4.    Parking, loading and landscape requirements: Refer to Chapter 17.57,

5.    Landscaping, 5-foot strip in front yard. (Ord. 509  21, 1983; prior code  3115.18)

Chapter 17.35
A-1-A, AGRICULTURAL-RESERVE DISTRICT
Sections:

17.35.010    Intent.

17.35.020    Review of all uses.

17.35.030    Permitted uses.

17.35.040    Uses requiring use permits.

17.35.050    Lot area, width and setbacks.

17.35.060    Height restrictions.

17.35.070    Parking.

17.35.010 Intent.
The A-1-A district is established to provide areas for interim agricultural and livestock grazing uses until such time as community services are available for urban development and to direct the orderly expansion of urban development consistent with the general plan. To the extent that the A-1-A district is a reserve district, it may be applied in any land-use designation identified on the land use and circulation element map of the general plan. (Ord. 486 (part), 1983)

17.35.020 Review of all uses.
All uses in this district shall be subject to review by the planning director for future compatibility and consistency with the objectives, policies, programs and general land use of the general plan. A written finding of compatibility and consistency shall be necessary before any building permit may be issued. Any person dissatisfied with the finding of the planning director may appeal it to the planning commission. (Ord. 486 (part), 1983)

17.35.030 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted in the A-1-A district are:

1.    Agricultural crop production;

2.    Livestock grazing and animal husbandry, except for uses requiring a use permit;

3.    Private stables and corrals;

4.    One single-family dwelling per parcel;

5.    Agricultural accessory dwellings, one unit per ten acres;

6.    Agricultural buildings customary to the permitted use;

7.    Roadside stands for display and sale of agricultural products grown on the premises; provided, that it is located no closer than fifty feet from any street or road right-of-way;

8.    Home occupations as defined in Chapters 17.02 and 17.13;

9.    Underground utility installations, and aboveground utility installations for local service, except that substations, generating plants, public utility communication buildings and gas holders must be approved by the planning commission prior to construction, and the route of any proposed transmission line shall be discussed with the planning commission prior to acquisition. (Ord. 486 (part), 1983)

17.35.040 Uses requiring use permits.
Applications for use permits will be reviewed for compatibility with the long-term uses designated for the area on the general plan. Uses which have the potential to emit noise and/or odor beyond the property lines will not be approved. Use permits are required for the following uses:

1.    Feed lots;

2.    Hog farms;

3.    Dairy farms;

4.    Poultry farms of more than 100 birds;

5.    Commercial riding stables, boarding stables, or riding academies;

6.    Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics;

7.    Kennels;

8.    Hunting, gun or shooting clubs;

9.    Public buildings, service facilities, parks and recreation facilities;

10.    Public utility substations; also refer to Section 17.35.030(9);

11.    Gas or oil wells;

12.    Gravel and mineral extraction. Such permits shall be reviewed annually to assure proper operation. (Ord. 504, 1983; Ord. 486 (part), 1983)

17.35.050 Lot area, width and setbacks.

Front and street side yards shall be measured from the right-of-way line of major arterial and collector streets shown on an approved tentative or recorded final map. Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall be heard and acted upon under the provisions of Chapter 17.62; provided, that no variance shall be granted from minimum lot area. (Ord. 486 (part), 1983)

B.    Minimum lot width, 500 feet;

A.    A-1-A, AGRICULTURAL-RESERVE DISTRICT Minimum lot area, 50 acres;

C.    Front and rear yards, 50 feet;

D.    Side yards, 25 feet.


17.35.060 Height restrictions.
The building height limit is 2 stories but not to exceed 30 feet, except for agricultural structures and as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.58. (Ord. 486 (part), 1983)

17.35.070 Parking.
There shall be no parking requirements for permitted agricultural uses. Parking requirements for other uses are those set forth in Chapter 17.50 or as established by use permit. (Ord. 486 (part), 1983)

Chapter 17.36
AV, AIRPORT DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.36.010    Intent.

17.36.020    Permitted uses.

17.36.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.36.040    Height limit.

17.36.010 Intent.
This district classification is intended to be applied on properties used, or planned to be used, as airports, and where special regulations are necessary for the protection of life and property.

The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all AV districts. (Prior code  3115.19)

17.36.020 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted are:

1.    Paved runways, taxiways, landing strips and aprons;

2.    Aircraft storage, service and repair hangars;

3.    Aircraft fueling facilities;

4.    Passenger and freight terminal facilities;

5.    Lighting, radio and radar facilities;

6.    Accessory structures and facilities including aircraft and aviation accessory sales. (Prior code  3115.20)

17.36.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

1.    Industrial plants, operations and uses;

2.    Commercial and service structures and uses. (Prior code  3115.21)

17.36.040 Height limit.
The maximum height limit is 35 feet. (Prior code  3115.22)

Chapter 17.37
SP, SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
Sections:

17.37.010    Purpose.

17.37.020    Authority.

17.37.030    Applicability.

17.37.040    Delineation of specific plan areas.

17.37.050    Procedure.

17.37.060    Application.

17.37.070    Specific plan contents.

17.37.080    Environmental review.

17.37.090    Amendment.

17.37.100    Expiration and extension.

17.37.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the SP, specific plan district is to provide a vehicle for implementing the citys general plan on an area-specific basis. A specific plan prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter is intended to serve as a regulatory document, consistent with the General Plan. In the event there is an inconsistency or conflict between an adopted specific plan and comparable regulations of this code, the specific plan will prevail. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.020 Authority.
Specific plans are authorized by California Government Code Section 65450 et seq., which specifies minimum contents and provides for fees and an additional environmental review procedure (Section 65457). (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.030 Applicability.
Chapters 21 and 40 of the General Plan encourage preparation of specific plans and identify certain areas of the city for which a specific plan is required prior to development. A specific plan zoning may be considered for other areas of the city which are approximately one hundred acres in size or larger. To be considered for application of the SP zoning district an area should possess 1 or more of the following characteristics:

A.    Rapidly and/or newly urbanizing, with significant new demand for public facilities and services;

B.    Possessing unique physical, cultural or locational conditions, in particular, significant natural resources to be preserved or utilized, but including any other unusual conditions which warrant special care in planning;

C.    Proposed for a complex mixture of uses;

D.    Held in multiple ownerships. This characteristic is more significant in combination with others listed;

E.    Physically and/or economically deteriorating or marginal. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.040 Delineation of specific plan areas.
It is not necessary for specific plan areas to be delineated on the general plan land use map. On the zoning map a specific plan district will be delineated in a manner similar to that of any other zoning district except that each SP-zoned area shall also bear a number which distinguishes it from other specific plan areas. In most cases an adopted specific plan will create zoning categories unique to that plan; those zonings will be described within the plan itself rather than on the zoning map or in this code. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.050 Procedure.
A.    A specific plan shall be adopted by resolution, following public hearings before the planning commission and city council. For subject areas which are expected to benefit by updating (signage, for example), supplementary documents such as design standards may also be adopted by resolution. Application for other entitlements may be made simultaneously with the specific plan application. In some circumstances simultaneous applications may in fact be necessary.

B.    Prior to adoption of a specific plan, the plan area must be zoned SP and assigned a number as required in Section 17.37.040. The zoning and specific plan applications may be processed simultaneously. In some areas it may be necessary or appropriate to link adoption of the specific plan with adoption of other entitlements or programs such as subdivision or parcel maps, area facilities plans, design guidelines, monitoring programs, PD permits, financing mechanisms, etc. The specific plan adoption resolution shall define the relationship of the plan to other approvals, whether separately or simultaneously requested. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.060 Application.
The application for a specific plan shall be in accordance with public hearing processes prescribed in Government Code Section 65453 and shall include text and diagram(s) as required by the planning commission to properly evaluate the ability of the proposed specific plan to carry out the citys general plan. Due to the significant role an adopted specific plan plays in the implementation of the general plan, application preparers shall seek guidance from the community development department and, if necessary, the planning commission, prior to submitting an application for a specific plan. Such guidance regarding relevant general plan goals, policies, land use and implementation programs shall be provided through preapplication conferences, written material, study sessions or other appropriate means. Application and implementation fees for specific plans shall be as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.070 Specific plan contents.
A.    State Requirements.

1.    A specific plan shall include a text and diagram(s) detailing the following:

a.    The distribution, location and extent of the uses of land, including open space, within the area covered by the plan;

b.    The proposed distribution, location and extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan;

c.    Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources, where applicable;

d.    A program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works projects and financing measures necessary to carry out paragraphs a, b and c of this subdivision.

2.    The specific plan shall include a statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general plan.

B.    City Requirements.

1.    The citys requirements include the state requirements listed above, but in sufficient depth, scope and detail to provide not only policies for the development of the area but also specific standards for regulating that development. As specified in Chapter 21 of the general plan, a specific plan must include the following:

a.    The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan;

b.    The types and configurations of building to be included in all developments within the plan area;

c.    The location of and types of streets;

d.    Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve developments within the specific plan area;

e.    A parking and circulation plan for off-street parking areas showing the location of parking lots, the approximate number of spaces, and the approximate location of entrances and exits;

f.    Proposed conservation, open space and/or recreation areas, if any;

g.    In the historic Folsom area, an historic preservation program and building design guidelines to ensure compatibility of new construction with the existing land uses;

h.    Any other programs, guidelines or standards that are appropriate for the area covered by the plan.

2.    To meet the goal of tailoring general plan implementation to a specific area, no 1 format is prescribed, but the text and diagrams prepared must be organized in a manner that clearly states the goals of the specific plan and clearly sets forth regulations in a format readily usable by both professionals and lay persons who may have a role in implementing the specific plan. The community development department shall provide a checklist and examples of specific plan contents to assist applicants. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.080 Environmental review.
It is anticipated, under the California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines, that most specific plans will require preparation of an environmental impact report. Once certified, the EIR for a specific plan may be relied upon for further entitlements sought subsequent to adoption of the specific plan. An initial study shall be prepared for all subsequent applications to determine whether a supplement to the EIR must be prepared. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.090 Amendment.
A specific plan may be amended as necessary, under the same procedure as adoption of a specific plan. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

17.37.100 Expiration and extension.
Since specific plan applications are flexible, expiration will be determined on a case-by-case basis. Like other city regulations, most specific plan approvals will not expire unless replaced by a subsequently adopted specific plan or rendered obsolete by adoption of a conflicting general plan designation. In some cases, however, limiting the duration of an approval may be appropriate, i.e., when the specific plan is linked to another entitlement which expires, such as a tentative subdivision map. The resolution adopting a specific plan shall specify the duration of the specific plan and any means of extension, which may include an evaluation of an applicants due diligence in satisfying specific plan provisions. (Ord. 714  3 (part), 1991)

Chapter 17.38
P.D., PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Sections:

17.38.010    Purpose.

17.38.020    Regulations.

17.38.030    General criteria.

17.38.040    ApplicationP.D. zone.

17.38.050    P.D. permitProcedure.

17.38.060    P.D. permitApplication.

17.38.070    Permitted uses.

17.38.080    Variances.

17.38.090    Design and density standards.

17.38.100    Review criteria.

17.38.110    Expiration.

17.38.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to allow greater flexibility in the design of integrated developments than otherwise possible through strict application of land use regulations, to encourage the creative and efficient use of land, and to encourage the efficient allocation and maintenance of privately-controlled open space through the redistribution of overall density where such redistribution is desirable and feasible. The Planned Development district is not intended to reduce the allowed density of development as specified in the general plan or to amend the allowed use of property as specified in the underlying zoning district. The Planned Development (P.D.) district is intended to be a combining district. P.D. Permits shall be considered by the planning or historic district commission (referred to collectively as commission) as appropriate. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.020 Regulations.
The specific regulations and the general rules set forth in Chapter 17.58 apply in all P.D. districts, except that where conflict occurs, the regulations and standards specified in or pursuant to this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.030 General criteria.
P.D. permits may be established in all areas of the city so long as they accomplish the purposes of this chapter and are consistent with the general plan and the underlying land use district. Land included within a P.D. district is subject to the requirements and restrictions set forth in this chapter in addition to the underlying land use district; provided, however, that in granting a planned development permit pursuant to this chapter, the commission may modify regulations (i.e., development standards) set forth in this title which would otherwise be applicable to the property. Modification to the allowed density or use of the property as specified in the general plan land use designation or underlying zoning district may not be authorized or required in conjunction with the P.D. permit. Changes to the allowed density or use of the property shall require a general plan amendment and/or rezoning of the property accordingly.

A planned development permit shall be required for development within a P.D. district and no building permit shall be issued until the planned development permit has been granted. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.040 ApplicationP. D. zone.
A.    P.D. districts shall be established or disestablished in accordance with the procedure pertaining to amendments of the zoning ordinance set forth in Chapter 17.58 of this title.

B.    The P.D. district must be established prior to or at the same time that the planned development permit is granted. The establishment of a P.D. district shall not confer upon the applicant the right to a planned development permit. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.050 P. D. permitProcedure.
An application for a planned development permit shall be submitted to the commission in writing on a form prescribed by the commission and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council. The procedural requirements for a planned development permit hearing, action by the commission, expiration or extension of a planned development permit, or appeal of the commissions action with respect to the permit shall be governed, to the extent the provisions of this section are not in conflict, by the provisions of Chapter 17.60 of this title. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.060 P. D. permitApplication.
All development within a P.D. district requires a planned development permit. The application for a planned development permit shall include the following:

A.    A map or maps showing:

1.    Topography of the land, contour intervals, as required by the commission,

2.    Proposed street system and lot design,

3.    Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, public or quasi-public buildings and other such uses,

4.    The type of use (residential, commercial or industrial) which is proposed and the location of the areas proposed for such uses,

5.    Proposed locations of buildings on the land,

6.    Landscaping plans,

7.    Signage,

8.    Total acreage of the development and the method of calculating the residential density.

B.    General elevations or perspective drawings of all proposed buildings and structures other than single-family residences.

C.    A description of the zoning regulations which applicant seeks to vary.

D.    Other data and information which may be deemed necessary by the commission for proper consideration of the application. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.070 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted are all uses permitted in the underlying district and which are consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.080 Variances.
The regulations of the underlying zone relating to height, setback, lot area and coverage, parking and other provisions of the title may be varied when such variance will result in improved design of the development and will permit desirable arrangements of structures in relation to parking areas, parks and parkways, pedestrian walks and other such features. Such variance may be provided for as a condition of the planned development permit granted pursuant to this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in the general plan or zoning code (i.e., density bonus, uses not listed), no variance as to allowed density or land use shall be permitted. The findings necessary to permit a variance under Chapter 17.62 need not be made. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.090 Design and density standards.
In approving a planned development permit, the commission shall comply with the following standards:

Design Standards. The proposed development project must be designed to provide open space, circulation, off-street parking and other conditions in such a way as to form a harmonious, integrated project of sufficient quality to justify exceptions to the normal regulations of this title. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 858  11, 1997; Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.100 Review criteria.
In its review of planned developments, the planning commission shall be governed by the following criteria:

A.    The projects compliance with the intent and purposes of this chapter, the applicable ordinances of the city, and the general plan;

B.    The projects consistency with the objectives, policies and requirements of the development standards of the city. Minor modifications of such standards shall be permitted to encourage the efficient use of land and the creation of open space, provided the commission determines that such modifications will result in a development that is superior to that obtained by rigid application of the standards. Design considerations shall not result in a reduction in the allowed density of a multifamily residential project or render the development infeasible for housing for very low, low and moderate income households, unless the commission makes findings as provided in Government Code Section 65589.5. The terms used herein are as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5;

C.    The physical, functional and visual compatibility between the proposed development and neighboring uses and neighborhood characteristics. The scope of compatibility for the P.D. permit shall be limited to project design considerations. Land use and density compatibility is evaluated separately, in conjunction with the zoning and general plan land use designation of the site;

D.    The availability of necessary public facilities including, but not limited to, water, sewage and drainage and the adequacy of the provision which the development makes for the furnishing of such facilities;

E.    The extent to which the proposed development causes adverse environmental impacts which have not been mitigated to an acceptable level;

F.    The requirement that the proposed development not cause unacceptable vehicular traffic levels on surrounding streets and that there be adequate internal traffic circulation, including ingress and egress;

G.    Adequate provision is made for the furnishing of sanitation services and emergency public safety services to the development;

H.    The proposed development will not be detrimental to health, safety and the general welfare of the persons or property within the vicinity of the proposed development and the city as a whole. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a residential development affordable to lower-income households shall not be denied unless the commission makes findings as provided in the Government Code Section 65589.5. The terms used herein are as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

17.38.110 Expiration.
Unless a building permit has been issued for the development within 1 year after the granting of the planned development permit or such further time as the commission shall allow, then without further action the planned development permit shall be null and void. (Ord. 968  2 (part), 2002: Ord. 589  1 (part), 1987)

Chapter 17.39
OSC, OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Sections:

17.39.010    Intent.

17.39.020    Permitted uses.

17.39.030    Uses requiring a use permit.

17.39.040    Uses requiring a use permit which shall be renewed annually to assure proper operation.

17.39.050    Minimum area, dimensions and other conditions.

17.39.010 Intent.
This district classification is intended to be applied to properties which should be generally maintained in an open or undeveloped state, or developed for permanent open uses as parks or greenbelts. (Ord. 298  1 (part), 1973)

17.39.020 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted are:

1.    Crop and tree farming, cattle or dairy farms, range-land and similar agricultural uses; providing that no farm animal shall be stabled within a distance of 40 feet from any dwelling or the boundaries of any district other than an A or OSC district; one single family dwelling for every 10 acres of agricultural land; accessory uses and structures appurtenant to agricultural uses or used for packing or processing of products raised on the premises;

2.    Public or private parks, game or bird preserves, golf courses, scenic highway corridors, river or stream courses and flood plain areas. (Ord. 298  1 (part), 1973)

17.39.030 Uses requiring a use permit.
Any of the following uses may be permitted if the planning commission finds that a proposed use is appropriate and desirable at the location proposed and will enhance the creation or preservation of open space and natural beauty or historical quality of the area:

1.    Picnic grounds;

2.    Stables and riding academies;

3.    Botanical and zoological gardens and zoos;

4.    Private clubs;

5.    Marinas;

6.    Restaurants, when appurtenant to other listed uses under Sections 17.39.020 and 17.39.030;

7.    Display and exhibit buildings or museums;

8.    Arts, crafts or antique galleries and studios;

9.    Cemeteries;

10.    Airports and heliports;

11.    Golf driving range, swimming pools and gymnasia;

12.    Important watershed lands, areas of geological, historical or cultural value;

13.    Similar uses if approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 298  1 (part), 1973)

17.39.040 Uses requiring a use permit which shall be renewed annually to assure proper operation.
Uses requiring a use permit which shall be renewed annually to assure proper operation are:

1.    Sanitary landfill;

2.    Gravel or mineral excavation. (Ord. 298  1 (part), 1973)

17.39.050 Minimum area, dimensions and other conditions.
Minimum area, dimensions and other conditions are:

1.    Minimum lot area and dimension: 10 acres for agricultural use, 5 acres for any other use. Minimum of 250 feet on any side;

2.    Minimum yards: front, side and rear, 50 feet;

3.    Maximum building coverage: 30 percent of lot area;

4.    Maximum paving coverage: 30 percent of lot area;

5.    Natural area requirements: minimum of 50 percent of site in natural state or approved landscaping, exclusion of paved area;

6.    Parking: parking shall be provided in the number and manner set forth in Chapter 17.57.

7.    When any development contemplates use of only a portion of an unsubdivided parcel of land, plans shall indicate the intended use and generalized arrangement of the remaining portion. (Ord. 509  23, 1983; Ord. 298  1 (part), 1973)

Chapter 17.40
A, AGRICULTURAL COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.40.010    Regulations.

17.40.020    Permitted uses.

17.40.030    Uses requiring use permits.

17.40.040    Special yardsDistance between buildings.

17.40.010 Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in all districts with which are combined A districts in addition to the regulations hereinbefore specified, and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.58; provided, however, that if any of the regulations specified in Chapter 17.58 differ from any corresponding regulations specified in this title for any district with which an A district is combined, then in such case the provision of this chapter shall apply. (Prior code  3117.01)

17.40.020 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted are:

1.    All uses permitted in the respective district with which the A district is combined;

2.    Animal husbandry and livestock farming, provided that not more than 1 horse, 1 mule, 1 cow, 1 steer, or 5 sheep shall be kept for each half acre of land;

3.    Small livestock farming provided that a use permit shall be required for the raising of more than 100 head of either poultry or animals;

4.    Sale of agricultural products produced on the premises, provided that no commercial structure for such purpose, other than a temporary stand, shall be permitted. (Prior code  3117.02)

17.40.030 Uses requiring use permits.
Uses requiring use permits are:

1.    Dog and cat kennel;

2.    Dairy, poultry and rabbit slaughter and processing;

3.    Veterinary hospital. (Prior code  3117.03)

17.40.040 Special yardsDistance between buildings.
Barns, stables, chicken houses, and similar accessory buildings shall be not less than 50 feet from the front property line; not less than 20 feet from any side property line; nor less than 30 feet from any dwelling. (Prior code  3117.04)

Chapter 17.41
HCD, HABITAT CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Sections:

17.41.010    Purpose.

17.41.020    Definitions.

17.41.030    Activities permitted within wetlands, wetland buffers or riparian habitat.

17.41.040    Minimum lot area.

17.41.010 Purpose.
The principal objective and purpose to be served by this classification and its application is to protect the diminishing natural ecosystem of wetlands and riparian habitats as a natural heritage to the citys present and future residents in years to come. (Ord. 782  1 (part), 1994)

17.41.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

Ecosystem means a system made up of a community of organisms and its interrelated physical and chemical environment.

Enhancement means actions performed to improve the condition of existing wetlands or riparian area so that the functions they provide are additional and are of a higher value.

Functions means the beneficial roles served by wetlands or riparian habitat including but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, conveyance and attenuation, groundwater recharge and discharge, erosion control, aesthetic value protection, and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority.

Riparian habitat means an ecosystem associated with the banks and other land adjacent to freshwater bodies, rivers, streams, creeks and surface-emergent aquifers (such as springs and seeps). Riparian habitat is characterized by plant and animal communities which require high soil moisture conditions maintained by transported freshwater in excess of that otherwise available through local precipitation.

Wetland buffer areas means land surrounding wetlands which provides area of an appropriate size to protect the environmental and functional habitat values of the wetland, or which are integrally important in supporting the full range of the wetland and adjacent upland biological community.

Wetlands means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by permanent or seasonal shallow water. For the purposes of this definition, wetlands are those lands that have all of the following attributes:

1.    At least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes;

2.    The substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil; and

3.    The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing season of each year.

Examples of wetland areas include swamps, freshwater marshes, bogs, vernal pools, wet meadows, wet pastures, springs and seeps; portions of lakes, ponds, rivers and streams; and all other areas which are periodically or permanently covered by shallow water, or dominated by hydrophytic vegetation, or in which the soils are predominantly hydric in nature. (Ord. 782  1 (part), 1994)

17.41.030 Activities permitted within wetlands, wetland buffers or riparian habitat.
The following uses, and all others determined by the planning commission to be similar, shall be permitted:

A.    Enhancement, conservation or preservation of soil, vegetation, fish and other wildlife;

B.    Passive outdoor recreational activities, including fishing, bird-watching, hiking, horseback riding and bicycling, provided that they do not harm the natural ecosystem;

C.    The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling of soil, planting of crops, or alteration of the wetland by changing existing topography, water conditions or water sources;

D.    The maintenance and repair (but not construction) of drainage ditches;

E.    Education, scientific research and interpretative centers;

F.    The construction, maintenance and repair of facilities which are necessary to protect the integrity of the wetlands; and

G.    Site investigative work necessary for land use application submittals such as tree surveys, soil logs, percolation tests and other related activities. In every case, impacts shall be minimized and disturbed areas shall be immediately restored. (Ord. 782  1 (part), 1994)

17.41.040 Minimum lot area.
Minimum required area for habitat conservation shall be not less than 1 acre. (Ord. 782  1 (part), 1994)

Chapter 17.42
B, SPECIAL BUILDING SITE COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.42.010    Regulations.

17.42.020    Building site areaSide yards.

17.42.010 Regulations.
In any district with which is combined a B district, the following regulations shall apply as to building site areas, depths of front yards and widths of side yards; provided, however, that such application shall not be made in any case in which any of the following regulations are less than the corresponding regulations hereinbefore specified for any district with which is combined a B district. (Prior code  3118.01)

17.42.020 Building site areaSide yards.
Special regulations are:

1.    Building site area required shall be indicated by a number following the B in the district designation, which number represents the required area in thousands of square feet;

2.    Side yards requirement is ten percent of lot width on each side to a maximum requirement of sixteen feet, but in no case less than eight feet for interior side yards or ten feet for side yards adjacent to streets on corner lots. (Prior code  3118.02)

Chapter 17.44
F, SPECIAL HIGHWAY FRONTAGE COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.44.010    Regulations.

17.44.020    Special regulations.

17.44.010 Regulations.
In any district with which is combined any F district, the regulations of this chapter shall apply in addition to those hereinbefore specified for such district; provided that if conflict in regulations occurs, the regulations of this chapter shall govern. (Prior code  3119.01)

17.44.020 Special regulations.
Special regulations are:

1.    A front yard of not less than twenty feet shall be required for all uses, unless a greater front yard distance is required in the district with which the F district is combined;

2.    Screen planting or fencing of permitted commercial uses of open land shall be required as a condition to the granting of a use permit in each particular case;

3.    No outdoor advertising signs or structures shall be permitted except such signs or structures which pertain directly to permitted commercial uses; which are located on or immediately adjacent to such uses; and which do not exceed forty square feet in area for all such signs or structures for any one such use;

4.    Directional and informational signs of not more than six square feet may be permitted upon the securing of a use permit in each particular case;

5.    The planning commission may in exceptional circumstances permit outdoor advertising signs and structures beyond the limitations of this section. (Prior code  3119.02)

Chapter 17.46
H, SPECIAL HEIGHT COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.46.010    Special height regulations.

17.46.010 Special height regulations.
In any district with which is combined an H district, the following special height regulations shall apply in lieu of the height regulations otherwise provided for:

1.    The special maximum height regulations shall be indicated by the symbol H followed by a numerical figure, which figure shall represent the maximum permitted height in feet measured from the average elevation of the ground area to be covered by a particular building or structure;

2.    In cases where the H district is created to provide protection against airport hazards in an airport hazard area, the following shall apply:

a.    The symbol AV shall be added to the district symbol,

b.    The special height limit shall apply to all buildings and structures, and to all trees and other objects of natural growth,

c.    The special height limit shall be measured from datum elevation which shall be established elevation of the end of the airport runway closest to the particular airport hazard area district. (Prior code  3119.03)

Chapter 17.48
CD, SPECIAL CIVIC DISTRICT COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.48.010    Plan review required.

17.48.010 Plan review required.
In any district with which the CD district is combined, such districts to be located around civic center, public parks, and public buildings and grounds as indicated upon the zoning map, no building permit for any proposed building or structure shall be issued until the planning commission has reviewed and approved the plans for such building or structure to insure an orderly development in the vicinity of public sites and buildings within the district. (Prior code  3119.04)

Chapter 17.52
H-D, HISTORIC DISTRICT
Sections:

17.52.010    Purpose and intent.

17.52.020    Historic district commission.

17.52.030    Eligibility for office.

17.52.040    Term.

17.52.050    Vacancies.

17.52.060    Removal.

17.52.070    Meetings.

17.52.080    Appointment of officers.

17.52.090    Quorum.

17.52.100    Rules.

17.52.110    Record of proceedings.

17.52.120    Duties of the historic district commission.

17.52.130    Administrative support.

17.52.140    Historic district boundaries.

17.52.150    Historic commercial primary area.

17.52.160    Sutter Street subarea.

17.52.170    River Way subarea.

17.52.180    Railroad Wye subarea.

17.52.190    Resort subarea.

17.52.200    Natoma-Riley-Bidwell commercial primary area.

17.52.210    Historic residential primary area.

17.52.220    Figueroa subarea.

17.52.230    Central subarea.

17.52.240    Persifer-Dean subarea.

17.52.250    The Preserve subarea.

17.52.260    Open space/public primary area.

17.52.300    Design review.

17.52.310    Design review submittal requirements.

17.52.320    Posting of site.

17.52.330    Plan evaluation.

17.52.340    Approval process.

17.52.350    Expiration and extension of approval.

17.52.360    Conditional use permit review.

17.52.370    Variance review.

17.52.380    Sign permit review.

17.52.390    Environmental review.

17.52.393    Review of land divisions and mergers.

17.52.395    Delegation of design review.

17.52.400    Design standards.

17.52.410    Eaves.

17.52.420    Architectural features.

17.52.430    Decks.

17.52.440    Fences.

17.52.450    Landscape features.

17.52.460    Play equipment.

17.52.470    Swimming pools and spas.

17.52.480    Accessory structures.

17.52.490    Accessory dwelling units.

17.52.500    Second units.

17.52.510    Sutter Street subarea special use and design standards.

17.52.520    River way subarea special use and design standards.

17.52.530    Natoma-Riley-Bidwell commercial primary area special use and design standards.

17.52.540    Historic residential primary area special use and design standards.

17.52.550    Open space/public primary area special use and design standards.

17.52.560    Railroad Wye subarea special use and design standards.

17.52.570    Resort subarea special use and design standards.

17.52.600    Preservation ratings.

17.52.650    Moving of structures.

17.52.660    Demolition.

17.52.670    Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots.

17.52.680    Nonconforming uses.

17.52.690    Nonconforming structures.

17.52.700    Appeal.

17.52.710    Appeal hearings.

17.52.720    Actions on appeal.

17.52.730    Code enforcement.

17.52.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    The city council intends to actively promote the purposes of this chapter by (1) creating incentives for residents, property owners and businesses, (2) encouraging cooperation in attaining the purposes set forth in this chapter, and (3) providing a simple, fair and effective system of enforcement of the regulations contained in this chapter.

B.    The purposes of this chapter are:

1.    To preserve and enhance the historic, small-town atmosphere of the historic district as it developed between the years 1850 and 1950;

2.    To maintain, restore, and reconstruct historic structures and sites within the historic district;

3.    To encourage an active business climate which promotes the development of a diverse range of businesses compatible with the historic district as it developed between the years 1850 and 1950;

4.    To retain the residential areas within the historic district;

5.    To ensure that new residential and commercial development is consistent with the historical character of the historic district as it developed between the years 1850 and 1950;

6.    To increase the awareness, understanding, and appreciation of the history of the city; and

7.    To preserve and enhance open space areas. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.020 Historic district commission.
There shall be a historic district commission of 7 members, appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. The historic district commission shall be composed of the following members:

A.    One representative who is actively involved with historic preservation;

B.    One representative who is a resident of the historic district;

C.    One representative who owns a business within the Sutter Street subarea;

D.    Two planning commissioners;

E.    One representative from a historic district business outside the Sutter Street subarea; and

F.    One architect, landscape architect, or other design professional with expertise in historic preservation. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.030 Eligibility for office.
Members of the historic district commission shall be residents and registered voters of the city. If a member of the historic district commission moves his or her residence outside of the city, or ceases to be a registered voter of the city or otherwise loses a qualification for membership on the commission (e.g., the resident representative moves to another area of the city or the business owner sells the business), such member shall automatically be removed from office. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.040 Term.
The members of the commission shall be appointed to serve for 2 years except for members appointed to the commission in December of 2002 who are filling the seats designated in subsections 17.52.020 A, B and C, who shall be appointed to 3 year terms and thereafter members filling these 3 seats shall be appointed to serve for 2 year terms expiring on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting in December of odd numbered years. Four members (members filling the seats designated in subsections 17.52.020 D, E and F) shall have terms which expire on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in December of even numbered years. (Ord. 964  3, 2002: Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.050 Vacancies.
If a member of the historic district commission is unable or unwilling to complete his or her term, the city council shall fill the vacancy by appointing a qualified person to serve the remainder of the term. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.060 Removal.
The members of the historic district commission serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office by a vote of a majority of the members of the city council. No public hearing need be held prior to removal, and no cause for removal need be shown. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.070 Meetings.
The historic district commission shall meet at least once each month on a regularly scheduled time and day, and at such other times as the chairperson deems necessary to perform the duties of the historic district commission. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.080 Appointment of officers.
The historic district commission shall appoint a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. The chairperson shall call an election annually. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.090 Quorum.
Four members of the historic district commission constitute a quorum, and a majority of those present is sufficient to take any action of the commission. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.100 Rules.
The historic district commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, including rules for the election of officers. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.110 Record of proceedings.
The historic district commission shall maintain summary minutes and a taped recording of its proceedings. The taped recording shall be retained as set forth in the citys record retention policy. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.120 Duties of the historic district commission.
The historic district commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

A.    Oversee the implementation of the provisions of this chapter;

B.    Develop and recommend design guidelines to the city council for the historic district;

C.    Prepare and maintain a survey of the historic structures within the historic district;

D.    Provide assistance to residents, property owners and business owners in relation to the provisions of this chapter;

E.    Provide advisory review, upon the request of another city commission, committee, any city department, or as directed by the city council, of projects or programs affecting or relating to the historic district;

F.    Recommend to the city council amendments to adopted city plans or codes in the interest of furthering the purposes of this chapter;

G.    Review the design and architecture of any new structure, or alteration to any existing structures within the historic district, as further defined in this chapter;

H.    Determine the historical significance of structures as further defined in this chapter;

I.    Review applications for sign permits, conditional use permits, variances, land divisions and mergers within the historic district;

J.    Make recommendations to the city council regarding programs and incentives to encourage and to support the preservation, maintenance, and rehabilitation of historic structures; and

K.    Carry out such other duties relating to the historic district as may be assigned by the city council. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.130 Administrative support.
The planning, inspections and permitting director shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter and shall assist the historic district commission in performing its functions. The director shall carry out those additional duties delegated by the historic district commission. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.140 Historic district boundaries.
The geographic boundaries of the historic district are described as follows:

Beginning at the northern boundary corner of APN 070-0220-013; thence southeasterly along the easterly boundaries of said parcel to the centerline of Stafford Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Dean Way; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Dean Way to Coloma Street; continuing southwesterly in a straight line connecting the centerline of Dean Way and the centerline of Bidwell Street at Riley Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Bidwell Street to the intersection of an extension of said centerline with the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor; thence southward along said western boundary to the boundary between Folsom Lake State Recreation Area parcels APN 070-0130-003 and APN 071-0020-022; thence northwesterly and then northeasterly along the boundary of state park lands to the boundary of the original Map of Folsom; thence northwesterly to the centerline of the American River; thence northeasterly to Riley Street (the Rainbow Bridge); thence northerly across the American River to the north boundary of state park lands; thence easterly along said boundary 350 feet more or less; thence southerly across the American River along a line parallel to Riley Street to the centerline of the American River; thence northeasterly and easterly to the point of beginning.

The historic district is further divided into primary areas and subareas in which specialized development standards shall apply. These geographic boundaries of the primary areas and subareas are described in Sections 17.52.150 through 17.52.260. Specific use and design standards for these areas are described in Sections 17.52.510 through 17.52.570. Permitted uses in these areas include those permitted in the applicable primary area and/or subarea as listed in Sections 17.52.510 through 17.52.570 and those permitted in the applicable base zoning district as listed in Chapters 17.11 through 17.23. If a conditional use permit is required by the applicable primary area and/or subarea as listed in Sections 17.52.510 through 17.52.570 or by the applicable base zoning district as listed in Chapters 17.11 through 17.23, a conditional use permit shall be required. (Ord. 1287  2, 2018: Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.150 Historic commercial primary area.
The geographic boundaries of the Historic Commercial Primary Area are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Scott Street with the west boundary of the Riley Street right-of-way, proceeding southerly along the westerly boundary of the Riley Street right-of-way to its intersection with Leidesdorff St.; thence northerly and westerly along the southern boundary lines of Folsom Lake State Recreation Area lands to the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridors eastern boundary line; thence southerly along said boundary to the deck structure above the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way at Leidesdorff Street; thence northerly along the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way to its intersection with the boundary of Folsom Lake State Recreation Area lands; thence southwesterly along the boundary of said state park lands to the centerline of Young Wo Circle; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the centerline of Forrest Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the northern boundary of APN 070-0240-001; thence northeasterly along said boundary line to Sutter Street; thence northeasterly to the centerline of Sibley Street; thence south-easterly to the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way; thence northeasterly to the deck structure above the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way; thence southerly along the eastern boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Figueroa Streets; thence northerly along the boundary line between APN 070-0062-003 and APN 070-0062-004 across Leidesdorff Street to the boundaries of state park lands and Riley Street; and thence westerly along said boundary to the centerline of Scott Street; thence northwesterly to the point of beginning.

An area consisting of APN 070-0182-001.

The historic commercial primary area is further divided into the following subareas: the Sutter Street subarea, the River Way subarea, the Railroad Wye subarea and the Resort subarea. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.160 Sutter Street subarea.
The geographic boundaries of the Sutter Street subarea are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Scott Street with the west boundary of the Riley Street right-of-way, proceeding south along the west boundary of the Riley Street right-of-way to its intersection with Leidesdorff St.; thence northerly and westerly along the southern boundary lines of state park lands to the eastern boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way line; thence southerly along said boundary to and including the deck structure above the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way at Leidesdorff Street; thence southerly to the intersection of the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way with the center-line of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Figueroa Streets, proceeding along the alley to a point between APN 070-0113-003 and APN 070-0113-004; thence northerly along the boundary line to the centerline of Sutter Street; thence northerly along the boundary line between APN 070-0062-014 and APN 070-0062-013 to the center line of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Leidesdorff Streets; thence northerly along the boundary line between APN 070-0062-003 and APN 070-0062-004 across Leidesdorff Street to the boundaries of state park lands and Riley Street; and thence northerly along the east boundary of the Riley Street right-of-way to the point of beginning.

This subarea encompasses Folsoms original central business district, the area first zoned for historic preservation. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.170 River Way subarea.
The geographic boundaries of the River Way subarea are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Sibley Street with the westerly boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way; thence northwesterly along said centerline to its intersection with Sutter Street; thence southwesterly to APN 070-0240-001; thence westerly along the northern boundary of said parcel to Burnett Street; thence northwesterly to the centerline of Leidesdorff Street; thence northeasterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary line between APN 070-0045-015 and APN 070-0045-014; thence northwesterly along said boundary line to the centerline of River Way, the alley parallel to and lying between Sutter and Leidesdorff Streets; thence south-westerly along said centerline to the boundary between APN 070-0045-020 and APN 070-0045-026; thence northwesterly along said boundary line to the boundary of state park lands; thence northeasterly along said boundary to its intersection with the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way; thence southerly along said right-of-way to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.180 Railroad Wye subarea.
The geographic boundaries of the Railroad Wye subarea are described as follows:

An area consisting of APN 070-0182-001.

(Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.190 Resort subarea.
The geographic boundaries of the Resort subarea are described as follows:

Beginning on the centerline of Leidesdorff Street at a point on the extension of the boundary line between APN 070-0045-015 and APN 070-0045-014; thence southwesterly along said centerline to Burnett Street; thence southeasterly to the northern boundary of APN 070-0240-001; thence southwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of Forrest Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Young Wo Circle; thence southwesterly along said centerline to its intersection with the boundary of Folsom Lake State

Recreation Area lands; thence northerly and northeasterly along said boundary to the boundary line between APN 070-045-026 and APN 070-045-020; thence southeasterly along said boundary line to the centerline of River Way, the alley parallel to and lying between Sutter and Leidesdorff Streets; thence northeasterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary line between APN 070-0045-014 and APN 070-0045-015; thence southeasterly to the point of beginning.

This subarea consists of the city-owned corporation yard property. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.200 Natoma-Riley-Bidwell commercial primary area.
The geographic boundaries of the Natoma-Riley-Bidwell commercial primary area are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Stafford Street with the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Natoma and Persifer Streets; thence southwesterly along said alley centerline, to the centerline of Coloma Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Persifer Street; thence southwesterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary line between APN 070-0166-006 and APN 070-0166-013; thence northwesterly along said boundary line to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Natoma and Persifer Streets; thence southwesterly approximately along said alley centerline, following parcel lines where alley abandonment has occurred, to the boundary line between APN 070-0162-013 and APN 070-0162-010; thence southeasterly along said boundary line to the centerline of Persifer Street; thence southwesterly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Riley Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Riley Street to the centerline of Bidwell Street; thence south-westerly along the centerline of Bidwell Street to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0203-008 and APN 070-0203-009; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Bidwell and Persifer Streets; thence northeasterly to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0203-005 and APN 070-0203-006; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of Persifer Street; thence southwesterly to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0156-013 and APN 070-0156-007; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Persifer and Natoma Streets; thence south-westerly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0156-004 and APN 070-0156-003; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of Natoma Street; thence northeasterly to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0155-014 and APN 070-0155-013; thence northerly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Natoma and Mormon Streets; thence northeasterly approximately along said centerline, following parcel lines where alley abandonment has occurred, to the centerline of Stafford Street; and thence along said centerline to the point of beginning.

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Natoma Street with the eastern boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor right-of-way; thence northerly along said boundary to its intersection with Mormon Street; thence southeasterly along the boundary between APN 070-0146-002 and APN 070-0146-003 to the boundary line between APN 070-0146-001 and APN 070-0146-008; thence southeasterly along said boundary to the centerline of Natoma Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 1271  2 (part), 2017; Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.210 Historic residential primary area.
The geographic boundaries of the historic residential primary area are described as follows:

Beginning at the northern boundary corner of APN 070-0220-013; thence southeasterly along the easterly boundaries of said parcel to the centerline of Stafford Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Dean Way; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Dean Way to the centerline of Coloma Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the centerline of Persifer Street; thence southwesterly along said centerline to the centerline of Riley Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Bidwell Street; thence southwesterly along said centerline to its intersection with the eastern boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor; thence northerly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Figueroa Streets; thence northeasterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0113-003 and APN 070-0113-004; thence northerly along the boundary line to the centerline of Sutter Street; thence northerly along the boundary line between APN 070-0062-014 and APN 070-0062-013 to the centerline of Leidesdorff Street; thence northwesterly along the boundary of Folsom Lake State Recreation Area lands to the point of beginning, excluding the areas within these boundaries which are otherwise described in this ordinance as the Open Space/Public Primary Area, the Railroad Wye Subarea and the Natoma-Riley-Bidwell Commercial Primary Area.

Beginning at the intersection of the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor with the boundary between APN 070-0130-003 and APN 070-0141-001; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of Forrest Street; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of the abandoned Figueroa Street right-of-way; thence southwesterly along said centerline and extending along the southerly and westerly boundaries of APNs 070-0250-058 through 065 to the centerline of Young Wo Circle; thence northwesterly to the centerline of Forrest Street to a point at the extension of the northerly boundary of APN 070-0240-001; thence northeasterly along said boundary line to the center-line of Sutter Street; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Sibley Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor; thence southerly along said boundary to the point of beginning.

This area is divided into four subareas: Figueroa subarea, Central subarea, Persifer-Dean subarea, and The Preserve subarea. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.220 Figueroa subarea.
The geographic boundaries of the Figueroa subarea are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Sibley Street with the easterly boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor; thence northerly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Figueroa Streets; thence northeasterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0113-003 and APN 070-0113-004; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of Sutter Street; thence southwesterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0062-014 and APN 070-0062-013; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Leidesdorff Streets; thence northeasterly approximately along said centerline, following property lines where alley abandonment has occurred, to the southwesterly boundary of APN 070-0070-009; thence southeasterly along said boundary line to the centerline of an abandoned segment of Sutter Street right-of-way; thence southwesterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0120-009 and APN 070-0120-008; thence southeasterly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Figueroa Streets; thence southwesterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0120-043 and APN 070-0120-047; thence southeasterly along said boundary to the centerline of an abandoned segment of Figueroa Street right-of-way; thence southwesterly along said centerline to the centerline of the abandoned Marshall Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of the alley, partially abandoned, lying between and parallel to Figueroa and Mormon Streets; thence southwesterly along said centerline to the centerline of Sibley Street; thence northwesterly to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.230 Central subarea.
The geographic boundaries of the Central subarea are described as follows:

An area consisting of the Historic Residential Primary Area described in Section 17.52.210, excluding areas described in Section 17.52.180 as the Railroad Wye Subarea, in Section 17.52.200 as the Natoma-Riley-Bidwell Commercial Primary Area, in Section 17.52.220 as the Figueroa Subarea, in Section 17.52.240 as the Persifer-Dean Subarea, in Section 17.52.250 as The Preserve Subarea, and in Section 17.52.260 as the Open Space/Public Primary Area.

The Central subarea is the largest subarea of the historic district and the one with the greatest variety in housing types. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.240 Persifer-Dean subarea.
The geographic boundaries of the Persifer-Dean subarea are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Stafford Street and the alley lying between and parallel to Persifer and Natoma Streets; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Stafford Street to the centerline of Dean Way; thence south-westerly along said centerline to the centerline of Coloma Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the intersection of the centerline of the alley between Natoma and Persifer Streets, to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 1271  2 (part), 2017; Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.250 The preserve subarea.
The geographic boundaries of The Preserve subarea are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor with the boundary between APN 070-0130-003 and APN 070-0141-001; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of Forrest Street; thence northwesterly along said boundary to the centerline of the abandoned Figueroa Street right-of-way; thence southwesterly along said centerline and extending along the southerly and westerly boundaries of APNs 070-0250-058 through 065 to the centerline of Young Wo Circle; thence northwesterly to the centerline of Forrest Street to a point at the extension of the northerly boundary of APN 070-0240-001; thence northeasterly along said boundary line to the center-line of Sutter Street; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Sibley Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor; thence southerly along said boundary, excluding APN 070-0091-007, APN 070-0091-008, APN 070-0091-012, APN 070-0240-003, and APN 070-0240-001, to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.260 Open space/public primary area.
The geographic boundaries of the open space/public area are described as follows:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Scott Street with the west boundary of the Riley Street right-of-way, proceeding southerly along the westerly boundary of the Riley Street right-of-way to its intersection with Leidesdorff Street; thence northerly and westerly along the southern boundary lines of Folsom Lake State Recreation Area lands to the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridors eastern boundary line; thence southerly along said boundary to the center-line of Bidwell Street; thence westerly along said centerline to the intersection of an extension of said centerline to the western boundary of the railroad/Folsom Boulevard transportation corridor; thence southerly along said boundary to the boundary between APN 070-0130-003 and APN 071-0020-022; thence northwesterly and then northeasterly along the boundary of state park lands to the boundary of the original Map of Folsom; thence northwesterly to the centerline of the American River; thence northeasterly to Riley Street (the Rainbow Bridge); thence northerly across the American River to the north boundary of state park lands; thence easterly along said boundary 350 feet more or less; thence southerly across the American River along a line parallel to Riley Street to the centerline of the American River; thence northeasterly and easterly to the northern boundary corner of APN 070-0220-013; thence southwesterly along the boundary of Folsom Lake State Recreation Area lands to the centerline of Scott Street; thence northwesterly to the point of beginning, excluding areas described in Section 17.52.170 as the River Way subarea, in Section 17.52.190 as the Resort Subarea, in Section 17.52.230 as the Central subarea, and Section 17.52.250 as The Preserve Subarea.

Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Stafford Street and an abandoned segment of Leidesdorff Street right-of-way; thence southwesterly along said centerline of Leidesdorff Street, including segments not abandoned, to a point on the extension of the boundary line between APN 070-0070-009 and APN 070-0070-018; thence southeasterly along said boundary to the centerline of an abandoned segment of Sutter Street; thence southwesterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0120-009 and APN 070-0120-008; thence southeasterly along said boundary to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Sutter and Figueroa Streets; thence southwesterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0120-043 and APN 070-0120-047; thence southeasterly along said boundary to the centerline of an abandoned segment of Figueroa Street right-of-way; thence south-westerly along said centerline to the centerline of the abandoned Marshall Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of the abandoned Mormon Street; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Mill Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline, including the centerline of an abandoned segment of Mill Street, to the centerline of the abandoned Figueroa Street right-of-way; thence northeasterly to the boundary of APN 070-0120-011; thence north-easterly along the northerly boundary of said parcel to the centerline of Stafford Street; thence northwesterly to the point of beginning.

Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Sibley Street and the alley lying between and parallel to Natoma and Mormon Streets; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Sibley Street to its intersection with an extension of the southerly boundaries of APN 070-0142-032 and APN 070-0143-033; thence southwesterly along said boundaries to the center-line of an abandoned segment of Brunet Street; then northwesterly along said centerline to the centerline of Natoma Street; thence northeasterly along said centerline to a point on the extension of the boundary between APN 070-0146-001 and APN 070-0146-008; thence northwesterly to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Natoma and Mormon Streets; thence northeasterly to the point of beginning.

Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Sibley Street and the alley lying between and parallel to Natoma and Mormon Streets; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Sibley Street to the centerline of Mormon Street; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Decatur Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of the alley lying between and parallel to Natoma and Mormon Streets; thence southwesterly along said centerline to the point of beginning.

Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Bidwell and Riley Streets; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Riley Street to the centerline of Persifer Street; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Coloma Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline to the centerline of Dean Way; thence southwesterly in a straight line to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.300 Design review.
The historic district commission shall have final authority relating to the design and architecture of the following structures within the historic district boundaries:

A.    All new office, industrial, commercial and residential structures; and

B.    All exterior renovations, remodeling, modification or addition to existing structures. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.310 Design review submittal requirements.
The applicant shall file the following information with the planning, inspections and permitting director for design review by the historic district commission:

A.    Completed and signed application form including name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

B.    Application fee as established by resolution of the city council;

C.    A copy of all entitlements granted for the property by the city, including conditions of approval and the environmental documentation;

D.    A copy of all required state and federal permits;

E.    Site plan;

F.    Building design plans;

G.    Material samples and color board; and

H.    Other material and information as requested by the commission. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.320 Posting of site.
Upon application for design review of a project by the historic district commission, the project site shall be posted by the applicant 5 days prior to the commission hearing, with a notice 11 inches by 17 inches in size, facing the street frontage, and indicating the project description and the place and time of the hearing. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.330 Plan evaluation.
In reviewing projects, the historic district commission shall consider the following criteria:

A.    Project compliance with the General Plan and any applicable zoning ordinances;

B.    Conformance with any city-wide design guidelines and historic district design and development guidelines adopted by the city council;

C.    Conformance with any project-specific design standards approved through the planned development permit process or similar review process; and

D.    Compatibility of building materials, textures and colors with surrounding development and consistency with the general design theme of the neighborhood. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.340 Approval process.
The historic district commission shall make its decision to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application with findings based on the criteria established in Section 17.52.330 of this chapter. A copy of the decision, findings and any applicable conditions shall be provided in writing to the applicant. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.350 Expiration and extension of approval.
A.    An approval by the historic district commission shall be null and void unless the applicant submits a complete application for a building permit within one year from the date of approval.

B.    The historic district commission may extend an approval for an additional 1 year upon receipt of a written request accompanied by a fee, as may be established by resolution of the city council, and other information deemed necessary by the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting. Requests for approval extension must be received 60 days prior to the expiration of the original approval. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.360 Conditional use permit review.
A.    The historic district commission shall have final authority relating to the issuance of conditional use permits for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title, within the boundaries of the historic district.

B.    In acting upon applications for conditional use permits, the historic district commission shall adhere to the procedural requirements set forth in Chapter 17.60, except for matters of appeal, which shall be governed by this chapter. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.370 Variance review.
A.    The historic district commission shall have final authority relating to application for variances from any of the provisions of this title, within the boundaries of the historic district.

B.    In acting upon applications for variances, the historic district commission shall adhere to the procedural requirements set forth in Chapter 17.62, except for matters of appeal, which shall be governed by this chapter. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.380 Sign permit review.
A.    The historic district commission shall have final authority relating to the issuance of sign permits for any signs for which such permits are required by this title, within the boundaries of the historic district.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 17.59 are applicable in the historic district as modified in this chapter and any adopted design and development guidelines. In acting upon applications for sign permits, the historic district commission shall adhere to the procedural requirements set forth in Chapter 17.59, except for matters of appeal, which shall be governed by this chapter. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.390 Environmental review.
Review by the historic district commission of applications for conditional use permits, sign permits, variances and design review is subject to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The commission is authorized to hold public hearings on negative declarations, mitigated negative declarations, draft environmental impact reports and final environmental impact reports prepared on applications for the above permits or for design review. The commission shall not approve applications prior to considering the applicable environmental document and complying with the requirements of CEQA and any city procedures for preparation and processing of environmental documents. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.393 Review of land divisions and mergers.
Review of land divisions and mergers shall be subject to the requirements of the California Subdivision Map Act (Government Code section 66410 et seq.) and Title 16 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.395 Delegation of design review.
The historic district commission may delegate its authority to review compliance with this chapter and any adopted design and development guidelines to the planning, inspections and permitting department under the following conditions:

A.    The city council has adopted specific design and development guidelines for the historic district; and

B.    Approval of the design of the project is the only matter within the jurisdiction of the historic district commission; and

C.    The posting of notice required in Section 17.52.320 will consist of notice of the project, where a person can review documents concerning the project and the right to request a public hearing concerning the project by a date certain, which date will not be less than five days from the date the notice is posted. If a person requests a public hearing within the time allotted, the matter will be referred to the historic district commission for review; and

D.    The planning, inspections and permitting department may only approve a project where it believes that the project clearly conforms to standards set forth in this chapter and the design and development guidelines. If the planning, inspections and permitting department determines that the project does not clearly conform to such regulations, approval of the design of the project shall be referred to the historic district commission; and

E.    The planning, inspections and permitting department shall review the design of all approved projects with the historic district commission at its regular monthly meeting. Such review will allow the commission to provide input to the department concerning the appropriateness of the approvals and help the commission and the department develop a consistent approach to design review; and

F.    If the planning, inspections and permitting department approves the design of a project under such delegated authority, the historic district commission may not overturn the decision of the planning, inspections and permitting department unless an appeal has been filed pursuant to Section 17.52.700. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.400 Design standards.
A.    The design standards specified in Sections 17.52.410 through 17.52.590 shall be applicable to all new structures and alterations to existing structures within the historic district. Design review is required for all new structures and alterations to existing structures, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.

B.    The city council may also enact design and development guidelines applicable to properties within the H-D zone. The design and development guidelines shall provide guidance to the historic district commission and the director of the planning, inspections and permitting as to the intent of the city council in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. The city council shall adopt the design and development guidelines by resolution, and may amend the design and development guidelines by resolution. The director of planning, inspections and permitting and the city clerk shall maintain a copy of the design and development Guidelines for the publics review. In the event of a conflict between the design and development guidelines and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

C.    In the event of a conflict between the design standards in this chapter and any other standards in this title, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

D.    Exceptions to the design standards stated herein or in any subsequently adopted design and development guidelines may be permitted by the historic district commission when unique individual circumstances require the exception in order to comply with the purposes of this chapter or when necessary to allow for historical reconstruction of a previously existing structure or feature. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.410 Eaves.
Roof overhangs may extend into a required setback area a maximum of 2 feet, but shall not be closer than 3 feet to a property line or closer than 6 feet to any portion of another structure. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.420 Architectural features.
Fireplaces, bay windows, attached porches and decks and patios higher than 30 inches above grade, may extend into a required setback area a maximum of 2 feet, but shall not be closer than 3 feet to a property line or closer than 6 feet to any portion of another structure. The combined length of all such features shall not account for more than 25 percent of the length of the wall surface on which the features are located. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.430 Decks.
Except as may be permitted by Section 17.52.420 of this chapter, attached or detached decks or patios 30 inches above grade or higher shall adhere to the setback standards for structures. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.440 Fences.
Fence height in front yards shall not exceed 42 inches in height. Rear and side yard fencing shall not exceed 6 feet in height. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.450 Landscape features.
Patio trellis covers, fountains, statuary, and similar yard structures shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from property lines. If the property line abuts a street or alley right-of-way, no setback is required. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.460 Play equipment.
Play equipment such as jungle gyms, tree houses, sports courts, basketball standards, and other similar equipment shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from property lines. Play equipment smaller than 120 square feet or below fence height is not subject to design review. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.470 Swimming pools and spas.
Any pools, spas, or ponds to be installed in public view are subject to design review. Pools, spas or ponds shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14.28. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.480 Accessory structures.
For the purposes of this chapter, an accessory structure is any freestanding roofed structure located on a parcel on which another larger structure (main structure) has been constructed. Accessory structures shall be setback 20 feet from the front property line of the main structure, 5 feet from any other property line, and 6 feet from all other structures on the property. An accessory structure shall not be larger than the main structure in square footage or height. Design review is not required for accessory structures smaller than 60 square feet or which are below required fence height. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.490 Accessory dwelling units.
For the purposes of this chapter, an accessory dwelling unit is a unit which is incidental to the primary use of the site. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the design standards for the main structure in the primary area and subarea in which it is located and is subject to design review.

Total square footage of all accessory dwelling units on a parcel shall not exceed the square footage of the primary structure.

Parking spaces for accessory dwelling units must meet the standards of the primary area and subarea in which the units are located, in addition to any space(s) required for the primary use. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.500 Second units.
For the purposes of this chapter, a second unit is a unit which is not incidental to the primary use of the site, with no owner-occupancy requirements. Second units shall only be located on lots with an area of 6,000 square feet or larger. Second units shall comply with the design standards for the primary area and subarea in which it is located. No more than one second unit shall be allowed per parcel. A second unit shall not exceed 1,200 square feet. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.510 Sutter street subarea special use and design standards.
A.    Permitted Uses.

1.    Retail, service, public/quasi-public and office uses permitted in Folsoms modern central business district (C-2 zone) are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    Uses not in scale with a small downtown, such as large discount stores and supermarkets, are not permitted.

b.    Uses which are so intrinsically modern that they cannot be successfully integrated, through design, into the plans historic time frame, such as non-antique auto sales with outdoor display, are not permitted.

c.    Uses which would require a conditional use permit from the planning commission in the modern central business district (C-2 zone) require a conditional use permit from the historic district commission in this subarea.

2.    Small light industrial uses are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    All industrial uses require a conditional use permit approved by the historic district commission.

b.    Industrial uses which were or could have been present in Folsom between 1850 and 1950 may apply for a conditional use permit (a blacksmith shop, for example).

c.    Modern industrial uses which typify the American entrepreneurial spirit of 1850 through 1950 may receive a conditional use permit if they can be successfully integrated into the plans historic time frame (a small research and development facility, for example).

3.    Residential uses are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    Street-level frontage space is intended for retail and other commercial use and is generally not appropriate for residential use.

b.    In assessing compatibility between residential and commercial uses, a residential use located within this subarea will be expected to tolerate greater impacts from commercial uses than if it were located in a primarily residential area. Commercial and residential uses may each be expected to make reasonable physical or operational modifications to improve compatibility between them.

c.    An upstairs or accessory apartment is best suited as a residence for caretakers, owners, or employees of the downstairs or primary business use but is not so limited.

d.    A conditional use permit is required in order for the primary use of a structure in this subarea to be residential.

e.    A use is defined as residential for purposes of this section if persons reside there for extended periods, as opposed to short-term stays typical of hotels or bed and breakfast inns.

f.    A conditional use permit is required for a commercial or residential project containing three or more dwelling units.

4.    A conditional use permit may be granted by the historic district commission to allow uses similar to and compatible with the permitted uses and intent of this subarea.

5.    Since many of the structures in this subarea cannot be modified to meet all the citys current building and fire safety standards, including the historical building code, without the loss of their historical value, some uses which would otherwise be permitted may be denied on the basis of maintaining safety at an acceptable level.

B.    Design Concept. The design concept for this subarea is to preserve existing pre1900 buildings, and require new or replacement structures to be of a pre1900 design, unless a post-1900 building is unique and/or representative of 1850-1950 architectural styles. The historic district commission may approve new construction of post-1900 design, on an exception basis, if it finds that the architecture is an outstanding design which represents a structure or use which formerly existed in historic Folsom or which represents a typical design and use extant in similar California towns between 1900 and 1950.

C.    Height. Building heights shall not exceed 35 feet adjacent to the sidewalk area on Sutter or Leidesdorff Street and 50 feet in other sections of the subarea. Towers, spires, or other similar architectural features may extend up to 15 feet above the building height.

D.    Setbacks. Contiguous shops on Sutter Street frontage shall maintain continuity of facades along public sidewalk.

E.    Signs.

1.    Each business whose entry door is located in the building frontage is permitted 1 wall or window sign. A business whose entry is located within an internal mall or corridor may utilize a nameplate incorporated in a wall sign for the entire building. The length of a wall sign may not exceed 75 percent of the shops frontage. The total of all window signage may not cover more than 25 percent of the window. Wall signs shall be designed and installed with minimal space between the planes of the wall and of the sign. Businesses with frontage on more than one street and/or public parking lot may place a wall or window sign on each frontage, with subsequent signs to be no larger than half the size specified for the first sign and subject to the other requirements of the first sign.

2.    Signs are permitted to be hung under a canopy, but shall not exceed 3 square feet in size with a minimum of 8 feet clearance from the sidewalk in addition to any permitted wall or window signs. Businesses without a canopy may utilize a projecting sign of the same size and clearance for this purpose. The historic district commission may approve an increase in the size of the under-canopy or projecting sign in exchange for a reduction in size of the wall or window sign.

3.    Signs exempt in Chapter 17.59 are exempt in this subarea except as follows:

a.    On-site directional signs are not exempt unless 2 square feet or smaller and, if freestanding, no higher than 2 feet, including base;

b.    Exempt real-estate signs do not require a setback from public right-of-way; and

c.    Window or door signs 1 square foot in size or larger and under-canopy signs are not exempt. Window or door signs smaller than 1 square foot are exempt but subject to the overall requirement regarding window coverage.

4.    In addition to those signs prohibited in Chapter 17.59, the following signs are prohibited in this subarea:

a.    Neon;

b.    Internally illuminated;

c.    Backlit canopies; and

d.    Corporate flags.

5.    Freestanding signs are not permitted, unless the historic district commission determines that the exclusive use of wall signage at a particular location is ineffective. The historic district commission may require a reduction in the amount of wall signage otherwise allowed to compensate for the use of a freestanding sign.

6.    Buildings with multiple tenants shall be required to submit a uniform signage program (USP) for historic district commission approval. After a USP is approved, tenant sign permits shall be reviewed and approved by the planning, inspections and permitting director.

F.    Parking. All uses must provide parking spaces at the following ratios:

1.    Retail, offices, restaurants, museums, and similar uses: 1 parking space per 350 square feet of building space;

2.    Hotels, motels, guesthouses: 1 parking space per guest room plus one parking space per 350 square feet of other building space; and

3.    Dwelling units: 1 parking space per dwelling unit; two parking spaces for dwelling unit if building square footage is greater than 600 square feet. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.520 River way subarea special use and design standards.
Use of structural design from the 1850-1950 era is encouraged.

A.    Permitted Uses.

1.    Combined studios, sales space, and/or residences of artists and craftspersons are the preferred permitted use(s), with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    Large-scale production facilities are not permitted.

b.    Uses which may produce visual, noise, odor, parking, or other effects which may be objectionable to surrounding uses require a conditional use permit from the historic district commission.

c.    Variations of the preferred uses are permitted, such as an art gallery combined with the residence of a proprietor, employee, or caretaker; a studio with no residence or sales space; or an office of a design professional such as an architect.

d.    Large-scale projects require a conditional use permit. For purposes of this section, a large-scale project is defined as an individual structure, or combination of structures, which exceeds 5,000 square feet in size, based on the square footage of all floors. In the case of an existing large-scale project, a new design review or conditional use permit is required for exterior remodeling or a change in type of use.

2.    Commercial retail and service uses complementary to and compatible with the artistic and pedestrian-oriented purposes of the subarea, such as small artist-supply outlets or coffeehouses, are permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit. Such uses may be combined with preferred uses.

3.    Residential uses which are not combined with nonresidential uses as set forth above are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    Single-family, duplex, or half-plex residences are subject to the regulations of the Central subarea in relation to second units and home occupations.

b.    A conditional use permit is required for a project containing three or more dwelling units.

4.    A conditional use permit may be granted by the historic district commission to allow other uses similar to and compatible with the permitted uses and in keeping with the intent of this subarea.

B.    Lot Standards. The minimum lot area is 7,000 square feet, except when recreating the 50 feet by 120 feet River Street lots as shown on the 1855 Theodore Judah map, which may be 6,000 square feet. The minimum lot width is 50 feet. A minimum of 45 percent of the lot area must be maintained as pervious surface.

C.    Height. Building heights shall not exceed 35 feet. Height of towers, spires, and similar features may extend 15 feet above the building height, if such extension does not adversely impact neighboring properties.

D.    Setbacks. The minimum setback for any structure is 5 feet from the property line and 10 feet from any other structure. Unless equipped with a garage door opener, garages must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the public right-of-way.

E.    Landscaping. All properties are required to landscape 60 percent of the front 20 feet of the lot plus 50 percent of the remaining pervious space. Front-yard landscaping must be installed prior to commencement of any use other than single-family residential.

F.    Signs.

1.    A studio or business use located adjacent to a public pedestrian way is permitted 1 on-site wall sign not to exceed 16 square feet. Other studio or business uses are permitted 1 on-site freestanding sign not exceeding 12 square feet including any base or framework, or a wall sign not to exceed 16 square feet.

2.    Buildings with multiple tenants shall apply for a uniform signage program.

3.    Signs exempt in Chapter 17.59 are exempt in this subarea except as follows:

a.    On-site directional signs are not exempt unless 2 square feet or smaller and, if freestanding, no higher than 2 feet.

b.    Window or door signs smaller than 1 square foot are exempt but subject to the overall requirement regarding window coverage.

G.    Parking. All uses must provide parking spaces at the following ratios:

1.    Dwelling units: 1 parking space per unit, unless larger than 600 square feet, which requires 2 parking spaces per unit.

2.    Studio space: 1 parking space per artist not residing on site.

3.    Commercial/office space: 1 parking space per 350 square feet of building area. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.530 Natoma-Riley-Bidwell commercial primary area special use and design standards.
A.    Permitted Uses.

1.    Retail, service, public/quasi-public and office uses permitted in Folsoms neighborhood commercial district (C-1 zone) are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    Uses not in scale with nearby residential uses, such as large discount stores and supermarkets, are not permitted.

b.    Uses which are so intrinsically modern that they cannot be successfully integrated, through design, into the plans historic time frame (such as a lube-and-tune or a fast-food drive-through lane) are not permitted.

c.    Uses which would require a conditional use permit from the planning commission in the modern neighborhood commercial district (C-1) require a conditional use permit from the historic district commission in this district.

2.    Small light industrial uses are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations.

a.    All industrial uses require a conditional use permit from the historic district commission, including a good-neighbor plan.

b.    To receive a conditional use permit, an industrial use must be located and operated in a manner which limits its impacts on nearby residential uses to a level comparable to a commercial office use.

3.    Certain areas adjacent to lands designated as residential on the General Plan land use map are limited to low-impact commercial uses.

4.    Residential uses are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    Apartment complexes may not exceed a density of twelve d.u./acre.

b.    A conditional use permit is required for a project containing three or more dwelling units.

c.    An upstairs or accessory apartment is best suited as a residence for caretakers, owners, or employees of the down-stairs or primary business use but is not so limited.

d.    In assessing compatibility between residential and commercial uses, a residential use located within this district shall be expected to tolerate greater impacts from commercial uses than if it were located in a primarily residential area.

B.    Design Concept. This area is a mixture of residences and commercial development. In order to accommodate this mixture of uses all new construction or substantial remodeling or reconstruction shall utilize residential architectural design. Residential architectural design should be interpreted broadly to include 1850 to 1950 designs of homes, inns, boarding-houses or other uses of a residential area.

C.    Lot Area. The minimum lot area is seven thousand square feet, with the preferred configuration as shown on the 1855 Theodore Judah map.

D.    Lot Width. The minimum lot width is fifty feet.

E.    Lot Coverage. A minimum of twenty-five percent of lot area must be maintained as pervious space.

F.    Height. Height of structures shall not exceed thirty-five feet. Height of towers, spires, and similar features may extend fifteen feet above the main structure subject to design review.

G.    Setbacks. The minimum setback for any structure is five feet from the property line and ten feet from any other structure.

1.    Front Yard. Front yard setback shall be twenty feet. Parking may not be located in the required front yard setback area.

2.    Side Yard. Side yard set back shall be a minimum of five feet from any interior side-yard lot line and ten feet from a street side-yard lot line. Where interior side yard access to rear parking is needed, the interior side yard must be a minimum of twenty-four feet for two-way access or twelve feet for one-way access.

3.    Rear Yard. Rear yard set back shall be twenty feet.

H.    Landscaping. A minimum of sixty percent of the front twenty feet of the parcel must be landscaped. A minimum of twenty-five percent of lot area must be maintained as pervious surface. Front yard and parking lot landscaping must be installed prior to commencement of any use other than single-family residential.

I.    Signs.

1.    Number, Type and Size of Signs. One nonilluminated freestanding sign per parcel or integrated development is allowed, subject to approval of a sign permit from the historic district commission or community development department director, with the following requirements.

a.    Freestanding signs: Retail uses and restaurants, which front on Natoma Street:

Maximum sign size:

16 square feet excluding the base area (Base may not exceed 5.5 foot width, 2 foot depth, and 1 foot height. The width of sign shall be greater than the height of sign, excluding the base.)

Maximum sign width:

5.5 feet excluding the base area

Maximum sign height:

4 feet including the base area

Minimum setback:

6 feet behind sidewalk

Materials:

Wood with raised, engraved, or painted letters. Base or standard need not be wood

Freestanding signs permitted under this section that are twelve square feet or smaller in size shall be reviewed by the community development director and freestanding signs permitted under this section that are larger than twelve square feet in size shall be reviewed by the historic district commission.

b.    Freestanding signs: Uses other than retail uses and restaurants, which front on Natoma Street:

Maximum height:

3 feet above finished grade, including base

Maximum width:

4 feet (Base may not exceed 5.5 foot width, 2 foot depth, and 1 foot height.)

Minimum setback:

6 feet behind sidewalk

Maximum message and background area:

2 foot height and 3 foot width

Materials:

Wood with raised, engraved, or painted letters. Base or standard need not be wood

c.    Buildings at intersections may have, in addition to a freestanding sign, one wall or window sign, not exceeding one-half square foot in size for each lineal foot of primary building frontage, up to a maximum of fifty square feet. A wall sign may be placed on either street frontage but shall not exceed more than seventy-five percent of the building frontage on which it is placed. A window sign shall not cover more than twenty-five percent of a window.

If no freestanding sign is utilized, a business with two street frontages may place one wall or window sign on each frontage; provided, that the total square footage of the two signs combined does not exceed the total square footage permitted based on the lineal feet of the principal wall frontage. The sign permit for corner properties is subject to approval of the historic district commission unless the authority to review is delegated to the community development director pursuant to Section 17.52.395, except that if only one freestanding, nonilluminated sign that is twelve square feet or smaller in size is used, the sign permit may be approved by the community development director.

d.    For purposes of this chapter, retail use means a business primarily characterized by the sale of goods or merchandise to the local public and tourists for personal or household consumption, a business rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods, a business engaged in the sale of food and/or beverages for on-premises consumption, a business rendering personal services including barbers and beauty and nail salons. Retail use shall exclude the sales, fueling, repair, washing, or storage of motor vehicles. The community development director shall determine whether an existing use or any proposed new use is a retail use for purposes of this chapter by considering whether the proposed use has the following retail characteristics:

i.    The establishment is engaged to a significant degree in business to attract the general public to sell tangible goods to consumers for their own personal or household use, or to render personal services to customers on the premises.

ii.    The business may process, repair, or manufacture some or all of the products it sells, such as jewelry, beverages, candy, baked goods, apparel, shoes, pottery, or consumer electronics; however, such processing, repair, or manufacturing shall be of items sold on the premises, whether or not also sold at wholesale, and shall be of a scale compatible with the retail component of the business.

iii.    By way of illustration only, the following shall be retail uses:

General merchandise, such as apparel, books, arts and crafts, furniture, home furnishings, jewelry, antiques, records/compact discs/videos, consumer electronic equipment, hardware, athletic/recreational equipment, stationery and office supplies, toys, or convenience goods such as food and grocery stores, pharmacies, and drug stores;

Personal services, such as barber shops, beauty/nail salons, tailors/dress makers, laundries, florists, eye glass/hearing aid shops, and shoe repair shops, which include incidental sale of related goods; and

Museums and galleries.

iv.    By way of further illustration, the following shall be considered nonretail uses:

Professional service businesses such as advertising, catering, grooming service, architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, planning, law, medicine, dentistry, music instruction/schools, interior design, accounting, insurance, real estate, mailing, telephone answering, finance and securities investments, travel agencies, and any similar type business;

Motor vehicle related uses, including sales, fueling, washing, repair, or storage;

Uses that require outside storage of stock, vehicles, or machinery;

Wholesale sales, other than those by a business also engaged in retail sales;

Child care centers and residential care homes for adults or children;

Religious institutions; and

Athletic, recreational, or entertainment facilities.

2.    Prohibited Signs. In addition to signs prohibited in Chapter 17.59 the following signs are prohibited in this primary area: neon, internally illuminated, backlit canopies, and corporate flags.

3.    Exempt Signs. Signs exempt in Chapter 17.59 are exempt in this district except as follows:

a.    Directional signs are exempt if they are two square feet or smaller and, if freestanding, not higher than two feet, including base. Directional signs for shared driveways are exempt if four square feet in size and not higher than four feet in height including base.

b.    Window or door signs smaller than one square foot are exempt but subject to the requirements regarding window coverage.

J.    Parking. All uses must provide parking spaces conforming to city standards as established by this plan, the Folsom Municipal Code, and any other adopted city policies and requirements, at the following ratios:

1.    Dwelling unitsone parking space per unit, unless larger than six hundred square feet, which requires two parking spaces per unit.

2.    Commercial/office spaceone parking space per two hundred square feet of building area.

For design and safety reasons the number of driveways accessing Natoma, Riley, and Bidwell Streets should be kept to a minimum.

Parking should not be located in the required front or street side yard, even if the yard exceeds city size standards. Lack of adequate parking, properly located, is grounds for denial of commercial or industrial use of a site.

On-street parking for loading purposes is permissible during time periods of lighter traffic, as established by the public works department after consultation with the historic district commission. (Ord. 1154  2, 2011; Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.540 Historic residential primary area special use and design standards.
A.    Permitted Uses.

1.    One-family dwellings, including accessory structures and uses, are permitted with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    In the Figueroa subarea attached garages are not permitted in the general view shed of the public, unless not identifiable as a garage. Carports must also be designed as historical features, such as porte cocheres.

b.    In the Central subarea attached garages identifiable as such are not permitted unless integral to the architectural time frame of the buildings existing design.

c.    Home occupations are permitted according to regulations of the Folsom Municipal Code except that the body authorized to grant any discretionary permit is the historic district commission.

2.    Second units are permitted with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    In the Figueroa subarea if there is a conflict, consistency with pre1910 design principles is of greater value to the community than provision of a second unit since the historic district as a whole provides a significant number of second units.

b.    In The Preserve subarea, because of the small lot size, successful design of a second unit is unlikely.

3.    Multifamily units are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    All multifamily projects, except second units as permitted in Section 17.52.500, require a conditional use permit from the historic district commission.

b.    A project may not exceed a total of 12 units.

c.    In the Figueroa subarea attached garages are not permitted in the general viewshed of the public, unless not readily identifiable as a garage. Carports must also be designed as historical features, such as porte cocheres.

d.    In the Central subarea attached garages identifiable as such are not permitted unless integral to the architectural time frame of the buildings existing design.

e.    In The Preserve subarea multifamily units are not permitted due to the small lot size and recorded design guidelines.

4.    Small commercial or light industrial uses which provide little evidence of their nonresidential nature are permitted, with the following exceptions and limitations:

a.    A conditional use permit from the historic district commission is required for all commercial or industrial uses except home occupations.

b.    Bed and breakfast inn regulations are as set forth in the Folsom Municipal Code except that the body authorized to grant any discretionary permit is the historic district commission. In its approval the historic district commission may grant exceptions to provisions of those regulations in the interest of authentic historical interpretation or to improve the uses compatibility with the neighborhood.

5.    Churches, meeting halls, care facilities for more than 6 persons, schools and other public or quasi-public uses require a conditional use permit from the historic district commission.

6.    Home occupations are permitted according to the regulations of the Folsom Municipal Code except that the body authorized to grant any discretionary permit is the historic district commission.

B.    Lot Area. The minimum lot area is 7,000 square feet.

C.    Lot Width. The minimum lot width is 50 feet.

D.    Lot Coverage. A minimum of 45 percent of the lot area must be maintained as pervious surface.

E.    Height. Structural heights shall extend 15 feet above the main structure, subject to design review.

F.    Setbacks. The minimum setback for any structure is 5 feet from the property line and 10 feet from any other structure. Garages shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the public right-of-way.

1.    Front Yard. Front yard setback shall be 20 feet. Parking may not be located in the required front yard setback area.

2.    Side Yard. Side yard set back shall be a minimum of 5 feet from any interior side-yard lot line and 10 feet from a street side-yard lot line.

3.    Rear Yard. Rear yard set back shall be 20 feet.

G.    Landscaping. A minimum of 60 percent of the front 20 feet of the lot plus 50 percent of the remaining area of the lot is required to be landscaped. Front-yard landscaping must be installed prior to commencement of any use other than single-family residential.

H.    Signs.

1.    Exempt Signs. Signs exempt in Chapter 17.59 are exempt in this primary area except as follows:

a.    Incidental, under-canopy, and window signs are not exempt.

b.    On-site directional signs are exempt if they are 2 square feet or smaller and if freestanding, no higher than 2 feet.

c.    Construction signs and project identification signs of current and pending development applications are exempt if 6 square feet or smaller and 6 feet or less in height.

2.    Prohibited Signs. In addition to signs prohibited in Chapter 17.59, the following signs are prohibited in this primary area: neon, internally illuminated, backlit canopies, corporate flags, animated, special event, signs larger than 6 square feet in size and 6 feet in height, and time and temperature, barber pole, and menu/order boards.

3.    Building with Multiple Tenants. Multifamily buildings with 4 or more units are permitted 1 permanent wall or free-standing sign, not to exceed 6 square feet in area and 6 feet in height. A uniform signage program is required for buildings with more than 1 business tenant.

I.    Parking. All parking spaces must be provided on site, outside of front and street side yards, and screened from public view by location, fence, landscaping or other means appropriate to the neighborhood. Available on-street parking may be utilized by residents and visitors but may not be counted toward required parking ratios. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.550 Open space/public primary area special use and design standards.
A.    Permitted Uses. When proposed by a public entity, the following uses are permitted; submittal to the historic district commission for courtesy review and comment is requested. When proposed by a private entity, a conditional use permit is required. If, in the opinion of the planning, inspections and permitting director, public or private status of the proposing entity is not clear, the historic district commission shall make a finding on the need for a conditional use permit.

1.    Natural open space, including management activities necessary for conservation and safety.

2.    Improved open space, including active and passive park and trail uses.

3.    Transportation corridors.

4.    Cemeteries.

5.    Public schools, including administrative facilities.

6.    Small-scale public utility structures.

7.    Residential uses accessory to a public use.

8.    Other public uses which are, in the opinion of the historic district commission, similar to permitted uses and compatible with surrounding uses.

B.    Design Standards. The appropriate standards are to be established in the design review process. Design of private projects is subject to historic district commission approval. Public projects, particularly those with potential to conflict with one or more goals, policies, or provisions of this chapter or any adopted design and development guidelines, are to be submitted for courtesy review and comment by the historic district commission. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.560 Railroad wye subarea special use and design standards.
A.    Permitted Uses. All uses require a conditional use permit from the historic district commission.

B.    Lot Area. Appropriate lot area requirements are to be established in the design review process.

C.    Lot Width. Appropriate lot width requirements are to be established in the design review process.

D.    Lot Coverage. Appropriate lot coverage requirements are to be established in the design review process.

E.    Height. As established in the design review process. In general, heights should not exceed 2-1/2 stories or maximum of 35 feet. Height of towers, spires, and similar features may exceed 35 feet, taking into account potential effects on neighboring properties and on views from state park lands. See also any adopted design and development guidelines.

F.    Setbacks. Appropriate setback requirements are to be established in the design review process.

G.    Landscaping. Appropriate landscaping requirements are to be established in the design review process. In the interest of improving overall quality of life, all projects are encouraged to seek means of incorporating substantial landscaping, particularly trees.

H.    Signs.

1.    Buildings existing at the time of plan adoption are permitted 1 wall or freestanding sign not exceeding 32 square feet in size nor 8 feet in height.

2.    Approval of new construction shall include approval of a uniform signage program, including elements that recognize the subareas railroad history and including provisions for signage consistent with design standards of the Sutter Street subarea and consistent with the above standard for existing buildings with respect to amount.

I.    Parking. The mount and configuration of required parking will be determined through the conditional use permit process, with guidance taken from parking requirements for similar uses in other subareas. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.570 Resort subarea special use and design standards.
A.    Permitted Uses. Permitted uses include meeting rooms, guest rooms, food service, assembly and recreation areas, parking, and other uses related to a resort-conference center. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.600 Preservation ratings.
Prior to forwarding an application for architectural and design review to the historic district commission, the director of the planning, inspections and permitting department shall investigate the historical significance of the property and structures which are the subject of the application. Based upon this investigation, the director of the planning, inspections and permitting department shall make a recommendation to the historic district commission as to the level of architectural and design authenticity that is appropriate and shall evaluate whether the application adheres to the recommended level. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.650 Moving of structures.
Moving a structure into or out of the historic district or moving a structure from one location to another location within the historic district is subject to the review and approval of the historic district commission. In evaluating an application to move a structure, the commission shall consider whether the moved structure, together with any site modifications, will advance the goals of this chapter. The movement of any structure shall comply with applicable building code and traffic safety regulations. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.660 Demolition.
The demolition of a structure located in the historic district is subject to the review and approval of the historic district commission. Prior to authorizing demolition of a structure considered historically significant, the historic district commission shall consider the following factors:

A.    Whether the public health, safety and/or welfare warrant the demolition;

B.    What accommodations can be provided to the owner of the property to make it feasible for the owner to preserve the property;

C.    Whether the owner of the property is willing to sell the property to a buyer who wishes to preserve the property;

D.    Whether a public entity wishes to acquire the property through exercise of the power of eminent domain in order to preserve the property.

Prior to the authorization of demolition, the applicant shall provide documentation of the structure for the historical record. Documentation shall include photographs of all sides of the structure, details of unique or representative construction features, and any history of the structure known to, or reasonably obtainable by, the applicant. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.670 Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots.
Any use or structure, or part thereof, legally in place as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may continue as a legal nonconforming use or structure. Likewise, plans for any use or structure approved as of the date this chapter becomes effective may be carried out as approved. Any extension of such approval, for which the applicant was entitled to apply as of the effectiveness date, may be granted according to the regulations in effect prior to the effectiveness date; if granted, such extension will be considered the same as an approval granted before the effectiveness date. In order to establish legal nonconforming status, a property owner may be asked to use his/her best efforts to produce proof of the legality of such structure or use as of the effectiveness date, to the satisfaction of the planning, inspections and permitting director. The city will also use its best efforts to find proofs. Acceptable proofs include such items as approved construction plans; certificates of occupancy; copies of zoning regulations on the date of commencement; minutes of planning commission, historical committee, or city council meetings; or similar materials deemed adequate by the planning, inspections and permitting director, excluding business licenses. In the absence of definitive proof, the planning, inspections and permitting director will make a determination based on available evidence, stating in writing the basis for this conclusion.

Illegal nonconforming uses or structures must be made to conform or must be removed. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.680 Nonconforming uses.
A.    A use is determined to be legally nonconforming if it is not permitted under provisions of this chapter but was legally in place, with licenses and permits in current status, at the effective date of this chapter.

B.    A legal nonconforming use of land or of a building may continue, subject to both of the following conditions:

1.    The use shall not be expanded, extended or enlarged in any manner beyond its existing scope at the time of the effective date of this chapter.

2.    The use shall not be changed, except to a similar nonconforming use or to a use that conforms to the regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.690 Nonconforming structures.
A.    A structure or part thereof is determined to be legally nonconforming if it was legally in place at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter but by reason of style, construction or placement it does not meet the standards or intent of the district or subarea in which it is located. Modifications undertaken illegally may cause a structure or part thereof to be deemed nonconforming.

B.    Any structure with legal nonconforming status may continue, subject to all the following conditions:

1.    It is maintained in good repair, as determined by the chief building official.

2.    The nonconformity is not increased, as determined by the planning, inspections and permitting director. Examples of actions which increase nonconformity include, but are not limited to, the following:

a.    New construction which increases the size of the structures footprint or roof overhang area within a required setback or which intensifies the use of such area, such as adding a bay window to a room which already extends into a required side yard or converting a similarly placed garage into a family room.

b.    Replacement of an existing nonconforming sign structure with a new one of the same general dimensions and placement, excluding normal maintenance such as replacing a worn part or repainting as allowed by the original approval.

c.    Replacement of conforming materials with nonconforming materials.

C.    Owners of nonconforming structures which sustain damage should not expect to make permanent repairs or reconstructions which are nonconforming in nature. Instead, repair or replacement should improve a structures conformity. When it is not feasible to promptly cause full conformity, a transition plan may be approved by the historic district commission.

D.    Whether legally in place or not, a structure or feature which was not original may be deemed nonconforming if its existence prevents listing on the National Register of Historic Places of an otherwise eligible structure or site or, in the opinion of the historic district commission, significantly degrades a locally significant structure or site.

E.    The historic district commission may grant conforming status to structures, or parts thereof, which would otherwise be deemed nonconforming if it finds that the structure or structural feature is of exceptional design value, contributes significantly to the goals and policies of the plan, is not detrimental to its neighborhood, and is appropriate to be a permanent feature of historic Folsom. For example, conforming status may be granted to post-1900 structures in the Sutter Street subarea which contribute to the intents and concepts of the subarea or to an outstanding example of a post-1950 style which is not well represented elsewhere in the city. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.700 Appeal.
A.    If a permit applicant, permittee, or other person whose property rights may be affected is dissatisfied with any determination made by the planning, inspections and permitting director, such person may appeal to the historic district commission. If a permit applicant, permittee, or other person whose property rights may be affected is dissatisfied with any determination made by the historic district commission, such person(s) may appeal to the city council.

B.    Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the specific reason for the appeal and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the planning, inspections and permitting director not later than 10 calendar days after the date of the action being appealed. The appeal must be accompanied by an appeal fee as established by resolution of the city council. If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of the action against which the appeal is made shall be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.710 Appeal hearings.
Appeal hearings shall be conducted no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting following 30 calendar days after the date of filing an appeal. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be served on the appeal body, the applicant or permittee, and the appellant at least 10 calendar days preceding the date of the hearing. Additionally, a notice specifying the date, time and place of the hearing shall be posted on the subject property at least 10 calendar days preceding the date of the hearing. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.720 Actions on appeal.
The appeal body shall review the entire proceeding relating to the act or decision being appealed, de novo, and may make any order it deems just and equitable, including granting of a permit. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appeal body shall prepare a written decision which either grants or denies the appeal, and contains findings of fact and conclusions. The decision shall be served on the applicant or permittee and the appellant. The decision shall become final upon the date of filing and service. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

17.52.730 Code enforcement.
A.    This chapter and any design and development guidelines adopted by the city council pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter, shall be enforceable through the citys code enforcement procedures as specified in Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. All procedures, rights and remedies set forth in Title 1 shall be applicable to enforcement of this chapter.

B.    The director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting shall have the responsibility for ensuring compliance with this chapter, and shall be designated as the enforcement authority.

C.    The goal of enforcement shall be to secure compliance with this chapter. Therefore, a notice to correct shall first be issued to advise all responsible persons of a violation in accordance with procedures established Section 1.09.024 of the Folsom Municipal Code. The period for correction of the violation shall be 10 days, unless some other time period is specifically set forth by ordinance. However, if there has been a violation of any provision of the Folsom Municipal Code in the preceding 12 month period, no notice to correct shall be required, and a notice of administrative violation shall be issued to all responsible persons.

D.    If the violation is not corrected within the time specified, a notice of administrative violation shall thereafter be served on all responsible persons pursuant to the criteria established in Section 1.09.014 of the Folsom Municipal Code. Unless otherwise established by ordinance, the level of administrative violation shall be a Level A violation, with a penalty range of $20.00 to $500.00 as provided for in Section 1.09.012(A)(1) of the Folsom Municipal Code.

E.    Any other sanctions specified in the Folsom Municipal Code shall also be available to redress violations of this chapter.

F.    The right to appeal any action by the enforcement authority shall be governed by the procedures set forth in Section 1.09.030 to 1.09.049, inclusive, of Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 890  2 (part), 1998)

Chapter 17.54
UUD, UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT
Sections:

17.54.010    Regulations.

17.54.020    Definitions.

17.54.030    Public hearingsNotice required.

17.54.040    Underground installationResolution.

17.54.050    Underground installationOverhead structures prohibited.

17.54.060    Emergency service requirements.

17.54.070    Exceptions.

17.54.080    ResolutionProperty owner notification.

17.54.090    Supplying utility requirements.

17.54.100    Underground installationNoticeAppealHearing.

17.54.110    City-owned equipment removal.

17.54.120    Work limitationTime extension.

17.54.130    Enforcement.

17.54.140    Penalties.

17.54.150    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

17.54.010 Regulations.
In any district which is combined with a UUD district, the regulations of this chapter shall apply in addition to those hereinbefore specified for such district, provided that if conflict in regulations occur, the regulations of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.020 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

Commission means the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

Underground utility district or district means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.54.040.

Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

Utility includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.030 Public hearingsNotice required.
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least 10 days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.040 Underground installationResolution.
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.050 Underground installationOverhead structures prohibited.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein, no person or utility shall erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 17.54.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.060 Emergency service requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The city administrator may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.070 Exceptions.
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.54.040 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

1.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer other than facilities or equipment belonging to Sacramento Municipal Utility District and installed by it pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;

2.    Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

3.    Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

4.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominate voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

5.    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

6.    Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

7.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

8.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 399  1, 1980; Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.080 ResolutionProperty owner notification.
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.54.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities.

Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.54.040, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 399  2, 1980: Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.090 Supplying utility requirements.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.54.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs. (Ord. 399  3, 1980: Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.100 Underground installationNoticeAppealHearing.
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities, as designated by the utility, referred to in Section 17.54.090, and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 17.54.040, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

B.    The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owners name appears, and must be addressed to such owners last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, city of Folsom. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

C.    The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

D.    If upon the expiration of the thirty day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

E.    The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

F.    Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

G.    If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of 6 percent per year. (Ord. 399  4, 1980; Ord. 241, 1969; Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.110 City-owned equipment removal.
City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 17.54.040. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.120 Work limitationTime extension.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.54.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 233  1 (part), 1968)

17.54.130 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The city engineer or his/her designee, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 858  13(1), 1997)

17.54.140 Penalties.
The penalties set forth in Section 17.03.020 of this title shall not apply, and the following penalties shall be applicable for any violation of this chapter:

A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level A violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A). (Ord. 858  13(2), 1997)

17.54.150 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the city engineer shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Section 1.09.023. (Ord. 858  13(3), 1997)

Chapter 17.56
E-1, E-2, ESTATE DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.56.010    Regulations.

17.56.020    E-1, small estate district.

17.56.030    E-2, large estate district.

17.56.010 Regulations.
In any district which is combined with an E district, the following special lot size regulations shall apply in lieu of lot size regulations otherwise provided for. (Ord. 239  2 (part), 1969)

17.56.020 E-1, small estate district.
Net average lot area of development shall be not less than 14,500 square feet and an average lot street frontage shall not be less than 100 feet. The net square footage of residential developments shall be considered that portion of the total square footage excluding the areas required for street rights-of-way, fenced easements and parkways. Lots or parcels having 2,500 square feet in excess of 1/2 acre shall not be considered in averaging the lot areas. (Ord. 239  2 (part), 1969)

17.56.030 E-2, large estate district.
Net average lot area of development shall be not less than 1/2 acre and an average lot street frontage shall be not less than 125 feet. The net square footage of residential developments shall be considered that portion of the total square footage excluding the areas required for street rights-of-way, fenced easements and parkways. In no case shall more than 20 percent of the lot street frontages be less than 125 feet and no lot shall have a net area of less than 20,000 square feet. (Ord. 239  2 (part), 1969)

Chapter 17.57
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

17.57.010    Purpose.

17.57.020    Definitions.

17.57.030    General standards.

17.57.040    Off-street parking requirements.

17.57.050    Special provisions.

17.57.060    Loading space requirement.

17.57.070    Development and maintenance of off-street parking facilities.

17.57.080    Location and dimensions of off-street parking facilities.

17.57.090    Bicycle parking facilities.

17.57.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require off-street parking spaces and loading spaces for all land uses in the city sufficient in number to accommodate all vehicles which will be congregated at a given location at a given point in time by drivers and passengers who use or occupy the facility for which the parking space is provided, to the end that on-street parking will be diminished, traffic and pedestrian safety increased, property values stabilized, and the general welfare promoted. (Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the provisions of the context indicate otherwise, the following terms have the following meanings:

1.    Parking lot means an area of land, a yard or other open space lot used for or designed for use by standing motor vehicles. A parking lot or parking area includes the parking space, maneuvering area, and related landscape areas.

2.    Parking space means land or space, covered or uncovered, laid out for, surfaced, and used or designed for use by a standing motor vehicle, that is directly accessible from a street, driveway, or maneuvering area as specified in Section 17.57.080.

3.    Covered parking space means a fully enclosed parking structure consisting of exterior materials, colors, and an architectural design that match the primary residence. The space shall be directly accessible from a street, paved driveway, or maneuvering area along a paved surface or similar hardscape as specified in Section 17.57.080. (Ord. 1187  10, 2013: Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.030 General standards.
A.    Application. This chapter shall apply to all land uses, to any building or structure, any enlargement or increase in capacity of any main building or structure or change of occupancy or use.

B.    General Provisions. Accessible off-street parking areas shall be provided and maintained as set forth in this chapter. The parking access area shall provide parking and maneuvering room for motor vehicles and for pedestrian safety, based on the anticipated occupancy of a given building, structure, or area of land or water. Where there is a combination of principal uses in any one facility, the sum of the parking requirements of these uses shall be provided unless otherwise indicated. If the calculation of parking needs results in the requirement for a fraction of a parking space, such a parking space need not be provided unless the fraction exceeds fifty percent. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the installation and maintenance of more parking spaces than the minimums required.

C.    Change of Occupancy or Use. For a change of occupancy and/or use where the parking demand is increased and where no new construction requiring a building permit is anticipated but a new business license is required, the planning director or his designee shall review the parking requirements of the proposed use. No new business license shall be issued until the planning department has approved the parking plan. Two copies of such plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted to the planning director or his designee for approval. The plan shall show the whole property in question and shall show the means of ingress and egress, location of the building, parking spaces, landscaping, barrier curbs, irrigation system, lights, and any other proposed facilities. If the plan conforms to the intent and provisions of this chapter, the planning director or his designee shall approve both copies, keeping one copy on file and returning the other copy to the finance department for issuance of any business license.

D.    Subsequent Development. No building or use shall be enlarged, expanded, or changed without having the parking plan reviewed and approved by the planning director or his designee.

E.    Existing Facilities. Any building or use for which parking facilities become substandard by the adoption of this chapter shall be considered a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use may continue for nonresidential buildings, but no enlargement, expansion, change of occupancy or use shall be made in such use or building unless the required number of parking spaces and other improvements, including landscaping, required by this chapter are provided. Furthermore, such nonconforming use may continue for residential buildings, but no garage conversion to nonvehicular use and no remodeling that involves enlarging or expanding over five hundred square feet of the measurable living area of existing residential building shall be made in such use or building unless the required number of covered parking spaces and other improvements, including landscaping, required by this chapter are provided.

F.    Change of Parking Requirements. When parking requirements as set forth in this chapter are amended, such amendment shall not invalidate a previously approved development plan or building permit.

G.    Parking of Nonregistered Vehicles. Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current registration, excluding farm equipment, shall not be parked or stored in the required front yard or required street side yard of any lot in any residential district. (Ord. 1187  11, 2013; Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.040 Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking space shall be provided in connection with the erection or major alteration, extension, or change of use of any building, structure, or site, in accordance with the following:

Residential.

1.    Single-family and two-family dwellings: two covered parking spaces per unit. Spaces must be provided outside the required front yard and street side yard setbacks and must be directly accessible along a paved surface or similar hardscape.

2.    Residential condominiums, townhouses, and planned developments with private streets: three spaces per unit, one of which shall be available for guest parking (unassigned).

3.    Multiple-family structures and complexes: one and five-tenths spaces per unit.

4.    Mobilehomes in mobilehome parks: two spaces per unit plus at least one guest parking space for each four mobile-home spaces in the park. Spaces for units may be end-to-end.

Commercial.

5.    Offices: one space per two hundred square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of five spaces shall be provided. Interior hallways used for access to office suites need not be counted in determining gross floor area.

6.    Retail commercial uses, banks, financial institutions, and office/service-type commercial uses: one space per two hundred square feet of gross floor area; minimum of five spaces.

7.    Eating establishments and bars: one space per three seats, based on the capacity of fixed and movable seating area as determined under the Uniform Building Code. If located within a shopping center or other mixed-use development which is predominantly retail commercial, the retail commercial parking requirement applies, provided that there are mutual parking agreements and the total cumulative gross floor area of the eating establishment(s) do(es) not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the shopping center.

8.    Retail furniture, major appliance, floor covering retail sales: one space per two hundred square feet for the first three thousand square feet of gross floor area; one space per one thousand square feet or fraction thereof for floor area in excess of three thousand square feet.

9.    Uncovered sales areas including new and used automobile, boat, or trailer sales; lumber and building material yards; plant nurseries; and similar uses: one space per one thousand square feet of sales display area.

10.    Automobile repair and service shops and service stations: one space per two hundred square feet of gross floor area. Spaces need not be striped.

11.    Motels, hotels, guesthouses, and lodges: one space per sleeping room or unit, plus parking as required in this chapter for other uses.

12.    Boardinghouses, fraternity and sorority houses, group care facilities, and similar uses: one space per two occupants, based upon the maximum occupant load of the sleeping or dining area, whichever is greater, as determined from the Uniform Building Code.

13.    Historical district: Refer to parking requirements of Section 17.57.090.

Recreational Uses.

14.    Dancehalls, ballrooms, discos, and incidental dancing areas: One space per two seats, based on the capacity of fixed and movable seating area as determined by the Uniform Building Code, or one space per thirty square feet of dance floor area, whichever is greater. When a dance area is incidental to another use, parking for the dance area shall be provided according to the above standards, based on the area of that portion of the premises oriented to the dance floor, in addition to the parking required for other uses.

15.    Bowling centers: six spaces per lane. Other principal uses within the bowling center shall provide parking as required for those uses by this chapter.

16.    Skating rinks: one space per one hundred square feet of skating area, plus parking for other uses in the facility as required by this chapter.

17.    Tennis and other court games: two spaces per court.

18.    Swimming pools: one space per one hundred square feet of pool area, plus parking for other uses at the facility as required by this chapter. This requirement does not apply to swimming pools which are accessory to residential uses.

19.    Swimming and tennis clubs and similar uses: The full parking requirement shall be provided for the part of the use requiring the greatest number of spaces, plus fifty percent of the parking required for other uses as established in this chapter.

20.    Golf courses: ten spaces per hole. Additional spaces are not required for the following accessory uses: driving ranges, putting greens, shower and locker rooms, maintenance shops and buildings.

21.    Driving and shooting ranges: one and five-tenths spaces per tee or shooting station.

22.    Commercial stables: one space per employee plus one space per five stalls or portion thereof.

23.    Parks: Parking area equal to five percent of the total park area for parks over ten acres in size.

24.    Stadiums and similar uses with fixed seating: one space per four seats.

25.    Theaters, auditoriums, and similar places of public assembly: one space per three seats in fixed seating facilities. One space per thirty square feet of net floor area in assembly halls.

26.    Travel trailer and recreational vehicle parks: one and five-tenths spaces per trailer or RV site, one of which shall be provided at each site.

Educational Facilities.

27.    Schools: Elementary schools shall provide at least one parking space for each employee or one parking space for every three seats in the auditorium or multi-purpose room, whichever is greater, plus off-street loading space for at least two school buses. Junior high schools shall provide at least one parking space for every three seats in the main auditorium or assembly hall. High schools shall provide the greater of the following:

a.    At least one parking space for each employee and one parking space for every three students in the eleventh and twelfth grades, or

b.    At least one parking space for every three seats in the main auditorium or stadium, whichever is the greater.

28.    Colleges: Colleges, including universities and junior colleges, shall provide the greater of the following:

a.    At least one parking space for each employee and one parking space for every two students, or

b.    At least one parking space for every three seats in the main auditorium or stadium, whichever is the greater.

Care Facilities.

29.    Hospitals: two spaces per bed. Any outpatient facility shall provide additional parking as required for offices.

30.    Convalescent hospitals: one space per four beds.

31.    Residential carehomes: one space per three persons receiving care in the home, in addition to the spaces required for the residence.

32.    Family day care homes, foster homes, and similar uses: one space per ten children in addition to the spaces required for the residence.

33.    Child day care centers and similar uses: one space per employee plus one loading space for every eight children licensed by the county or state.

Industrial.

34.    Manufacturing plants, machine shops, and contractors and industrial facilities: The greater of the following:

a.    One space per employee and each company-operated vehicle based at the facility,

b.    One space per five hundred square feet of gross floor area and each company-operated vehicle based at the facility.

35.    Warehouses and storage buildings: The greater of the following:

a.    One space per employee plus one space per company-operated vehicle based at the facility,

b.    One space per two thousand square feet.

36.    Industrial-office parks: One space per five hundred square feet of floor area for manufacturing areas, one space per two thousand square feet of floor area for storage areas, and one space per two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area for offices and accessory retail sales area. In the event that the structure is constructed on speculation, parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space per two hundred seventy-five square feet based on gross floor area.

37.    Industrial uses maintaining more than one shift shall provide the greater of the following:

a.    Two spaces per every three employees for each of the two larger shifts, plus one space per company-operated vehicle based at the facility,

b.    The ratio based on floor area as listed above.

Other Uses.

38.    Churches and other places of worship, mortuaries and funeral homes: one space per four seats in the main assembly area.

39.    Other uses for which parking requirements are not specified elsewhere in this chapter: Parking spaces shall be provided at the ratio determined by the planning director. (Ord. 1187  12, 2013; Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.050 Special provisions.
A.    Compact car space: Uses requiring five or more parking spaces may have up to thirty percent of such spaces designated for compact cars. A compact space shall have a width of nine feet and a length of not less than fourteen feet. Compact spaces shall be clearly marked, Compact Car.

B.    Parking spaces for the handicapped: Parking spaces shall be provided for the handicapped in accordance with the following provisions:

1.    The number of handicapped parking spaces to be provided shall be as follows:

Total Number of Parking Spaces

Number of Handicapped Parking Spaces Required

040

1

4180

2

81120

3

121160

4

161300

5

301400

6

401500

7

over 500

7 + 1 for every 200 parking spaces over 500.

2.    The handicapped parking space shall be located so as to provide for safety and optimum proximity to curb ramps or other pedestrianways providing the most direct access to the primary entrance(s) of the building(s) served by the parking lot.

3.    Each parking space reserved for the handicapped shall be identified by a permanently-affixed reflectorized sign constructed of porcelain on steel, beaded text, or equal, displaying the International Symbol of Accessibility. The sign shall not be smaller than seventy square inches in area and shall be centered at the interior end of the parking space. In addition, the paved surface of each parking space shall have the symbol of accessibility painted on the surface in white paint, at least three feet square.

4.    Each parking space reserved for the handicapped shall be at least fourteen feet wide; alternatively, two spaces can be provided within a twenty-three-foot-wide area, striped to provide a nine-foot-wide parking space on each side and a five-foot loading and unloading area in the center.

C.    Parking reductions: A proponent of an office, commercial, or industrial project may provide alternative facilities or programs which serve to reduce parking demand in return for a reduction in vehicle parking requirements. Vehicle parking requirements may be reduced in accordance with the following provisions:

1.    Shower/locker facilities: Developments with one hundred or more employees may reduce their parking requirement by providing shower and clothing locker facilities for bicycle-commuting employees. Maximum reduction: Two percent of required parking or five spaces, whichever is greater.

2.    Secure bicycle parking: Developments which provide additional secure bicycle parking facilities over and above the minimum requirement may reduce their parking requirement by one vehicle space for every three additional bicycle spaces provided. Maximum reduction: two percent of required parking.

3.    Preferred carpool/vanpool parking spaces: Office or industrial developments which guarantee preferred parking spaces (e.g., covered, shaded, or near building entrance) to employees who participate regularly in a carpool or vanpool may reduce their parking requirement by one vehicle space for every one space which is marked and reserved for car-pools/vanpools at a preferred location. Maximum reduction: two percent of required parking. (Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.060 Loading space requirement.
A.    Quantity receivers, shippers: All retail and wholesale stores, warehouses, supply houses, building devoted to manufacturing trade, hotels, hospitals or other buildings where large amounts of goods are received or shipped shall provide loading and unloading space adequate to handle the volume and frequency of truck traffic to the building or shopping center. The minimum number of spaces shall be determined in accordance with the estimated volume of truck traffic and loading requirements. Each required loading space shall be not less than ten feet wide, thirty-five feet long, and fourteen feet high.

B.    Table of spaces required: In any case, the minimum number of truck loading and unloading spaces indicated in the following table shall be provided:

Gross Floor Area (square feet)

Loading-Unloading Spaces (number)

7,499 or less

0

7,50014,999

1

15,00024,999

2

25,00039,999

3

40,00059,999

4

60,00079,999

5

80,000100,000

6

For each additional 100,000

1

C.    New and used car agencies: New and used car agencies shall provide one truck loading and unloading space fifteen feet wide and fifty feet long for each ten thousand square feet of uncovered sales area up to a maximum of four spaces for delivery rigs. (Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.070 Development and maintenance of off-street parking facilities.
A.    Drainage facilities: Drainage facilities shall be provided in all public parking areas adequate to handle the drainage requirements of the subject property, to alleviate the creation of flooding and drainage problems for the subject property or any surrounding properties.

B.    Paving requirements:

1.    Paving shall be provided for all public parking and loading areas in accordance with specifications of the department of public works to eliminate dust and maintain a passable surface at all times for the parking and loading areas.

2.    Parking lot pavement shall consist of two inches asphalt concrete on four inches of aggregate base on ninety-five percent compacted subgrade, delivery driveways having two inches asphalt concrete on six inches of aggregate base on ninety-five percent compacted subgrade. All construction shall be in accordance with the county of Sacramento Standard Construction Specifications. If concrete is used, it shall be four inches in depth.

C.    Fences: An approved solid fence six feet high shall be provided and maintained along the edge(s) of any public parking areas adjacent to properties for residential or agricultural uses to protect these properties from the interruption and nuisance of the automobiles using the parking area. On that portion of any parking area located between the building line and the street where such a fence would interfere with visibility, the fence shall not exceed thirty inches within ten feet of the right-of-way line and shall not exceed forty-two inches within twenty feet of the right-of-way line. The height of the fence shall be measured from the paved surface of the parking lot and may be modified by the director of public works or his designee when he finds that due to a significant difference in elevation between parcels, different screening requirements are necessary.

D.    Bumper curbs, wheel stops: To insure the proper maintenance and utilization of these facilities, public parking areas shall be designed so that a parked vehicle does not overhang required sidewalks, planters or landscaped areas. A permanent curb, bumper, wheel stop, or similar device shall be installed which shall be adequate to protect the required sidewalks, planters, and landscaped areas from vehicular overhang and to protect any structure from vehicular damage. If such protection is provided by means of a method designed to stop the wheel rather than the bumper of the vehicle, the stopping edge shall be placed no closer than two feet from the edge of the required sidewalks, planter or landscaped areas and from any building. The innermost two feet of each parking space (between the curb and any planter or sidewalk) may remain unpaved if planted with low ground cover and added to any required or proposed landscaping, to allow for bumper overhang; this additional planting area is considered to be part of the parking space and may not count toward satisfying any landscaping requirement. The director of public works or his designee may require other barrier curbs or wheel stops as deemed necessary to protect areas within or adjacent to the parking area from vehicular encroachment.

E.    Marking of parking spaces: Parking spaces shall be marked or maintained on the pavement, and any other directional markings or signs shall be installed as permitted or required by the director of public works or his designee to insure the proper utilization of space, adequate traffic flow, and general safety.

F.    Lighting: Lighting, if provided, shall be directed away from residential areas and public streets so that the light source is not visible from such areas in order to insure the general safety of other vehicular traffic and the privacy and well-being of the residential areas.

G.    Planters, landscaping:

1.    A planter or landscaped area at least 4 feet wide, excluding curbing, shall be provided adjacent to all street rights-of-way. In addition any area within the street right-of-way between the edge of the sidewalk and outer edge of the right-of-way shall be developed as a planter or landscaped area in conjunction with the required 4-foot area above, unless this requirement is waived by the director of public works or his designee. Within this planter, trees shall be planted no further than 50 feet on center, at least 5 feet but not further than 10 feet from the back of the sidewalk. The planter shall include shrubs, hedges, and other natural growth or other features such as berms, except near street and driveway intersections where landscaping shall not exceed 21/2 feet in height. Nothing in this section shall preclude the installation of additional landscaping and the planting of additional trees so long as it is consistent with the visibility regulations.

2.    Where a public parking area has a capacity of more than 5 parking spaces, it shall provide landscaped areas, in addition to the required perimeter landscaping, referenced above, equal to at least 5 percent of the total parking area. Within the planter or landscaped areas, an irrigation system and live landscaping shall be provided and maintained. Not more than 30 percent of the planter or landscaped area may be covered with hard surfaces such as gravel, landscaping rock, concrete, or other impervious materials. Such landscaped area of planter shall be provided to create the visual and physical separation necessary to reduce the traffic hazards between pedestrians and vehicles. All landscaping areas shall be designed so that plant materials are protected from vehicle damage or encroachment.

3.    Trees shall be interspersed throughout the parking area so that in 15 years 40 percent of the parking lot will be in shade at high noon, assuming the sun directly overhead. The percentage of area required to be shaded shall be based on aboveground and uncovered parking area. Trees shall be equivalent to 10-gallon-can size or larger at planting. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 1-gallon-can size.

H.    Sight Distance/cross-visibility area:

1.    No foliage or structural feature shall extend into the cross-visibility area between 30 inches and 7 feet above the surface of the public sidewalk.

2.    Cross-visibility requirements:

a.    At any corner formed by the intersection of a driveway/alley and street, the cross-visibility area shall be a triangle having 2 sides 15 feet long and running along the driveway/alley edge and curb line of street (consistent with public works standard street specifications), said length beginning at their intersection and the third side formed by a line connecting the 2 ends.

b.    At any corner formed by the intersecting streets, the cross-visibility area shall be a triangle having 2 sides 35 feet long and running along each curb line (consistent with public works standard street specifications), said length beginning at their intersection and the third side formed by a line connecting the 2 ends.

I.    Maintenance: All landscape areas shall be maintained in a healthy and attractive condition. Maintenance shall include but not be limited to watering, fertilizing, weeding, cleaning, pruning, trimming, spraying, and cultivating. Plant mate-rials showing physical damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical damage, insects, or disease shall be replaced by the same or similar species. (Ord. 831  2, 1995; Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.080 Location and dimensions of off-street parking facilities.
A.    Vehicular Access Requirements.

1.    Access to all parking spaces shall be provided by private access drives except that (a) single-family detached units and duplex units may have vehicles back out of parking spaces onto a public street, and (b) uses with alley access may back out into alleys, provided that sufficient maneuvering area is provided for. The design and arrangement of access drives are set forth in subsection B of this section.

2.    Fire department and other emergency vehicular access shall be assured an unencumbered continuous width of 27 feet for all major/primary driveway aisles, as determined and designated by the fire marshal, by the physical design of the project. Physical design provisions do not include red curbs, parking prohibition signing, tow-away zones, or strong provisions for homeowners association enforcement, although such provisions are not prohibited and may, in some cases, be required in addition to the physical design provisions.

3.    Off-street parking spaces shall be designed so that vehicles will not back up out onto public street.

4.    Access to public parking areas and curb cuts for driveways shall be approved by the director of public works or his designee to assure an efficient and safe traffic flow into the parking areas and along the public streets.

B.    Off-Street Parking Spaces. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every use shall provide the required parking spaces in a paved public parking area or building on the same property. The owners of adjoining buildings or lots may provide parking space in common if the total parking space provided is equal to the sum of the individual parking needs. All parking areas shall be designed so that the parking spaces are permanently maintained and have suitable maneuvering space and access to and from a public street or alley. The dimensions of each parking space shall be determined from the following charts. Other angles or dimensions may be considered only upon the approval of the director of public work or his designee.

Refer to Section 17.57.050 for parking provisions for compact cars and handicapped parking provisions for compact cars and handicapped parking requirements. Plates I, II, and III, on subsequent pages, are intended to serve as a guide in the design of parking areas. All major/primary driveway aisles, as determined and designated by the fire marshal, shall provide a minimum width of 27 feet. Dead-end aisles are discouraged. When used, ninety-degree angle stalls are required, and extra backing area shall be provided for spaces at the end of the aisle.









(Ord. 891  2, 1998: Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

17.57.090 Bicycle parking facilities.
A.    Bicycle Parking Requirement.

1.    For multifamily residential, 1 bicycle parking space per every 5 dwelling units. Where this parking requirement results in a fraction of a space, another space need not be provided unless the fraction exceed 50 percent.

2.    Office and retail commercial, minimum 5 bicycle parking spaces for up to 25 required vehicle parking spaces. An additional bicycle parking space is required for every 10 additional vehicle parking spaces required or portion thereof. The maximum number of bicycle parking spaces required is 20, unless more are deemed necessary for major employment and commercial facilities by the community development director.

3.    For public facilities and civic centers (municipal offices, parks, swimming pools, museums and auditoriums), the number of bicycle spaces shall be 30 percent of the vehicle parking normally required or immediately available to the facility. The maximum number of bicycle parking spaces required is 25, unless more are deemed necessary for major public facilities and civic centers by the community development director.

4.    For elementary, middle and high schools, bicycle parking spaces number 25 percent of peak enrollment shall be provided.

B.    Design Standards. Bicycle parking facilities shall be installed in a manner which allows adequate spacing for access to the bicycle and the locking device when the facilities are occupied. General space allowances shall include a 2-foot width and a 6-foot length per bicycle and a 5-foot maneuvering space behind the bicycle. The facilities shall be located on a hard, dust-free surface, preferably asphalt or concrete slab.

Bicycle parking facilities shall consist of at least a stationary bicycle rack, typically a concrete slab or vertical metal bar, where the bicyclist supplies a padlock and chain or cable to secure the bicycle to a stationary object. (Ord. 795  1, 1994; Ord. 508 (part), 1983)

Chapter 17.58
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
Sections:

17.58.010    Designated.

17.58.020    Rules governing use of zoning map and symbols.

17.58.030    Regulations are minimum.

17.58.040    Relationship to other regulations and to private restrictions.

17.58.050    Additional uses permitted.

17.58.055    Mobilehome placement.

17.58.060    Building sites, areas and easements.

17.58.070    Yard requirements.

17.58.080    Height exceptions.

17.58.120    Land division fee.

17.58.010 Designated.
The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions enumerated in Sections 17.58.02017.58.110. (Prior code  3121.01)

17.58.020 Rules governing use of zoning map and symbols.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

1.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following property, street or alley lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;

2.    In unsubdivided property and where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map;

3.    A symbol indicating the classification of property on the zoning map shall in each instance apply to the whole of the area within the district boundaries;

4.    Where a public street, alley or parcel of land is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply equally to such vacated or abandoned street or alley;

5.    Where a parcel of land is divided by a district boundary, all or any part thereof may be placed in either district by approval of a variance application. (Prior code  3121.02)

17.58.030 Regulations are minimum.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, unless otherwise stated, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public safety, health and general welfare. (Prior code  3121.03)

17.58.040 Relationship to other regulations and to private restrictions.
A.    Where conflict occurs between the regulations of this title and any building code or other regulations effective within the city, the more restrictive of any such regulations shall apply.

B.    It is not intended that this title interfere with or abrogate or annul an easement, covenants or other agreements now in effect; provided however, that where this title imposes greater restrictions than are imposed or required by other titles, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall apply. (Prior code  3121.04)

17.58.050 Additional uses permitted.
The following accessory uses, in addition to those hereinafter mentioned, shall be permitted:

1.    The renting of rooms for not more than three paying guests in a dwelling;

2.    The operation of necessary service facilities and equipment in connection with schools, colleges, and other institutions when located on the site of the principal use;

3.    Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks, playgrounds and golf courses;

4.    Off-street parking areas in conjunction with commercial uses may be permitted in R districts on properties adjoining C or M districts upon the securing of a use permit in each case. (Ord. 1105  2 (part), 2008; prior code  3121.05)

17.58.055 Mobilehome placement.
Except as hereafter provided, mobilehomes shall be located in trailer courts or mobilehome parks as provided for in this title except when a use permit is granted by the planning commission for temporary use of a unit outside of a court or park for a caretaker, during construction of a permanent structure or under other special hardship circumstances.

Mobilehomes certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq.) which are constructed and/or purchased after October, 1976, shall be permitted on an individual lot in any zoning district wherein a single-family residential dwelling unit is permitted, subject to the following requirements:

1.    The mobilehome shall be placed on a permanent foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code.

2.    The requirements of the applicable zoning district, including but not limited to those for use permits; lot area, width and setbacks; and parking, etc., as set forth for single-family residential dwellings and other standards affecting single-family residential dwellings as may be set forth in a planned development use permit or subdivision approval shall be adhered to.

3.    The mobilehome shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.06 for architectural review. Architectural features to be considered in the review for compatibility of uses shall include roof overhang, roofing materials, siding materials and the parking structure. (Ord. 445 Exh. A (part), 1981)

17.58.060 Building sites, areas and easements.
A.    Any lot or parcel of land in one ownership having an area sufficient for more than one dwelling may be used and a building permit may be issued for such use; provided the owner thereof who changes or intends to change any existing lot line or lines or to establish new lot lines, files with the city planning commission, a record of survey map showing the proposed lot lines and the lots and building sites to be established in conformity with the regulations of the city.

Every residential structure shall have frontage on a public street, or an access way which has been approved for residential access by the planning commission.

B.    A detached garage or accessory building not exceeding one story in height and without living quarters may occupy not more than fifty percent of the area of a required rear yard. In exception to the provisions of this section, a garage or other similar out building not exceeding fifteen feet in height at the ridge may be built to the side, and/or rear line; provided that said garage or similar out building is not less than seventy-five feet from any street, and otherwise shall observe a five foot clear distance for side yard and rear yard. A garage or accessory building that is not attached to and made part of the main building shall not be closer than eight feet clear distance to main building.

The total floor area of all accessory structures on a single parcel, except for residential accessory dwellings/second units, shall not exceed 50 percent of the habitable floor area of the primary residential dwelling on the same parcel. Exceptions to this area requirement may be granted, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. This requirement shall not apply to properties located within the historic district, as identified in Chapter 17.52 of this code.

C.    In the case of a corner lot abutting upon two streets, no detached accessory building shall be erected, altered or moved so as to occupy any part of the front half of such lot.

D.    Any lot of record existing prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified herein shall be considered a legal building site. (Ord. 945  2, 2001; prior code  3121.06)

17.58.070 Yard requirements.
A.    No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or structure.

B.    In any case where a setback line, building line or official plan line has been established, the required yards or the street frontages of lots shall be measured in accordance with such lines and in no case shall the provisions of this title be construed as permitting any structure to extend beyond such lines.

C.    Garages, carports and other accessory buildings may be attached to and have a common wall with the main building, or, when located as required by this title, may be connected thereto by a breezeway. No parking spaces as required by this title, shall be located in any required front yard, or in any required side yard on the street side of any corner lot.

D.    In cases where side yards are to be computed on the basis of twenty percent of the width of the lot under the terms of this title, no such side yard need exceed sixteen feet in width unless required by other regulations.

E.    Cornices, eaves, canopies, fireplaces and similar architectural features, but not including any flat wall or window surface, may extend into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet.

F.    Uncovered porches or stairways, fire escapes or landing places, may extend into any required front or rear yard, a distance not to exceed six feet and into any required side yard a distance not to exceed one-half of the width of the side yard required for the lot.

G.    In any R district where forty percent or more of the building sites on any one block, or portion thereof in the same district, have been improved with buildings, the required front yard shall be of a depth equal to the average of the front yards of the improved building sites, to a maximum requirement of that specified for the district, but in no case less than ten feet.

H.    In case a dwelling is to be located so that the front yard or rear yard thereof faces any side lot line, such dwelling shall be located not less than ten feet from such lot line. The shorter of the street frontages of a corner lot shall be considered to be the front of the lot.

I.    In the case of a corner lot adjacent to a key lot in any R district, the setback on the street side of the corner lot within twenty feet of the side line of the key lot shall be equal to the front yard required on the key lot, and a clear five foot rear yard shall be maintained on the corner lots.

J.    In R districts, fences in side and rear yards may not exceed six feet in height, and may not exceed three and one-half feet in front yards.

K.    In any full block of lots the front yards may be varied so that the required yard depth is not reduced more than five feet, the average of all lots equals the required yard depth, and corner lot yards are not reduced.

L.    Nothing contained in the general provisions shall be deemed to reduce special yard requirements as set forth in the regulations for any R or B district.

M.    Yards required for residential buildings which may be permitted on use permit shall be as required for the particular district, or for R-4 districts, whichever yard requirements are greater. (Prior code  3121.07)

17.58.080 Height exceptions.
Towers, spires, chimneys, machinery, penthouses, scenery lofts, cupolas, water tanks, radio aerials, television antennae and similar architectural and utility structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be built and used to a height not more than 25 feet above the height limit established for the district in which the structures are located; provided, however, that no such architectural or utility structure in excess of the allowable building height shall be used for sleeping or eating quarters or for any commercial advertising purposes. Additional heights for public utility structures may be permitted upon approval of the planning commission. Height limitations provided herein shall not apply to electrical transmission lines and towers. (Prior code  3121.08)

17.58.120 Land division fee.
An application for a land division or lot split shall be accompanied by a fee of $25. (Ord. 323  31, 1975)

Chapter 17.59
SIGNS
Sections:

17.59.010    Purpose and scope.

17.59.020    Definitions and illustrations.

17.59.030    General provisions.

17.59.040    Sign regulations.

17.59.050    Permits and procedures.

17.59.060    Enforcement.

17.59.070    Penalties.

17.59.080    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

17.59.010 Purpose and scope.
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to coordinate the type, placement and scale of signs within the city. The procedures and requirements of this chapter are enacted to:

1.    Encourage a desirable urban character consistent with the General Plan;

2.    Preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place to live, work and visit;

3.    Promote commerce;

4.    Balance the needs of the business and development community to advertise their goods and services with the community and planning goals related to streetscape aesthetics and traffic safety;

5.    Establish regulatory distinction between permanent and temporary signs;

6.    Promote ease of administration of sign regulations;

7.    Provide for eventual elimination of preexisting nonconforming signs on a fair and equitable basis;

8.    Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter;

9.    Enable the fair and equitable enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

The above shall be accomplished by regulation of the display, erection, use, and maintenance of signs. The use of signs is regulated according to land use. The placement and scale of signs are regulated primarily by standards established for sign type and length of primary building frontage. No sign shall be erected or displayed except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Scope. The primary objective of this chapter is to regulate signs intended to be viewed from any vehicular or pedestrian public right-of-way. (Ord. 831  3 (part), 1995)

17.59.020 Definitions and illustrations.
A.    Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

Abandoned sign means any sign which is on the premises upon which it is located and has been vacated for a period of more than 90 days.

Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene, beacons, pennants, hand-held signs, large balloons or other inflatables used as signs, high-intensity illuminated signs, or other moving or flashing signs. Electronic or mechanical indications of time and temperature and decorations shall not be considered animated signs.

Banner means any sign constructed of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to any structure, including a pole, at 2 or more edges.

Beacon means a spotlight (searchlight) or other source of light used to attract attention.

Billboard sign means an off-site outdoor advertising sign on which space is leased or rented.

Building facade means the portion of any exterior elevation of a building or structure from grade to the top of the roof line and the entire width of the building.

Building permit means a permit issued by the city authorizing construction of a building or structure, including signs.

Canopy sign means any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other material, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area.

Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion of a sign with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than once per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.

Clear vision triangle means the required clear cross-visibility area unobstructed by any sign structure between 30 inches and 7 feet above the surface of the public sidewalk as follows:

1.    At any corner formed by the intersection of a driveway/alley and street, the cross-visibility area shall be a triangle having 2 sides 15 feet long and running along the driveway/alley edge and curb line of street, said length beginning at their intersection and the third side formed by a line connecting the 2 ends.

2.    At any corner formed by the intersecting streets, the cross-visibility area shall be a triangle having 2 sides 35 feet long and running along each curb line, said length beginning at their intersection and the third side formed by a line connecting the 2 ends.

Commercial message means any sign wording, logo or other representation that names or advertises a business, product, service or other commercial activity.

Construction sign means an on-site temporary sign identifying the names of individuals and/or firms connected with the construction of a project. Such sign may include the name of the project, lender, owner, developer, architect, contractor, address of business and emergency telephone number.

Directional sign means an on-site sign designed to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic that does not promote or advertise a business, property or product.

Directory sign means a sign or set of similarly designed individual signs, placed or displayed in sequence, to list all or part of the businesses within a building or shopping center.

Flag (civic) means a piece of cloth or canvas, usually rectangular or triangular in shape, representing a country, state or other civic entity, and designed to be flown from a flag pole. Flags of the United States, the state of California, other states, the city of Folsom, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by the city of Folsom may be flown as a civic flag.

Flag (corporate) means a piece of cloth or canvas, usually rectangular or triangular in shape, representing a corporation, business or other private organization, and designed to be flown from a flagpole.

Freestanding pad building means a detached building within an integrated development.

Freestanding sign means a sign supported permanently upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building.

Freeway sign means a sign adjacent to a freeway or intended to be viewed from vehicles traveling upon a freeway.

Frontage, Building. Building frontage means the length of an outside building wall facing a street, public parking lot or mall.

Frontage, Primary Building. Primary building frontage means the building frontage which faces the street. In cases where a building has more than 1 street frontage, the longest of the street frontages shall be considered the primary building frontage.

Governmental/civic sign means any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by or required by the city, county, state or federal government for traffic direction, city entrance, or for designation or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property or facility.

Grade means the elevation of the finished surface of the ground or paving. Finished grade shall be construed to be the grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the finished grade cannot reasonably be determined, the grade shall be determined by either the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal building of the lot. The lower elevation of the 2 points described shall be regarded as the finished grade.

Height of freestanding sign means the actual distance from the base of the sign at finished grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.

Home occupation sign means an attached wall, suspended, projecting or other building sign located at a residence advertising a business conducted in the residence.

Illuminated sign means a sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.

Incidental sign means a small sign, emblem or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, including but not limited to a rest room and phone sign, credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business.

Integrated development means a group of 2 or more adjacent uses or entities planned and developed in a joint manner with undivided or nonsegregated parking facilities shared by them or that are governed by a common business, tenant, homeowner or other association or by common conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs), regardless of whether such uses or entities are located on the same lot or parcel.

Logo sign means a graphic sign which represents a particular trademark or business symbol for identification.

Menu/order board sign means a sign installed in a drive-through facility and intended for drive-through customers that advertises the products available at the facility.

Monument sign means a freestanding sign constructed upon a solid-appearing base or pedestal.

Multiple-faced sign means a sign containing 3 or more faces, not necessarily in back-to-back configuration.

Name plate means an attached wall, suspended, projecting or other building sign identifying the occupant of a dwelling unit.

Noncommercial sign means any sign which does not bear a commercial message. Noncommercial messages include religious, political, social and other state, federal and local issues.

Nonconforming sign means a sign which does not meet the requirements of this chapter and which has not received legal nonconforming status.

Nonconforming Sign, Legal. Legal nonconforming sign means a sign which was erected legally and has a valid permit, but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulations.

Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, attached to a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind and attract attention.

Pole sign means a freestanding sign mounted to a structure, where the average height of the structure is more than 2 times that of the average width.

Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported. Portable signs include, but are not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs configured as A or T frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public way, unless said vehicle is used in the day-to-day operations of the business.

Projecting sign means any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.

Real estate sign means a temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease or sale.

Retail commercial center means a regional-serving commercial development that is zoned C-2 or C-3, is located north of U.S. Highway 50, is located within 1,000 feet of U.S. Highway 50, and consists of 25 or more operating retail stores with an aggregate floor area of at least 100,000 square feet of retail space.

Roof line means the top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any mansards, cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections.

Roof sign means any sign erected on the roof or over the roof line of a building.

Sign means any device, structure, fixture or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy for the primary purpose of identifying, providing directions or advertising any establishment, product, goods or services.

Sign, Area of. The measurable area of a sign face shall be computed by means of a single continuous perimeter composed of any rectilinear geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message. However, if the building attached sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as the background with no added decoration, the total sign area shall be calculated by measuring the area of a rectilinear geometric figure which encloses each word or logo. The combined areas for the individual words and/or logos shall be considered the total sign area. For freestanding signs, the perimeter of measurable sign area shall not include support and framing design embellishments with logo or no written advertising copy. The sign area of a double-faced sign with identical size and message placed back to back on the same structure (not more than 24 inches apart) so that only 1 face is visible at a time, shall be computed as the measurement of one of the faces. The sign area for multifaced signs shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any 1 point.

Sign, Off-Site. Off-site sign means a sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is located, e.g., bill-boards.

Sign, Off-Site Directional. Off-site directional sign means a sign which provides directional assistance to access an establishment conveniently and safely.

Sign permit means a permit issued by the planning director approving a sign plan pursuant to this chapter.

Special event sign permit means a permit issued by the planning director approving temporary signage for special events not otherwise permitted by this chapter.

Temporary sign means a sign not constructed or intended for long-term use.

Temporary sign permit means a permit issued by the planning director approving temporary signage in conformance with this chapter.

Time and temperature sign means a sign which displays the current time or outdoor temperature, or both, and which does not display any commercial advertising or identification.

Under-canopy sign means a sign perpendicular to the building face that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.

Uniform sign program (USP) means sign criteria established for design consistency among all signs within an integrated development.

Vehicle sign means any sign which is attached to and is an integral part of a motorized vehicle or bicycle used directly for the purpose of a particular business and not used primarily as a sign base.

Wall sign means a sign attached essentially parallel to and extending not more than 18 inches from the wall of a building with no copy on the sides or edges. This definition includes painted signs, individual letter, cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard.

Window sign means a sign installed or placed inside a window or upon the window or glass (including the glass of door) intended to be viewed from outside.

B.    Illustrations.







(Ord. 1185  2, 2013; Ord. 1005  2 (part), 2004; Ord. 831  3 (part), 1995)

17.59.030 General provisions.
A.    Signs Prohibited. The following signs are prohibited:

1.    Any nonexempt sign which is not authorized by a valid permit;

2.    Abandoned signs;

3.    Any sign located in a required clear-vision triangle;

4.    Signs within the public right-of-way. The only type of signs permitted in the public right-of-way are governmental or city-sponsored civic signs, or those which comply with Section 17.59.030(D), Special Provisions;

5.    Signs erected without the permission of the owner (or his/her agent) of the property on which the sign is located;

6.    Billboard signs and off-site directional or off-site identification signs except government, civic, real estate and other signage as provided in this chapter;

7.    Portable signs except those approved in the historic district zone or as otherwise provided in this chapter;

8.    Vehicle signs where the primary purpose of the motor vehicle relates to its use as a sign;

9.    Animated signs unless a special event sign permit is granted by the planning director or as otherwise provided for in this chapter;

10.    Roof signs erected and constructed on and/or over the roof line of a building and supported by the roof structure;

11.    Any sign which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or signal, or which makes use of words, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

B.    Permits Required. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, any sign placed, constructed, erected or modified on a lot or parcel within the city shall require permits and payment of fees prior to placement or erection of such signs in compliance with Section 17.59.050 of this chapter. No permit or fee is required for the repair or maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on painted, printed or changeable copy signs.

C.    Signs Exempt. The following signs shall be exempt from sign permits under this chapter, but may require a building permit according to the Folsom Municipal Code. Signs which exceed the numerical or square footage standards listed below may be approved by the planning commission upon approval of a variance with the finding that there exist special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, such that the strict application of this chapter deprives the property owner of privileges enjoyed by other property owners within the vicinity and under identical zoning classification:

1.    Any public notice or warning required by a federal, state, or local law or regulation;

2.    Governmental signs;

3.    Flags (civic);

4.    Incidental signs;

5.    City-sponsored civic signs for community entrance, identification, direction and information, located off-premises on private property or in the public right-of-way, with approval of an encroachment permit by the public works department; provided, that the sign(s) not exceed a 150 square foot sign area and a height limit of 15 feet;

6.    Commemorative wall signs, wall signs indicating the historical significance of a site or building, and building markers, not exceeding 4 square feet;

7.    House numbers identifying the address of a residence or building, less than 2 square feet;

8.    Name plates identifying the occupants of dwelling units, less than 2 square feet;

9.    Home occupation signs at the residence of currently permitted and licensed home occupations provided that the signage is less than 1 square foot;

10.    Signs prohibiting trespassing and advertising, as well as neighborhood watch and alarm signs;

11.    Garage/yard sale signs; provided, that there are no off-site signs, that only 1 sign shall be displayed on site with a maximum sign area of 6 square feet and a 4-foot height limit, and that such sign be displayed only during the time of the sale. Signs in the public right-of-way may be authorized pursuant to Section 17.59.030(D);

12.    Real estate signs for sale or lease of property; provided, that signs are located on private property, set back 5 feet from the public right-of-way unless authorized pursuant to Section 17.59.030(D), and out of any required clear vision triangle, with the following limitations:

a.    For residential property, 1 on-site sign with a maximum sign area of 6 square feet. Additionally, a maximum of 3 attached rider signs are permitted on each real estate sign identifying the agent, special feature and/or sales status. On weekends and holidays, open house signs as needed to direct traffic from major collector and arterial streets to the subject property. One sign may be placed for each change in direction to a maximum of 5 signs with a maximum sign area of 6 square feet.

b.    For commercial property, 1 on-site sign per street frontage with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet for parcels with less than 1 acre and 48 square feet for parcels larger than 1 acre with an 8-foot height limit.

13.    Noncommercial sign(s) on private property, not within or over a public right-of-way unless authorized pursuant to subsection D of this section, or over the roofline of any building and outside of any clear vision triangle as follows:

a.    For residential property, one or more signs are permitted on any one parcel of land with a maximum combined sign size of ten square feet and a maximum height of six feet. For noncommerical signs pertaining to an election to any public office or ballot measure or a noncommercial event or activity, one or more additional temporary signs which do not exceed a maximum sign size per sign of ten square feet and a maximum height of six feet are permitted, provided the signs are posted so that clear vision triangles or other lines of sight for pedestrians and vehicles are not impeded and the signs are posted during the durational period provided in this section;

b.    For commercial property, one or more signs are permitted on any one parcel of land provided all such signs do not exceed a maximum combined sign size of thirty-two square feet and a maximum height of ten feet. For noncommerical signs pertaining to an election to any public office or ballot measure or a noncommercial event or activity, one or more additional temporary signs are permitted with a maximum sign size per sign of thirty-two square feet, provided the signs are posted so that clear vision triangles or other lines of sight for pedestrians and vehicles are not impeded and the signs are posted during the durational period provided in this section;

c.    Noncommercial signs pertaining to an election to any public office or ballot measure or a noncommercial event or activity may be erected not earlier than sixty days prior to the election or noncommercial event or activity, and shall be removed within seven days following said election or noncommercial event or activity;

d.    For purposes of this section, measurement of sign size is the actual sign dimension. When both sides of the sign are printed upon, or when the sign is configured in a V or triangle shape, then such sign shall be counted as one sign and shall be permitted;

14.    Signs that are displayed during the course of and at the site of a political event or demonstration;

15.    Construction Signs. One on-site temporary sign identifying the names of individuals and/or firms connected with the construction of a project. The maximum sign area is 40 square feet and shall not exceed 10 feet in height, removed prior to issuance of occupancy permit;

16.    Project identification signs of current and pending development applications with a sign area of 40 square feet sign and a 10-foot height limit;

17.    Holiday decorations that do not contain any commercial message. Such noncommercial signage must be removed within 7 days following the holiday or event;

18.    Temporary community activity signs in designated banner sign locations throughout the city or as approved by the planning director, for a period not exceeding 30 days in duration;

19.    Vehicle signs attached to and an integral part of a motorized vehicle or bicycle which is used directly for the purpose of a particular business. This exemption includes authorized commercial signage on public transit vehicles such as buses and light rail cars as determined by the public works director. The total amount of signage shall not exceed 30 square feet on any 1 side of a vehicle and shall not exceed 12 square feet on the rear of a vehicle. Signage shall be located within designated areas as determined by the public works director;

20.    One under-canopy sign for each commercial business with a maximum sign area of 4 square feet, located perpendicular to the building face with an 8-foot vertical clearance above sidewalks and walkways. An encroachment permit issued by the public works department may be necessary if a sign projects into a public right-of-way;

21.    Window signs; provided, that all such commercial and incidental signs (both temporary and permanent) do not exceed a combined maximum of 25 percent of the total window area for each window. Total signage placed on any window may not include unused signage amounts allowable for other windows;

22.    Signs located in the interior of a building, mall, court, stadium, or enclosed lobby intended for interior viewing only;

23.    Directory signs internal to the site within an integrated development for commercial, business or industrial uses with a maximum sign area of 24 square feet and a 6-foot height limit;

24.    Time and temperature signs in nonresidential zones, not to exceed a maximum sign area of 12 square feet;

25.    Barber poles in nonresidential zones;

26.    Two menu/order board signs for each drive-through business; provided, that each sign not exceed a maximum 40 square foot sign area and an 8-foot height limit and be located adjacent to the drive;

27.    One on-site directional sign which does not promote or advertise a business, property or product is permitted for each one-way drive, drive aisle, and service or delivery entrance, located so as not to impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The area of each sign shall not exceed 4 square feet. The height of the sign including the pole or base shall not exceed 4 feet from grade to the top of sign. If the sign(s) contain a corporate logo or identification, the signs are calculated into the total allowable sign area for the use;

28.    Sign copy changes;

29.    Authorized commercial signs located on permanent structures (e.g., shelters and kiosks, excluding benches) at officially designated transit stops/stations as determined by the public works director. The total amount of signage within a shelter or kiosk shall not exceed 50 square feet and be located within a designated area as determined by the public works director;

30.    Noncommercial signs inside a vehicle or painted on a vehicle, provided the sign does not obstruct view or other requirements in the California Vehicle Code.

D.    Special Provisions for Signs in the Public Right-of-Way.

1.    Except as provided herein, setback for signs shall be measured from the right-of-way to the closest edge for the sign. For streets which are improved to a width less than the future right-of-way, setback for signs may be measured from the existing improvements meeting current city standards; provided, that a relocation agreement shall be recorded at the owners expense which guarantees that the property owner agrees to relocate the sign at his/her own expense to the required setback from the right-of-way at such time that the city widens (or causes to be widened) the improvements to the future right-of-way. For parcels where improvements are not complete to meet present city standards, setback shall be measured from that point which would abut city standard improvements if they were installed.

2.    Signs may be placed in the public right-of-way with approval of a sign permit pursuant to Section 17.59.050(A) and in compliance with the following provisions:

a.    Signs are allowed only on weekends (and holidays) between Friday evenings after 6:00 p.m. and removed no later than Monday mornings by 7:00 a.m. Removal includes any portion of the sign or supporting structure.

b.    Specific location approved by the planning and public works directors for pedestrian and traffic safety, and if located within a city-maintained lighting and landscaping district with approval of the lighting and landscaping district supervisor.

c.    The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance and other documentation or agreements assuming liability for the sign(s) within the public right-of-way to the satisfaction of the city attorney.

d.    The applicant shall agree to remove the sign(s) at the request of the city without payment of compensation or authorization for relocation.

E.    Nonconforming Signs.

1.    All nonconforming signs are deemed public nuisances, except for those signs satisfying the requirements of subsection (E)(2) of this section.

2.    No sign which was lawfully erected anywhere within the city shall be compelled to be removed, nor shall its customary maintenance or use be limited, without payment of compensation, as defined in the State Eminent Domain Law (Title 7, commencing with Section 1230.010 of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure), except as provided in this section. The compensation shall be paid to owner(s) of the sign and the owner(s) of the land upon which the sign is located.

3.    No nonconforming sign shall be, in any manner, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved without being made to comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter; however nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the painting, maintenance or repairing of such sign, including the face and changing of copy, except that such repairs shall not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of such sign.

4.    Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this section, those nonconforming off-site signs which meet all of the following requirements shall be removed without compensation:

a.    The sign is located within an area shown as residential or agricultural in the general plan or within an area zoned for residential or agricultural use.

b.    The sign is not located within 660 feet from the edge of the right-of-way of an interstate or primary highway with its copy visible from the highway, nor is placed or maintained beyond 660 feet from the edge of the right-of-way of an interstate or primary highway with the purpose of its message being read from the main traveled way.

c.    The sign is not required to be removed because of an overlay zone, combining zone, or any other special zoning district whose primary purpose is the removal or control of signs.

d.    The off-site sign is allowed to remain in existence for 7 years after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and after giving notice of the removal requirement. The off-site sign shall be deemed to be a public nuisance after the expiration of the 7-year amortization period, unless the sign was granted approval by the planning commission or city council, in which case the sign is not required to be removed.

5.    Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from entering into agreements for the relocation of existing nonconforming signs.

6.    If at any time any sign in existence or maintained prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter is destroyed by fire, accident, explosion or act of God to the extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost thereof, then, without further action of the city, such sign, from and after the date of such destruction, shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, the value of any sign shall be the estimated cost and replacement of the sign in kind as determined by the chief building official in accordance with applicable laws.

7.    a. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, a sign that was legally erected on private property and where such property is acquired by the city shall be deemed a legal nonconforming sign and need not be removed if all of the following criteria are met:

i.    The sign was for on-site advertising and the acquisition of the property by the city would convert the sign to off-site advertising.

ii.    No other reasonable alternative exists, as determined by the community development director, for placement of the sign on the remainder of the property on which the sign was located and that was not acquired by the city. Criteria to evaluate alternative locations includes, but is not limited to, visibility and interference with or proximity to other legally erected structures or signs.

iii.    No expansion of the size, height or structural design of the sign will be permitted; however, nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the painting, maintenance or repairing of such sign, including the face and changing sign copy.

iv.    The lighting of the sign shall be subject to approval by the community development director.

v.    The sign shall remain the property of the prior owner who shall be solely responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the sign, the terms of which shall be specified in an easement or other similar instrument to the satisfaction of the city attorney.

vi.    No advertising on the sign shall be permitted, except that which advertises businesses located on the remainder of property not acquired by the city.

vii.    The city consents to the continued presence of the sign.

b.    When the community development director finds that a sign meeting the criteria of subsection (E)(7)(a) cannot be located on the property acquired or controlled by the city and when the community development director finds that no reasonable alternative exists for the placement of the sign on the remainder of the property on which the sign was located and that was not acquired by the city, the sign may be relocated to property owned or controlled by the city which is immediately adjacent to the acquired property. In order for the community development director to approve the relocation of a sign to an adjacent parcel, the community development director must find that:

i.    No reasonably feasible alternatives exist for placement of the sign on the property acquired by the city;

ii.    No reasonably feasible alternatives exist for placement of the sign on the remainder of the property not acquired by the city;

iii.    Relocating the sign on an adjacent parcel will not impair the value or use of that parcel;

iv.    Relocating the sign will not grant the sign owner special privileges which the owner would not have enjoyed absent acquisition of the property by the city; and

v.    Placement of the sign on the adjacent property will not be detrimental to other neighboring properties or scenic view sheds.

Approval of the relocation of a sign pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the criteria set forth in subsection (E)(7)(a).

F.    Sign Inventory. Pursuant to Section 5491.1 of the California Business and Professions Code, the city shall commence an inventory and identification of illegal and abandoned signs within city limits within 6 months of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Additionally, within 60 days after the 6-month period, the city shall commence abatement of the identified preexisting nonconforming and abandoned on-premises signs.

G.    Construction and Maintenance.

1.    All signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed provisions of the city building code and the Uniform Sign Code relative to design and construction, structural integrity, connections and safety. Signs shall also comply with the provisions of the applicable electrical code and the additional construction standards set forth in this chapter.

2.    Each sign hereafter erected or remodeled shall bear, in a prominent location, clearly legible identification decals stating the firm or corporation responsible for its construction and erection. Electric signs shall be marked with amperages at the full-load output.

3.    Each sign shall have a specified sticker issued by the building department that identifies the permit number issued by the city, and such sticker must be visibly placed on the frame or outer perimeter of the sign.

4.    All signs shall be maintained in good condition including, but not limited to, maintenance of colors and materials, replacement of defective parts, painted, cleaned, and kept free of graffiti. Any portions of a sign in need of repair shall be repaired or contracted for repair within 30 days of notification by the enforcement officer. If the sign is not made to comply with adequate safety standards, the enforcement officer shall require its removal in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.59.080 of this chapter.

H.    Sign Removal. An owner of property on which a sign was constructed, painted, installed or maintained in conformance with a permit under this chapter, but for which the permit has lapsed, become void, or the amortization period of a nonconforming sign has expired, shall forthwith remove the sign without additional notice or action from the city.

I.    Abatement Obligation by Property Owner or Possessor of Property. It shall be the duty of both the owner of the property on which the violation is located and any person who is in possession of such property to at all times maintain such property that can be viewed by any person using the public right-of-way in compliance with signage requirements specified by this chapter. If the owner or person in possession of the property fails to maintain such property in said manner, violations may be summarily abated pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1185  3, 4, 2013; Ord. 1006  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 953  2, 2002; Ord. 858  14(1)(3), 1997; Ord. 831  3 (part), 1995)

17.59.040 Sign regulations.
A.    Signs for Commercial Uses. Unless otherwise exempt by this chapter, signs for retail and service commercial uses located in nonresidential zones require the planning directors approval of a sign permit for compliance with the following standards:

1.    Building Signs. The maximum allowable sign area for a business or entity is calculated as a ratio of the length of the primary building frontage. Types of building signage calculated into the total maximum sign area are wall, projecting and canopy signage as follows (square footage of exempt signage is not counted toward the maximum sign area):

a.    Maximum Sign Area. One and a half square feet of signage for each 1 lineal foot of primary building frontage up to a maximum of 150 square feet.

b.    Location. Building sign(s) may be placed on building frontages facing a street, public parking lot, or mall and shall not be located above the roof line. Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building wall and the sign length shall not exceed 75 percent of the building frontage.

c.    Projecting signs and canopies shall maintain an 8-foot vertical clearance from public walkways and may not project into any public right-of-way without approval of an encroachment permit by the public works department.

2.    Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs shall be set back 5 feet from the public right-of-way, located outside required clear vision triangles in a landscaped planting area. However, signs attached to a fence or soundwall may be located within the required setback area. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. Freestanding signs may be located in planter medians with approval of the public works and planning departments for traffic safety and clear visibility. Along arterial roads designated in the General Plan, freestanding signs shall be externally lit, nonilluminated, or internally illuminated with opaque (nontranslucent) backgrounds. Freestanding signs may include changeable copy; provided, that the sign area for changeable copy does not exceed 75 percent of the signs area. Corporate flags used to identify a business or entity shall be calculated into the maximum allowable freestanding sign area.

a.    Individual Buildings. Individual buildings not part of an integrated development may choose to substitute 1 free-standing monument sign for a portion of allowable building attached signage, not to exceed a maximum sign area of 24 square feet and a maximum height of 6 feet, including a maximum 2-foot tall base.

b.    Integrated Developments. Integrated developments with multiple businesses are permitted 1 freestanding monument sign (exclusive of allowable building attached signage) with a maximum sign area of 60 square feet and a 15-foot height limit to identify the name of the center or development, address, and tenants within the development.

B.    Signs for Business/Industrial/Hospital Uses. Unless otherwise exempt by this chapter, signs for professional office, business park, industrial, hospital, and other similar uses located in nonresidential zones require the planning directors approval of a sign permit for compliance with the following standards:

1.    Building Signs. Each business or entity is permitted 1 nonilluminated wall sign as follows:

a.    Maximum Sign Area. The allowable sign area is .5 square foot of signage for each 1 lineal foot of primary building frontage up to a maximum sign area of 50 square feet.

b.    Location. The wall sign shall not be located above the roof line or project more than 18 inches from the building wall. The sign length shall not exceed 75 percent of the building frontage.

2.    Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs shall be set back 5 feet from the public right-of-way, located outside the required clear vision triangle in a landscaped planting area. However, signs attached to a fence or soundwall may be located within the required setback area. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. Freestanding signs may be located in planter medians with approval of the public works and planning departments for traffic safety and clear visibility. Freestanding signs shall be externally lit, nonilluminated, or internally illuminated with opaque (non-translucent) background along arterial roads as designated in the General Plan. Freestanding signs may include changeable copy; provided, that the sign area for changeable copy does not exceed 75 percent of the total freestanding sign area. Corporate flags used to identify a business or entity shall be calculated into the maximum allowable freestanding sign area.

a.    Individual Buildings. Individual buildings not part of an integrated development are permitted 1 freestanding monument sign with a maximum sign area of 24 square feet and a maximum sign height of 6 feet, including a maximum 2-foot tall base.

b.    Integrated Developments. Integrated developments with multiple businesses or offices are permitted 1 freestanding monument sign with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet and a maximum sign height of 6 feet, including a maximum 2-foot tall base, to identify the name of the development, address, and tenants within the development.

C.    Signs for Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zones. Unless otherwise exempt by this chapter, signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones require the planning directors approval of a sign permit for compliance with the following standards:

1.    Building Signs. Each nonresidential use in a residential zone is permitted one nonilluminated or externally illuminated wall sign as follows:

a.    Maximum Sign Area. The allowable sign area is one-half square foot of signage for each one lineal foot of primary building frontage up to a maximum of fifty square feet.

b.    Location. The wall sign shall not be located above the roof line or project more than eighteen inches from the building wall. The sign length shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the building frontage.

2.    Freestanding Signs. Each nonresidential use in a residential zone (individual building or integrated development) is permitted one nonilluminated or externally illuminated freestanding monument sign as follows:

a.    Maximum Sign Area. The maximum sign area is twenty-four square feet.

b.    Maximum Height. The maximum sign height is six feet, including a maximum two-foot tall base.

c.    Location. Freestanding signs shall be set back five feet from property lines, located outside required clear vision triangles in a landscaped planting area. However, signs attached to a fence or soundwall may be located within the required setback area. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. Freestanding signs may be located in planter medians with approval of the public works and planning departments for traffic safety and clear visibility.

d.    Freestanding signs may include changeable copy; provided, that the sign area of the changeable copy does not exceed seventy-five percent of the total freestanding sign area.

e.    Design. The sign shall match the architectural style of the building.

f.    Corporate flags used to identify a business or entity shall be calculated into the maximum allowable freestanding sign area.

D.    Signs for Multifamily Residential Uses. Unless otherwise exempt by this chapter, signs for multifamily residential uses require the planning directors approval of a sign permit for compliance with the following standards:

1.    Building Signs. Each multifamily use is permitted one externally lit or nonilluminated wall sign as follows:

a.    Maximum Sign Area. The maximum sign area is forty square feet.

b.    Location. The wall sign shall not be located above the roof line or project more than eighteen inches from the building wall. The sign length shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the building frontage.

c.    Design. The sign shall match the architectural style of the complex.

2.    Freestanding Signs. Each multifamily use is permitted one freestanding sign as follows:

a.    Maximum Sign Area. The maximum sign area is thirty-two square feet.

b.    Maximum Height. The maximum sign height is six feet, including a maximum two-foot tall base. The sign shall not exceed the height of the structure to which it is attached.

c.    Location. The sign shall be set back five feet from property lines, located outside required clear vision triangles in a landscaped planting area. However, signs attached to a fence or soundwall may be located within the required setback area. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. Freestanding signs may be located in planter medians with approval of the public works and planning departments for traffic safety and clear visibility.

d.    Design. The sign shall match the architectural style of the complex.

e.    Corporate flags used to identify a business or entity shall be calculated into the maximum allowable freestanding sign area.

E.    Freeway Signs. In addition to signage permitted in subsection A of this section, the following section applies to signs for nonresidential uses located directly adjacent to and intended to be viewed from Highway 50. Freeway signs are subject to Caltrans approval as well as approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission.

1.    Building Signs. One additional wall sign is permitted on the building frontage facing the freeway as follows:

a.    Maximum Sign Area. The maximum sign area is one and one-half square feet of signage for every one lineal foot of building frontage facing the freeway, not to exceed a maximum one hundred fifty square feet.

b.    Location. The wall sign shall not be located above the roof line or project more than eighteen inches from the building wall. The sign length shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the building frontage.

c.    Letter Height. Letter height maximums for freeway visible wall signs shall comply with the following table.

Freeway-Visible Wall Sign
Letter Height Calculation

Distance of sign from nearest freeway lane

Maximum
letter height

Less than 100 feet

18 inches

100200 feet

24 inches

200300 feet

36 inches

300500 feet

48 inches

500+ feet

60 inches

2.    Freestanding Signs. Each integrated development located adjacent to the freeway is permitted one freestanding sign facing the freeway, consistent with the following provisions:

a.    Maximum Sign Area. The maximum sign area is three hundred square feet with no more than six panels for on-site tenant identification. Individual letters shall have a maximum height of three and one-half feet (forty-two inches).

b.    Maximum Height. The maximum height of the sign shall be eighteen feet, measured from the crown of the adjacent highway.

c.    Location. The sign shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from property lines, located outside required clear vision triangles in a landscaped planting area. However, signs attached to a fence or soundwall may be located within the required setback area. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. Freestanding signs may be located in planter medians with the approval of the public works and planning departments for traffic safety and clear visibility.

d.    Design of the sign shall be compatible with the architectural theme of the business or center.

e.    Freestanding signs may include changeable copy; provided, that the sign area for changeable copy does not exceed seventy-five percent of the signs area.

f.    Sign copy shall be made of routed letters, so that internal illumination is from behind letters and/or logos only, not the background.

g.    Corporate flags used to identify a business or entity shall be calculated into the maximum allowable freestanding sign area.

2.5.    Animated Signs. A conditional use permit for an animated freestanding freeway sign on property abutting U.S. Highway 50 may be approved when the proposal involves the removal of more than one existing billboard sign along Highway 50 or a scenic corridor as defined in this chapter. The sign shall be an authorized billboard within the current city limits. In order to grant approval of the conditional use permit, the planning commission shall find that the proposal results in a net decrease in the number and sign area of billboard signs along U.S. Highway 50 or a scenic corridor within the city and that the property on which the animated sign is located has no other freestanding sign as permitted in subsection (E)(2) of this section. Where a freestanding sign already exists on the property on which the animated sign is to be located, the project shall be conditioned to require removal of the sign. The maximum height of the animated freeway sign shall be no higher than the highest billboard sign being removed and shall not have a greater sign area than the largest billboard being removed. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, both on-site and off-site commercial messages shall be permitted on animated signs.

3.    Off-Site Commercial Signs.

Off-site billboard signs are permitted on the U.S. Highway 50 corridor if all the following criteria are met:

a.    The billboard sign must advertise a retail commercial center which itself does not have freeway frontage and an existing sign visible to U.S. Highway 50 and the property on which the retail commercial center is located north of U.S. Highway 50 and within one thousand feet of U.S. Highway 50.

b.    The billboard sign may not advertise a particular store or product, instead must refer to the retail commercial center.

c.    The billboard sign must comply with all applicable codes and regulations promulgated by Caltrans, including, but not limited to the Outdoor Advertising Act.

d.    The billboard sign shall not exceed twenty-five feet in height and twenty feet in width. The total sign area (for a single-side of the billboard sign) shall not exceed three hundred square feet in area.

e.    No billboard sign may be erected without approval of a conditional use permit, a building permit and an outdoor advertising permit issued by Caltrans.

f.    No billboard sign may be located within five hundred feet of another freestanding freeway oriented monument or billboard sign.

g.    The design, colors and lighting of any billboard sign erected pursuant to this section shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. No changes to a sign may be made without planning commission approval. The design, colors and lighting shall be designed to be consistent with the surrounding topography, trees and open space corridor along U.S. Highway 50.

h.    Qualifying retail commercial centers are limited to one off-site billboard sign.

F.    Subdivision Signs. This subsection includes provisions for both temporary and permanent on-site and off-site subdivision signage. Subdivision signs require approval of a sign permit by the planning director, in compliance with the provisions below:

1.    On-Site Signs.

a.    Entrance Signs. One nonilluminated freestanding sign is permitted for each subdivision street entrance as follows:

i.    Maximum Sign Area. The maximum sign area is 24 square feet.

ii.    Maximum Height. The maximum sign height is 4 feet, unless mounted on an entry wall or soundwall, in which case 2 signs are permitted with a 6-foot height limit.

iii.    Location. Freestanding entrance sign(s) shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the public right-of-way, located outside of required clear vision triangles in a landscaped planting area. Signs attached to a fence or soundwall may be located within the required setback area. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. Signs may be located in planter medians with the approval of public works and planning departments for traffic safety and clear sign visibility.

b.    Subdivision Flags. New subdivisions can have a maximum of 10 flags on model home lots, sales offices or at the entryway along the subdivision frontage as follows:

i.    Maximum Flag Size. The maximum flag size shall not exceed 24 square feet.

ii.    Maximum Height. The maximum pole height is 20 feet.

iii.    Location. Flags must be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the right-of-way and outside of all required clear vision triangles. Location of flags within any corridor of a lighting and landscaping district requires approval of the citys lighting and landscaping supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit.

iv.    Flags must be removed when the last home within a subdivision is sold and must be maintained in good repair to the satisfaction of the planning director.

c.    Temporary Subdivision Identification Sign(s). One nonilluminated identification sign is permitted per project for projects which are less than and including 5 acres in size. For projects larger than 5 acres, the applicant may request 1 on-site sign for each project frontage with entrance(s), up to a maximum total of 3 signs.

i.    Maximum Sign Area. The maximum sign area is 40 square feet.

ii.    Maximum Height. The maximum sign height is 10 feet.

iii.    Location. Freestanding signs must be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the right-of-way and outside of all required clear vision triangles. Any on-site subdivision identification sign located within a lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit.

iv.    Signs are to be removed when the last home within a subdivision is sold.

d.    Joint-Use Subdivision Directional Signs for Master Planned or Specific Planned Communities. In order to allow on-site direction within a large subdivision to those builders/villages which do not have frontage on major streets, on-site joint-use directional signs may be approved to identify and provide direction for these builders/villages on other parcels within the same subdivision. Number and location of such signs to be established by the planning director with the approval of a sign permit in compliance with the following conditions:

i.    Approval. The planning director may grant approval of a sign permit for on-site joint-use subdivision signs, which provide directional assistance on the project site only, for a limited 5-year period. One year extension(s) may also be granted by the planning director if requested prior to the expiration date on the permit.

ii.    Sign Area and Dimensions. The sign area shall be a maximum of 48 square feet with a 10-foot maximum sign height, an 8-foot maximum sign width, and a 3-foot base required for ground clearance. The sign shall have a maximum of 4 subdivision nameplates per sign face.

iii.    Location. On-site directional signs within master planned or specific planned communities shall be located along major arterials and collectors, no closer than 1,000 feet to any other such sign in the same direction on any 1 roadway. Joint-use signs shall be set back 5 feet from the public right-of-way, unless authorized pursuant to Section 17.59.030(D), and shall not be located within any required clear vision triangle. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit.

iv.    Nameplates. Individual subdivision nameplates on a joint-use sign require an annual sign permit approved by the planning director. Sign copy is limited to the name of the builder, project identification, and a directional arrow. Sign area of nameplates shall be a maximum of 12 square feet. Letter height shall not be less than 8 inches.

v.    Responsible Party, Attachments. All sign(s) to display the name, address and phone number of the company responsible for the placement of the sign(s). Signs shall not be displayed with any lights, balloons or any other items attached.

2.    Off-Site Signs. Individual builders or subdividers have the option of choosing 1 of the following types of off-site signage programs in compliance with listed provisions.

a.    Joint-use subdivision directional signs as follows:

i.    Approval. The planning director may grant approval of a sign permit for joint-use subdivision directional signs, which provide directional assistance only, for a maximum 5-year period. One-year extension(s) may also be granted by the planning director if requested prior to the expiration date on the permit.

ii.    Sign Design and Dimensions. Sign design shall be consistent with the city-wide standard illustrated in Section 17.59.020(B), Illustrations. The sign area is 96 square feet per sign face (2-sided) with a 15-foot sign height, an 8-foot sign width, and a 3-foot base required for ground clearance. The sign shall have 6 subdivision nameplates per sign face. Colors and materials to be approved by the planning director.

iii.    Location. Off-site joint-use directional signs shall be located along major arterials, no closer than 1,000 feet to any other such sign in the same direction on any one roadway. However, the planning director may approve more than 1 subdivision sign at any corner at the intersection of 2 major arterial streets. Joint-use signs shall be set back 5 feet from the public right-of-way, unless authorized pursuant to Section 17.59.030(D), and shall not be located within any required clear vision triangle. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit.

iv.    Nameplates. Individual subdivision nameplates on a joint-use sign require an annual sign permit approved by the planning director; provided, that each builder does not exceed a maximum of 8 nameplate locations throughout the city. Sign copy is limited to the builder and project identification and a directional arrow. Nameplate dimensions shall be 8 feet wide and 1.5 feet tall with a sign area of 12 square feet. Letter height shall not be less than 8 inches. If a joint-use sign advertises 3 or fewer builders, each builder may occupy the area of 2 subdivision nameplates until a fourth space is leased, at which time all 3 builders shall modify their signs to the standard nameplate dimensions.

v.    Responsible Party, Attachments. All sign(s) to display the name, address and phone number of the company responsible for the placement of the sign(s). Signs shall not be displayed with any lights, balloons or any other items attached to them, nor shall such signs be visible from freeway or along the on-/off-ramps.

vi.    Removal. Joint use subdivision signs shall be permanently removed within 60 days after the sign advertises no subdivisions or within 10 days after the expiration of the sign permit. Nameplates shall be removed from all joint-use signs when the last home within the subdivision is sold.

vii.    Deposit. A $500 deposit or other financial security as approved by the city attorney is required for each off-site sign. The deposit shall be made to the city prior to issuance of building permits as an incentive to take the signs down at the expiration of the permit. The funds will be returned when the sign is removed or will be used by the city to remove the signs.

b.    Subdivision Directional Signs for Master Planned or Specific Planned Subdivisions. Large subdivisions with multiple builders or villages may request a sign program catered to the overall project design for the master/specific planned subdivision as follows:

i.    Approval. The planning director may grant approval of a sign permit for off-site subdivision signs which provide planned community identification and directional assistance for a maximum 5-year period. One- year extension(s) may be granted by the planning director if requested prior to the permit expiration date.

ii.    Location. Signs shall be located along major arterials, and all signs for any particular project must be separated by a minimum distance of 1,000 feet. However, the planning director may approve more than 1 subdivision sign at any corner at the intersection of 2 major arterial streets. Signs may be approved only at decision-making points deemed necessary to provide direction to the subdivision, up to a maximum of 6 off-site sign locations. Joint-use signs shall be set back 5 feet from the public right-of-way, unless authorized pursuant to Section 17.59.030(D), and shall not be located within any required clear vision triangle. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit.

iii.    Sign Design and Dimensions. Sign design shall be approved by the planning director on a case-by-case basis consistent with the following parameters. Sign area shall be a maximum of 40 square feet per sign face to identify the name of the overall subdivision, exclusive of individual nameplates. Sign height shall be a maximum of 10 feet, with an 8-foot maximum width, and a 3-foot base required for ground clearance.

iv.    Maximum Number of Nameplates. Individual builders within the master planned or specific planned subdivision are permitted a maximum of 8 subdivision nameplate locations throughout the city, including off-site subdivision signs erected for the overall development as described herein, which are exclusive of individual nameplates identifying the builders within the master planned or specific planned subdivision.

v.    Responsible Party, Attachments. All sign(s) to display the name, address and phone number of the company responsible for the placement of the sign(s). Signs shall not be displayed with any lights, balloons or any other items attached to them, nor shall such signs be visible from freeway or along the on-/off-ramps.

vi.    Removal. Off-site subdivision directional signs for master planned or specific planned subdivisions shall be permanently removed within 60 days after the last home in the subdivision is sold or within 10 days after the expiration of the sign permit.

vii.    Deposit. A $500 deposit or other financial security as approved by the city attorney is required for each off-site sign. The deposit shall be made to the city prior to issuance of building permits as an incentive to take the signs down at the expiration of the permit. The funds will be returned when the sign is removed or will be used by the city to remove the signs.

c.    Temporary Weekend Directional Sign(s). Each subdivision, builder or property owner is permitted a maximum of 25 weekend directional signs in compliance with the following provisions:

i.    Approval. Temporary sign programs for weekend directional signage are subject to approval of a sign permit by the planning director for a 6-month period of time. The applicant shall submit, as a requirement of the application, a map identifying the proposed location for each temporary directional sign, property owners authorization, contact person for placement and removal of signs, as well as a security deposit, in the amount of $200, provided to the city as guarantee of funds to cover costs associated with removal and disposal of sign(s) found in violation of this section.

ii.    Maximum Sign Area. Maximum sign area shall be limited to 4 square feet to advertise the name of the builder, project identification, and a directional arrow.

iii.    Maximum Sign Height. The maximum height of the sign is 4 feet from finished grade.

iv.    Location and Placement. Signs shall not be placed within a required clear vision triangle, shall not be displayed on private or publicly owned fences, utility poles or walls, and shall not be visible from freeway or along the on-/off-ramps. Weekend directional signs may be located within the public right-of-way pursuant to Section 17.59.030(D). Sign placement is limited to 1 sign per direction at any one intersection. The placement of a maximum of 1 sign per project may be approved at points of turn, but all signs for any particular project must be separated by a minimum distance of 500 feet. Any sign located within the lighting and landscaping district corridor requires approval from the citys lighting and landscaping district supervisor prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit.

v.    Signs are allowed only on weekends (and holidays) between Friday evenings after 6 p.m. and removed no later than Monday mornings by 7 a.m. Removal includes any portion of the sign or supporting structure.

vi.    Weekend directional signs for subdivisions shall not be displayed with any lights, balloons or any other items attached to them.

vii.    All sign(s) shall display the name, address and phone number of the company responsible for the placement of the sign(s).

viii.    Signs shall be designed to ensure that sign face(s) are securely fastened to the supporting structure and that the supporting structure is securely fastened to the ground.

ix.    Removal. Permanently removed when the last home within the subdivision is sold. Any sign found in violation of any provision herein may be removed by city personnel after compliance with the procedures set forth in Section 17.59.080 of this chapter.

x.    Any subdivision sign program found to be in violation of any provision herein may be grounds for the denial of future renewal permits.

G.    Humbug/Willow Creek Parkway Signage. Signage related to surrounding and adjacent land uses shall not be oriented towards the Humbug/Willow Creek Parkway. Signage criteria for information or interpretive signs within the parkway is as follows:

1.    Sign material, color and design should reflect the natural setting of the site. Whenever possible, natural materials such as wood, granite and river rock shall be used.

2.    Large, light-colored sign faces invite graffiti and are not permitted.

3.    For simplicity, continuity and ease of communication, signs shall employ symbols where appropriate for bike trails, rest rooms, hiking trail designations.

4.    In most cases within the parkway, illumination of signs could adversely affect the environmental qualities of the parkway and is therefore not permitted. An exception might include a minor, shielded, lighting source at an emergency call box, a trail-head near an intersection, or at a bike tunnel.

H.    Signage in Scenic Corridors. Applicants who wish to have nonexempt signs erected visible from a scenic corridor are required to obtain a sign permit from the planning director in compliance with provisions of this chapter.

1.    The following are designated as scenic corridors in the city:

i.    Greenback Lane (east of Madison Ave. to Rainbow Bridge);

ii.    Green Valley Road (from East Natoma Street to the city limits);

iii.    Blue Ravine Road;

iv.    East Bidwell (from Blue Ravine Road east to the city limits);

v.    Prairie City Road;

vi.    Folsom Boulevard;

vii.    Folsom-Auburn Road.

2.    Signs in the scenic corridor shall comply with the following special provisions and other applicable sections of this chapter:

a.    Signs shall be externally lit, nonilluminated, or internally illuminated with opaque (nontranslucent) backgrounds so that the lighting comes through the letter or logo only. Type and level of illumination must be approved by the planning director to prevent excessive glare along scenic corridors.

b.    Sign design shall match or complement the color and architecture of the building.

I.    Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are permitted on the site of the business to which the message pertains with approval of a temporary sign permit issued by the planning director (unless otherwise exempt in this chapter). Temporary commercial signs include grand opening, special product, sale or event advertising. Such temporary promotional signs shall not be freestanding, moving or illuminated.

1.    Maximum Area. Each business or entity is permitted one or more temporary signs with a combined maximum sign area of one hundred square feet. Additionally, businesses or entities with more than one hundred lineal feet of primary building frontage are permitted an additional two square feet of signage for each lineal foot of primary building frontage (in excess of one hundred lineal feet), up to a total maximum sign area of two hundred square feet.

2.    Location. Temporary sign(s) must be attached to the main building or wall/fence, but not located above the roof line or height of wall/fence structure for the business advertising.

3.    Time. Each business is allowed a maximum of two weeks temporary promotional signage a quarter/season (four times a year) or a total of eight weeks per calendar year, but not more than four consecutive weeks (twenty-eight consecutive days). (Ord. 1101  2, 2007; Ord. 1005  1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1006  2 (part), 2003; Ord. 890  3(1), 1998; Ord. 858  14(5), 1997; Ord. 831  3 (part), 1995)

17.59.050 Permits and procedures.
A.    Sign Permit.

1.    Application. The sign user or authorized representative shall submit a sign permit application to the planning department upon forms provided for that purpose, including but not limited to the following:

a.    Four sets of sign plans illustrating all permanent attached and freestanding signage proposed which is calculated into the total maximum allowable signage for the parcel or business (including the number of signs, location, size, type, colors and materials, illumination, and construction details of proposed signage);

b.    The sign plan shall illustrate compliance with any applicable Uniform Signage Program and any other sections of this chapter.

2.    Application Fee. The city council may establish a fee for the processing of an application under the provisions of this chapter by resolution, which may be amended from time to time.

3.    Application Review. Except as otherwise provided herein, the planning, inspections and permitting director shall review and approve, conditionally approve or deny the sign permit application based on conformance with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable uniform sign program. The historic district commission shall review and approve, conditionally approve or deny sign permit applications for signs to be located within the boundaries of the historic district based on conformance with the provisions of this title and any applicable uniform sign program. Applications shall be approved unless the planning, inspections and permitting director, or historic district commission finds in writing that:

a.    The applicant has failed to provide sufficient or adequate plans, information or other data necessary to allow determinations respecting compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

b.    The proposed signage will violate provisions of this chapter, state or federal laws, and such violation cannot be resolved by the imposition of conditions pursuant to this section.

4.    Notice of Denial. Written notice of the planning directors decision shall be given to the applicant within seven days of the decision.

5.    Conditions. The planning director may at the time of approval impose such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, or state or federal laws.

6.    Term of Permit. The sign permit shall be effective eleven days from the date of issuance, unless an appeal has been filed, and shall remain in force indefinitely unless suspended or revoked or if installation of the sign is not completed within six months from the date of issuance of such permit. The planning director may grant one ninety-day extension if work has been commenced but not completed.

7.    Building Permit Required. Prior to installation of a sign, an applicant shall first obtain any required building permits for the sign.

8.    Amendment of Permit. Any proposed changes to the sign(s) shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director in the manner and pursuant to the standards of the citys current sign ordinance.

B.    Uniform Signage Program (USP). Each integrated development with multiple tenants shall submit a Uniform Signage Program (USP) application for approval by the planning director. The uniform signage program shall include the process for sign review by the landlord and incorporate the citys requirements for obtaining a sign permit, and shall also include sign criteria for building-attached and freestanding signs for tenants, anchors, freestanding buildings and the integrated development itself. Uniform signage programs shall be consistent with the standards set forth in this chapter.

1.    Application. The developer, landlord or authorized representative for integrated developments shall submit a uniform signage program application to the planning department upon forms provided for that purpose.

2.    Application Fee. The city council may establish a fee for the processing of an application under the provisions of this chapter by resolution, which may be amended from time to time.

3.    Application Review. The planning director shall review, approve, conditionally approve or deny the uniform signage program applications based on compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. Applications shall be approved unless the planning director finds in writing that:

a.    The applicant has failed to provide sufficient or adequate plans, information or other data necessary to allow determinations respecting compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

b.    The proposed signage will violate provisions of this chapter, state or federal laws, and such violation cannot be resolved by the imposition of conditions pursuant to this section;

c.    The uniform signage program proposed for the integrated development does not establish standards for consistency of sign type, location, logo and/or letter height, lines of copy, illumination, construction details, and color and material of signs within that development.

4.    Notice of Denial. Written notice of the planning directors decision shall be given to the applicant within seven days of the decision.

5.    Conditions. The planning director may at the time of approval impose such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, or state or federal laws.

6.    Permits Required. Each tenant within an integrated development shall submit a sign permit application consistent with the uniform signage program to the planning director for review and approval according to subsection A of this section. Additionally, prior to installation of any sign(s), the applicant shall first obtain any required building permits for the sign(s).

7.    Binding Effect. After approval of a uniform signage program, no sign shall be displayed except in conformance with such plan and this chapter. The uniform signage program shall be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such plan and any provisions of this chapter, the chapter shall control.

8.    Amendment of Uniform Signage Program. Any proposed changes in the program after approval shall be submitted to the planning director for review. No person shall undertake activity which does not conform with the uniform signage program, unless approved by the planning director. The planning director shall review any proposed changes in the manner and pursuant to the standards of the citys current sign ordinance.

C.    Temporary Sign Permit. Temporary signs not otherwise exempt from or prohibited by this chapter must obtain a temporary sign permit from the planning director.

1.    Application. The sign user or authorized representative shall submit a temporary sign permit application to the planning department upon a form provided for that purpose, including but not limited to the following: explanation of number, location, size and promotional period requested.

2.    Application Fee. The city council may establish a fee for the processing of an application under the provisions of this chapter by resolution, which may be amended from time to time.

3.    Application Review. The planning director shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny the temporary sign permit application based on conformance with the provisions of this subsection, Section 17.59.040(J), and other applicable provisions in this chapter.

4.    Conditions. The planning director may at the time of approval impose such conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, or state or federal laws.

5.    Term Limit. The temporary sign permit shall be effective for the dates identified on the approved permit consistent with this chapter.

6.    Renewal of Temporary Sign Permit. A request for renewal for a temporary sign permit may be submitted to the planning director prior to the end of the period for which the temporary sign permit was approved. The planning director may approve a renewal request provided all applicable renewal fees have been paid, and the planning director finds the sign(s) to be in conformance with the standards set forth in Section 17.59.040(J) and other applicable provisions of this chapter.

D.    Special Event Sign Permit. Any person or entity requesting short-term use of temporary animated signs not otherwise permitted in this chapter, including but not limited to beacons, pennants, freestanding banners, or inflatables used as signs, for a special event, shall apply for a temporary special event sign permit.

1.    Application. The sign user or authorized representative shall submit a special event sign permit application to the planning department upon a form provided for that purpose including, but not limited to the following: explanation of sign type, number, location, size and promotional period requested.

2.    Application Fee. The city council may establish a fee for the processing of an application under the provisions of this chapter by resolution, which may be amended from time to time.

3.    Application Review. The planning director shall review, approve, conditionally approve or deny the special event sign permit application for community-wide events, grand openings, and other similar events as determined by the planning director to be of a community-wide benefit; provided, that the sign(s) not be a roof sign and comply with traffic safety standards. No entity or integrated development may be issued more than 2 special event sign permits per calendar year.

4.    Conditions. The planning director may at the time of approval impose such conditions as are necessary to ensure the protection of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.

5.    Term Limit. The special event sign permit shall be effective for the dates identified on the approved permit and shall not exceed a maximum of 14 consecutive calendar days.

E.    Use Permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if a particular use in any land use district requires the issuance of a use permit, the planning commission shall, in granting such permit, specify and establish the size, location, number and conditions of signs to be erected in conjunction with the proposed land use and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall exempt such signs from the requirements of subsection A of this section, Sign Permit. However, in addition to other standards specified, the planning directors action shall be consistent with the provisions of the use permit.

F.    Planned Development Permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if a particular use in any land use district requires the issuance of a planned development permit, the planning commission shall, in granting such permit, specify and establish the size, location, number and conditions of signs to be erected and maintained in conjunction with the proposed project, in compliance with Chapter 17.38 and the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall exempt such signs from the requirements of subsection A of this section, Sign Permit. However, in addition to other standards specified, the planning directors action shall be consistent with the provisions of the planned development permit.

G.    Appeals.

1.    Appeals. If the applicant or other person whose property rights may be affected is dissatisfied with any determination made by the planning director, such person may appeal to the planning commission. Decisions of the planning commission, when sitting as an appeal body, may not be appealed to the city council.

Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the specific reasons therefor and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the planning director not later than 10 calendar days after the date of the action being appealed. If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of the action against which the complaint is made shall be deemed to have been waived.

2.    Appeal Fee. The city council shall by resolution adopt and, from time to time, amend a fee for the filing of appeals. Such fee shall be for the sole purpose of defraying costs incurred for the administration of appeals. The fee for an appeal shall be paid at the time of and with the filing of an appeal. No appeal shall be deemed valid unless the prescribed fee has been paid.

3.    Appeal Hearing. After the filing of an appeal within the time and in the manner prescribed herein, a hearing shall be scheduled before the appeal body within 30 days of the filing of the appeal for the purpose of determining whether the appeal should be granted. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be served upon the appellant not later than 10 days preceding the date of the hearing.

4.    Action on Appeals. The appeal body shall review the entire proceeding(s) relating to the decision being appealed, de novo, and may make any order it deems just and equitable, including the approval of the application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appeal body shall prepare a written decision which either grants or denies the appeal and which contains findings of fact and conclusions. The written decision, including a copy thereof, shall be filed with the city clerk. The clerk shall serve such decision on the applicant and the party filing the appeal. The decision of the appeal body shall become final upon the date of the filing and service with respect to any appeal.

5.    Notices. Any notice authorized or required by this chapter shall be deemed to have been filed, served and effective for all purposes on the date when it is personally delivered in writing to the party to whom it is directed or deposited in the United States mail, first-class postage prepaid, and addressed to the party to whom it is directed.

Whenever a provision in this chapter requires a public hearing to be conducted, notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published at least once not later than 10 calendar days in advance of the date of commencement of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation which is published within the county. The same type of notice shall also be served on each permittee whose permit may be affected by the action taken at the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. 890  3(2), 1998; Ord. 831  3 (part), 1995)

17.59.060 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The director of planning, inspections and permitting and the code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this chapter.

D.    Confiscation and Fees. Any sign installed or placed on public property, including signs within the public right-of-way that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. When noncommercial signs related to election issues are confiscated by city staff from public property, staff shall notify the campaign of record within seven days of confiscating the sign and afford the campaign the opportunity to retrieve the sign. If the campaign has not retrieved the sign within ten days of notice, the city may dispose of the signs. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign, including any administrative staff costs and attorneys fees incurred to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 1185  5, 2013; Ord. 858  14(5), 1997)

17.59.070 Penalties.
The penalties set forth in Section 17.03.020 of this title shall not apply and the following penalties shall be applicable for any violation of this chapter:

A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(2). (Ord. 858  14(6), 1997)

17.59.080 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting and the code enforcement officer shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct or stop order shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. The time to correct any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be no less than 24 hours and no more than 14 calendar days. In determining the appropriate length of time to allow for correction of the violation, the code enforcement officer shall consider whether the sign is temporary or permanent.

If an event is advertised by the sign and the event has occurred or will occur within 24 hours, no notice to correct shall be required, and a notice of administrative violation may be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.027 of Chapter 1.09, Title 1 of the Folsom Municipal Code. Signs advertising an event that has occurred or will occur within 24 hours that are given a notice of administrative violation are a Level A violation, as defined in Section 1.09.012(A)(1).

C.    A notice to abate may be served at the same time as the service of either a notice to correct or notice of administrative violation. The notice to abate shall be served in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 1.10, and the city shall be entitled to recover all costs and expenses of abatement as set forth therein.

D.    If a sign has been confiscated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall not be returned until all administrative penalties, fines, costs, expenses and other charges are reimbursed in full to the city.

E.    If it is determined that the sign was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that the owner has not subsequently acquiesced in the presence of such sign, the costs of administration or removal of the sign shall not be assessed against the property upon which the sign exists, and the city shall make no other attempts to collect such costs from such owner of the land. (Ord. 858  14(7), 1997)

Chapter 17.60
USE PERMITS
Sections:

17.60.010    Issuance conditions.

17.60.020    Application and fee.

17.60.030    Public hearings.

17.60.040    Action by planning commission.

17.60.050    Revocation.

17.60.060    Expiration and extension.

17.60.070    Appeal procedure.

17.60.080    Other provisions.

17.60.090    Exceptions.

17.60.100    Requirements for temporary use permits.

Prior legislation: Ords. 273, 323 and 466.

17.60.010 Issuance conditions.
Use permits, which may be revocable, conditional or valid for a term period, may be issued by the planning commission, or within the historic district by the historic district commission, for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title. Guarantees to ensure compliance with terms and conditions may be required by the commission. (Ord. 890  3(3), 1998: prior code  3122.01)

17.60.020 Application and fee.
Application for a use permit shall be made to the community development department in writing, on a form prescribed by the department, and shall be accompanied by plans and elevations necessary to show details of the proposed land use activities on the subject property. The application shall be accompanied by a processing fee set by the city council for either a minor use permit or a major use permit. All use permits are minor unless otherwise designated as major under the commercial use table in Section 17.22.030(E). (Ord. 1169  4, 2012: Prior code  3122.02)

17.60.030 Public hearings.
The planning commission may hold a public hearing on any such application after having given notice as provided in the State Planning Law. (Prior code  3122.03)

17.60.040 Action by planning commission.
The findings of the planning commission shall be that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use or building applied for will or will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use, or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood, or to the general welfare of the city. (Prior code  3122.04)

17.60.050 Revocation.
In any case where the conditions to the granting of a use permit have not been, or are not, complied with, the planning commission shall give notice to the permittee of intention to revoke such permit at least ten days prior to a hearing thereon. Following such hearing the planning commission may revoke such permit. (Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982: prior code  3122.05)

17.60.060 Expiration and extension.
A.    In any case where the use permit has not been exercised within the time limit set by the planning commission or within one year if no specific time limit has been set, then without further action the permit shall be null and void. The permit is deemed exercised upon issuance of a building permit or actual use of the site for the permitted use if no building permit is required.

B.    The planning commission may extend the use permit for a period or periods not to exceed twelve months upon receipt of a written request accompanied by a fee, as may be established by resolution of the city council, and other information as deemed necessary by the planning director.

C.    1. A use permit, or any portion thereof, shall be deemed to have been abandoned and therefore expired and terminated if the use granted in the permit is discontinued for a period of twelve consecutive months or longer. For purposes of this section, a use is discontinued if the activity or activities permitted under the use permit have ceased on the premises.

2.    Whenever the city determines that the use permitted under a lawfully issued use permit has been discontinued, the city shall provide the use permit holder and the owner of the property on which the use is located with a notice that the use has been discontinued and the date on which the city has determined that such use is, or will be, deemed abandoned. The notice shall inform the permit holder and the property owner that they have a right to a hearing, and that if no hearing is requested within fifteen calendar days of the notice, the use permit, or any portion thereof, will terminate due to abandonment. Notice shall be provided by first class mail at the property address where the use was conducted, the last known address for the holder of the use permit, and to the property owner of record as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

3.    Failure to submit a timely hearing request to the director of community development department shall constitute a waiver of any hearing on the determination that the use has been abandoned, and the termination of the use permit, or any portion thereof, shall be final and not appealable. The hearing request shall set forth the reasons and good cause as to why the use permit should not be deemed abandoned and terminated.

4.    Upon receipt of a hearing request, the matter shall be placed on the earliest available planning commission meeting agenda unless withdrawn by the individual making the request. The use permit shall not terminate during pendency of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the permit holder, the property owner (if the permit holder is not the property owner), and to all property owners within three hundred feet of the subject property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to any other persons who have filed a written request for notice, with such notices mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing. Instead of using the equalized assessment roll, records of the county assessor or tax collector may be used if those records contain more recent information than the information contained on the equalized assessment roll as authorized by Government Code Section 65091.

5.    The planning commission shall determine, based on oral and written evidence presented at the hearing, whether the use permitted under a use permit has been discontinued or whether such use has remained active during the time period provided in this section.

6.    If the planning commission finds that the use permitted under a use permit has been discontinued, the use permit shall terminate upon conclusion of the hearing notwithstanding any attempt to revive the discontinued use during the pendency of the hearing.

7.    The commission may, in its discretion upon a showing of substantial good cause, reinstate a use permit terminated under this section if both of the following conditions are met and may impose reasonable conditions for reuse of the premises:

a.    Discontinuance of the use was unrelated to the permittees financial inability to continue with such use (e.g., change of ownership in the permitted business or property, remodel/reconstruction activities, natural disaster, and circumstances beyond the permittees control); and

b.    Good faith efforts were made by the permittee or the property owner in furtherance of continuing the permitted use during the time period leading to the termination of the use permit. (Ord. 1168  2, 2012; Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982)

17.60.070 Appeal procedure.
Any person dissatisfied with any action of the planning commission on a request for a use permit may appeal therefrom to the city council, at any time within ten days after the rendition of the decision of the planning commission. The appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal with the planning director. Upon filing of the notice of appeal, and payment of a filing fee, the planning director must, within ten days, transmit to the city clerk all exhibits and documents on file, together with the finding of the planning commission.

The city council shall hold a hearing upon said appeal after giving written notice to the applicant, property owners within three hundred feet of the subject property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to any other persons who have filed a written request for notice. Such notices shall be mailed at least ten days prior to said hearing. (Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982)

17.60.080 Other provisions.
A.    No official action such as the issuance of a building permit, license or other type of permit shall be taken while an appeal or proceeding for a use permit is pending.

B.    In the event that an application for a use permit is denied by the planning commission or, if there is an appeal, by the city council, no application for the same or similar use shall be filed for a period of one year from the date of the last denial. (Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982)

17.60.090 Exceptions.
A.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use permit for surface mining and reclamation activities shall be approved by the city except by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the city.

B.    No amendment to this section shall be made, except by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the city. (Ord. 613  1, 1988)

17.60.100 Requirements for temporary use permits.
In order to assure the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, while still providing for their pleasure and convenience, the planning, inspections and permitting department director may issue a permit for the establishment of temporary uses within the city in accordance with the following procedure and conditions; however, at the directors discretion or at the request of the planning commission, the director may refer any application for a temporary use or structure to the planning commission for consideration:

A.    Prior to the establishment of any temporary use on any lot or parcel in the city, a temporary use permit shall be obtained from the planning, inspections and permitting department. Such permit may be issued for a specified period of time after the date of issue for any use which is deemed by the planning, inspections and permitting director to be of a temporary nature upon making the following findings:

1.    That the temporary use will not be detrimental to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located; and

2.    That the temporary use will not be detrimental to adjoining properties through the creation of excessive dust, noise, light, odor, or other objectionable characteristics.

a.    Temporary uses for which permits may be granted include, but are not limited to, carnivals, circuses, religious revivals, Christmas tree lots, pumpkin patches, promotions and sales in trucks or trailers, animal shows or displays, and food stands, and other uses of a similar nature as determined by the planning, inspections and permitting director. Except as modified herein, temporary uses shall be limited to durations not to exceed thirty consecutive calendar days, and shall not exceed thirty total days within any three-month period. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and subject to fire prevention and/or other applicable regulations and laws, outdoor retail sales of Christmas trees (but not including any other merchandise), and the preparation of a site in any manner for such sales, may be permitted on a seasonal basis, beginning November 15th and extending through December 31st, in any zoning district if a permit has been obtained. The site shall be returned to its original condition by January 5th.

In addition, the planning, inspections and permitting director shall have the authority and duty to impose conditions on the issuance of any such permit which the director deems necessary to protect the public interest or the rights of adjacent surrounding users to be free of objectionable interferences or undue detriment to existing uses.

B.    Temporary uses conducted entirely within a structure that is occupied by an existing business or organization shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

C.    Ingress and egress shall be limited to those areas designated by the planning, inspections and permitting department. Appropriate directional signs, barricades, fences, or landscaping shall be provided when required. A security officer may be required for promotional events.

D.    Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the site of each temporary use in accordance with the provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code.

E.    Upon the termination of the temporary use permit or the abandonment of the site, the applicant shall remove all materials and equipment and restore the premises to its original condition.

F.    The opening and closing time for promotional enterprises shall coincide with the hours of operation of the sponsoring commercial establishment. Reasonable time limits for other uses may be set by the planning, inspections and permitting director.

G.    Applications for temporary use permits shall be made to the planning, inspections and permitting department and shall be accompanied by the following:

1.    Five copies of a dimensional plot plan showing the following:

a.    The subject property with the property lines and abutting properties;

b.    The location of the temporary use related to the subject and adjoining properties;

c.    The parking, driveways, and loading areas; and

d.    The vehicular ingress and egress locations; and

2.    One copy of the dimensioned elevations of any structure proposed for location.

a.    The planning, inspections and permitting director shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the application, or to approve it subject to compliance with such conditions as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter and to meet the requirements listed in subsection A of this section. The planning, inspections and permitting director shall refuse issuance of any such permit where it is found, as a result of investigation, that the proposed activity will, at the particular location involved, constitute an undue detriment to the public interest or to adjacent or surrounding properties or will unreasonably interfere with existing adjacent or surrounding uses. In making determinations on applications for permits in residential zones, the planning, inspections and permitting director shall issue no permit unless the proposed site meets each of the following criteria:

i.    The site has direct access onto an arterial roadway.

ii.    The site is at least one hundred feet from any single-family residence in an R-district.

iii.    The site can be used without causing dangerous congestion on adjacent roadways.

H.    If the applicant for a temporary use permit, or any other person, is dissatisfied with any determination made by the planning, inspections and permitting director, such person may appeal to the planning commission. Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the specific reasons therefor and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the planning, inspections and permitting director not later than ten calendar days after the date of the action being appealed. If the appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of the action against which the complaint is made shall be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 887  2 Exh. B, 1998)

Chapter 17.61
HOME OCCUPATIONS
Sections:

17.61.010    Statement of purpose.

17.61.020    Home occupation defined.

17.61.030    Permit required.

17.61.040    Permit application and procedure.

17.61.050    Business license.

17.61.060    Fees.

17.61.070    Criteria for approval.

17.61.080    Appeals concerning the issuance or denial of a home occupation permit.

17.61.085    Revocation of permit.

17.61.090    Enforcement.

17.61.093    Penalties.

17.61.095    Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.

17.61.100    Time limit.

17.61.010 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to recognize the residence as a viable location for certain types of occupations and to ensure the compatibility of home occupations with principal residential uses, protecting the integrity and character of the neighborhood by minimizing negative impacts of commercial uses being conducted in residential areas. (Ord. 804  1 (part), 1994)

17.61.020 Home occupation defined.
Home occupation means any business-related use carried on within a residential structure or accessory structure thereto, primarily by the residents thereof, which use is secondary to the residential use of the structure. The home occupation must not substantially or materially change the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 858  14(1) (part), 1997)

17.61.030 Permit required.
No person shall conduct a home occupation without first obtaining a permit from the director of planning, inspections and permitting or designee. The home occupation permit is personal to the resident named on the permit and for the occupation to be conducted at the location stated on the permit. The permit is not transferable. (Ord. 858  14(1) (part), 1997)

17.61.040 Permit application and procedure.
Application for a home occupation permit shall be made to the planning, inspections and permitting department on a form provided by the planning, inspections and permitting department. A home occupancy permit shall be issued where the director of planning, inspections and permitting or designee finds that the home occupation applied for can be conducted pursuant to Section 17.61.070. (Ord. 858  14(1) (part), 1997)

17.61.050 Business license.
If a business license is required for the occupation to operate within the city, the home occupation may not begin operation until a business license has been obtained as required by Chapter 5.04. (Ord. 858  14(1) (part), 1997)

17.61.060 Fees.
Upon planning, inspections and permitting department approval of the home occupation permit, the applicant shall pay the designated current fee amount established to cover administrative cost, as well as any other applicable fees established by other city resolution. (Ord. 858  14(1) (part), 1997)

17.61.070 Criteria for approval.
Home occupations shall meet all of the following criteria in order to be approved.

A.    Storage.

1.    Storage, operation or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment, other than office equipment and supplies located inside the residential structure, related to the operation of a home occupation may not be visible from outside of the residence;

2.    On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, combustible or flammable) associated with the home occupation is prohibited;

3.    Storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures, and activities associated with the home occupation may not exceed 25 percent of floor area of the dwelling unit. Rooms used for both residential uses and the home occupation use shall be considered dedicated to the home occupation for purposes of this calculation.

B.    Employees/Clients.

1.    Employment is limited to the resident occupant permit holder, other resident occupants and no more than 2 non-resident employees on-site. The home occupation may not have more nonresident employees than resident employees.

2.    The number of clients that can be present at the residence is limited to 2 at any one time, and not to exceed a maximum of 8 per day. Clients are permitted at the home occupation business location only on weekdays from seven a.m. to ten p.m. and on weekends from eight a.m. to six p.m.

C.    Vehicles/Parking.

1.    One commercial vehicle is allowed, not to exceed 1-ton capacity. Regardless of the number of home occupations at a residence, only 2 additional vehicles (including commercial, employee and client vehicles) can be present at any one time. Off-street parking space shall be provided for any such vehicle associated with the home occupation.

2.    There shall be no commercial deliveries from or to the home occupation premises beyond what is normally incidental to residential uses. Normal residential deliveries can be defined as typically being no more than 1 per day, during normal business hours of eight a.m. to six p.m.

D.    Signage. One attached wall, suspended or projecting nameplate sign not to exceed 1 square foot of area and pertaining directly to the particular home occupation is allowed subject to any permits required by the sign ordinance.

E.    Nuisances. No activity which produces noise, smoke, odors, glare, electrical interference, or vibrations discernible beyond the site is allowed.

F.    Other Conditions. The director of planning, inspections and permitting may place additional conditions on the permit in order to carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 858  14(2), 1997; Ord. 804  1 (part), 1994)

17.61.080 Appeals concerning the issuance or denial of a home occupation permit.
The decision of the planning, inspections and permitting department concerning the issuance or denial of a home occupation permit shall be final unless an appeal is submitted in writing to the director of planning, inspections and permitting accompanied by the current nonrefundable home occupation permit appeal fee, and is filed within 10 days of the decision. The appeal shall be heard by the planning commission. The planning commission may attach such conditions as it deems necessary to the issuance of such a permit to ensure compliance with the intent of this section. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council within 10 days of the decision. The appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk, accompanied by the current non-refundable home occupation permit appeal fee. (Ord. 858  (1) (part), 1997)

17.61.085 Revocation of permit.
A home occupancy permit may be revoked or modified by the director of planning, inspections and permitting if any of the criteria for approval listed at Section 17.61.070 are not met by the home occupancy. (Ord. 858  (3) (part), 1997)

17.61.090 Enforcement.
A.    This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    The director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting and the code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 858  (1) (part), 1997)

17.61.093 Penalties.
The penalties set forth in Section 17.03.020 of this title shall not apply and the following penalties shall be applicable for any violation of this chapter:

A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020.

B.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Based upon the criteria for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level C violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A)(3). (Ord. 858  (3) (part), 1997)

17.61.095 Enforcement proceduresNotice to correct.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, the director of the department of planning, inspections and permitting and the code enforcement officer shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 1.09.020 through 1.09.048, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in Sections 1.09.050 through 1.09.059, inclusive, of the Folsom Municipal Code shall apply.

B.    A notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.09.023. (Ord. 858  3 (part), 1997)

17.61.100 Time limit.
All home occupation permits shall be valid for a period of 1 year from the initial date of approval. Requests for renewal shall be submitted to the finance department in writing on a form sent to the applicant, accompanied with the appropriate fee. If the use continues to meet the then current criteria, the permit may be renewed. (Ord. 858  1 (part), 1997)

Chapter 17.62
VARIANCES
Sections:

17.62.010    Intent.

17.62.020    Application and fee.

17.62.030    Public hearing.

17.62.040    Commission action.

17.62.050    Revocation.

17.62.060    Expiration and extension.

17.62.070    Appeal procedure.

17.62.080    Other provisions.

17.62.010 Intent.
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the purposes and intent of this title may result from the strict application of certain area, height, yard and space requirements thereof, variances in such requirement may be granted as provided in this chapter. (Prior code  3123.01)

17.62.020 Application and fee.
Application for a variance shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the planning commission and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council no part of which shall be returnable to the applicant, and by statement, plans and other evidence showing:

1.    That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the land, building or use referred to in the application, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to other land, buildings, and/or uses in the district;

2.    That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the petitioner;

3.    That the granting of such application will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially affect the health or safety of persons, residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the applicant, and will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood. (Ord. 466 Exh. A (part), 1981; Ord. 323  29, 1975; prior code  3123.02)

17.62.030 Public hearing.
A public hearing may be held within sixty days after filing of application, notice of which shall be given as provided in the State Planning Law. (Prior code  3123.03)

17.62.040 Commission action.
Following the public hearing, the planning commission, or within the historic district, the historic district commission, may grant a variance, exclusive of a use variance, when it finds that there exist special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings whereby the strict application of the zoning code deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. The commission may apply such conditions as it deems necessary to assure that the adjustment shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. (Ord. 890  3(4), 1998: Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982: prior code  3123.04)

17.62.050 Revocation.
A.    In any case where the conditions of granting of such variance have not, or are not, complied with, the city council shall give notice to the permittee of intention to revoke such variance at least ten days prior to hearing thereon. After conclusion of the hearing the council may revoke such variances.

B.    In any case where intent to use an approved variance is not evident within sixty days after the date of granting thereof, then, without further action by the council, the variance granted shall be null and void. (Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982: prior code  3123.06)

17.62.060 Expiration and extension.
The provision for expiration and extension of use permits, Section 17.60.060, shall apply. (Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982)

17.62.070 Appeal procedure.
The provisions of Section 17.60.070 shall apply. (Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982)

17.62.080 Other provisions.
The provisions of Section 17.60.080 shall apply. (Ord. 476 Exh. A (part), 1982)

Chapter 17.64
NONCONFORMING USES
Sections:

17.64.010    Prior use continuance.

17.64.020    Use transferal requirements.

17.64.030    Structural alteration requirements.

17.64.040    DestructionUse conformance required.

17.64.050    Applicability.

17.64.060    Certificate of use and occupancy required.

17.64.070    Exception.

17.64.010 Prior use continuance.
The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this title, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued; provided, however, that nonconforming commercial and industrial uses operated on open land may be continued for a period no longer than two years after such uses become nonconforming. If any nonconforming use is abandoned or discontinued for a period of six months or more, subsequent use of the land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Prior code  3124.01)

17.64.020 Use transferal requirements.
If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification. (Prior code  3124.02)

17.64.030 Structural alteration requirements.
No existing building designed, arranged or intended for or devoted to a use not permitted under the regulations of this title for the district in which such building or premises is located shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, unless such is changed to a use permitted under the regulations specified by this title for such district in which the building is located; providing, however, that authorized maintenance shall be permitted not exceeding a total amount, during a period of five years, of fifty percent of the assessed value of the building according to the assessments thereof by the city assessor. (Prior code  3124.03)

17.64.040 DestructionUse conformance required.
If at any time any building in existence or maintained at the time of the adoption of this title which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located is destroyed by fire explosion, act of God, or act of the public enemy to the extent of more than one-half the value thereof, then and without further action by the city council, the building and the land on which the building was located or maintained shall, from and after the date of such destruction, be subject to all the regulations of the district in which such land and/or building are located. For the purposes of this title, the value of any building shall be the estimated cost of the replacement of the building in kind, as determined by the building inspector. (Prior code  3124.04)

17.64.050 Applicability.
The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts hereafter changed or established and any time limit for the suspension of a nonconforming use of land shall date from the date of the enactment of this title or any amendment of district boundaries which first creates a nonconforming use or uses. (Prior code  3124.05)

17.64.060 Certificate of use and occupancy required.
The owner or occupant of any land or building classified as nonconforming use under provisions of this title shall, upon notification by the planning commission, make application for a certificate of use and occupancy, and shall annually thereafter apply for renewal of said certificate. (Prior code  3124.06)

17.64.070 Exception.
Any nonconforming use or building may be permitted to be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered in cases where an application for a variance is first approved, as provided in Chapter 17.62. The regulations of Sections 17.64.010 to 17.64.060 are subject to this section. (Prior code  3124.07)

Chapter 17.66
CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
Sections:

17.66.010    Required.

17.66.020    Application.

17.66.030    Issuance.

17.66.010 Required.
No vacant land in any district established under the provisions of this title shall hereafter be occupied or used except for agricultural purposes and no building hereafter erected, structurally altered or moved into or within any such district shall be occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued therefor by the planning commission. (Prior code  3125.01)

17.66.020 Application.
Application for a required certificate of use and occupancy for a new or changed use of land, for a new building or for an existing building which has been altered or moved shall be made to the planning commission before any such land or buildings shall be occupied or used. No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of use and occupancy. (Prior code  3125.03)

17.66.030 Issuance.
A certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued within three days after:

1.    Written notice that the premises are ready for occupancy or use;

2.    Inspection indicates that the building or use is in conformity with this title and other regulations. (Prior code  3125.04)

Chapter 17.68
AMENDMENTS
Sections:

17.68.010    Procedure.

17.68.020    Initiation procedure.

17.68.030    Public hearingsNotice.

17.68.040    Action by planning commission.

17.68.050    Action by city council.

17.68.010 Procedure.
This title may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts or by changing any other provisions thereof whenever the public necessity and convenience and the general welfare require such amendment by procedure set forth in this chapter. (Prior code  3126.01)

17.68.020 Initiation procedure.
The amendment procedure is:

1.    The petition of one or more property owners, affected by the proposed amendment, which petition shall be filed with the planning commission and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council no part of which shall be returnable to the petitioner; or by

2.    Action by the city council; or by

3.    Action by the planning commission. (Ord. 466 Exh. A (part), 1981; Ord. 274  1, 1971; prior code  3126.02)

17.68.030 Public hearingsNotice.
A.    The planning commission shall hold public hearings as required by law on any proposed amendments, and shall give notice thereof by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to such hearings, or as otherwise provided by law.

B.    In case the proposed amendment consists of a change of the boundaries of any district, so as to reclassify property from any district to any other district, the planning commission may give additional notice of the time and place of such hearings and of the purpose of posting public notices thereof not less than ten days prior to the date of such hearing along the streets and roads upon which the property proposed to be reclassified abuts and in the vicinity thereof. Any failure to post public notices as aforesaid shall not invalidate any proceedings for amendment of this title. (Prior code  3126.03)

17.68.040 Action by planning commission.
Following the hearings mentioned in Section 17.68.020, the planning commission shall submit a report of its findings and a summary of hearings, together with its recommendations with respect to the proposed amendment to the city council. (Prior code  3126.04)

17.68.050 Action by city council.
Upon receipt of such report from the planning commission, the city council shall set the matter for public hearing and shall give notice thereof by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to such hearing. Within ninety days from the date of receipt of the planning commission report, the city council may adopt the proposed amendment or any part thereof.

Upon the consent of the planning commission, any petition for an amendment may be withdrawn upon written application of a majority of all the persons who signed such petition. The city council may by resolution abandon any proceeding for an amendment initiated by its own action, provided that such abandonment may be made only when such proceedings are before such body, provided that any hearing of which public notice has been given shall be held. (Prior code  3126.05)

Chapter 17.70
REPORTS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Sections:

17.70.010    Planning, inspections and permitting department file.

17.70.020    Residential building file contents.

17.70.010 Planning, inspections and permitting department file.
The planning, inspections and permitting department shall establish a file on all residential buildings within the city, reflecting the information set forth in Section 17.70.020. The planning, inspections and permitting department shall provide copies of a file upon request and the payment of a fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 858  15(1) (part), 1997)

17.70.020 Residential building file contents.
All files of residential buildings shall show the regularly authorized use, occupancy and zoning classification of such property. The file shall also contain the date of construction, records of improvements or modifications, and any action taken by the city to condemn such property or otherwise declare that any such property is being used in violation of Chapter 8.28 of this code. The file may also contain any code enforcement complaints and/or actions taken regarding the residential building or the associated property. (Ord. 858  15(1) (part), 1997)

Chapter 17.72
SERVICE STATIONS
Sections:

17.72.010    Defined.

17.72.020    Use permitRequired.

17.72.030    Use permitIssuance requirements.

17.72.010 Defined.
As used in this chapter, service station means the same as set forth in Section 17.02.350. (Ord. 212  1 (part), 1966)

17.72.020 Use permitRequired.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, no service station may be operated in any portion of the city limits, without having a current, valid use permit for the particular location and use. Any existing service station, upon the effective date of this chapter, shall be deemed to have a use permit for the operation of such station which is subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and subject to the special terms and conditions set forth in the action granting the original use permit. Any holder of an existing use permit for a service station upon the effective date of this chapter who is dissatisfied with the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter shall, within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, apply for a continuation of the existing use permit, and failure to do so will be deemed acceptance by the holder thereof, of the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter.

An application for a use permit shall be made either by the owner of the land or the lessee of the land, with the owners permission. The issuance of a use permit shall bind the owner, the lessee and all persons holding under the owner or lessee to all terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 212  1 (part), 1966)

17.72.030 Use permitIssuance requirements.
All use permits for service stations, after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, shall be issued subject to the following terms and conditions, whether or not such terms and conditions are specifically set forth therein or not:

1.    The use permit is valid only for the exact location set forth in the permit and is not transferable from the person to whom originally issued without the express approval of the planning commission. The planning commission may deny such transfer on the basis that each and all terms and conditions of the use permit have not been met, or that the location of the station no longer meets the proper zoning requirements;

2.    The holder of the use permit will construct, at his own expense, traffic barriers and turn out lanes on city streets, in accordance with plans and specifications established from time to time by the city council, to prevent the flow of traffic in and out of service stations from impeding the through flow of traffic on the city streets and from causing undue hazardous conditions to exist by reason of such traffic. Such traffic lanes and barriers may be required to be constructed on the holders property through a broadening of the city street if the existing right-of-way would be unduly restricted by reason of the erection of such barriers;

3.    The use permit is revocable by the planning commission, upon thirty days notice and an opportunity to be heard, upon the following grounds:

a.    Unsightly conditions or accumulations of trash or wastes are allowed to accumulate after notice from the city that such condition exists,

b.    The user of the permit fails to perform or keep any condition or requirement contained in the particular use permit, or any requirement of this chapter,

c.    The service station is abandoned. Any service station that has been closed for a period of ninety consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned. Any service station that has not been open for business for at least ninety days out of the preceding three hundred sixty-five days shall be deemed to have been abandoned. A station not open for business shall not be deemed abandoned if it is closed by reason of strikes, war, major repairs or other causes beyond the control of the holder of the use permit therefor,

d.    The user has failed to comply with all laws, rules and regulations of the city, county and state, applicable to service stations and the storage and handling of petroleum and petroleum products;

4.    In the event that a use permit is revoked as provided in this chapter, the owner of the land on which such station is located shall, upon written notice by city, within six months from the mailing of such notice, remove from the site all buildings, signs, pumps, islands and underground storage tanks. If the owner fails to remove such improvements within such six month period, the city shall be authorized to enter upon the premises and remove all improvements, sell all equipment on the premises, and apply the proceeds of sale to the costs of removal. The balance of removal costs, if any, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city, upon demand.

The continued violation of any term or condition of a use permit shall constitute a public nuisance which shall be abated as provided by law. (Ord. 304  1, 1973: Ord. 212  1 (part), 1966)

Chapter 17.74
RMH, TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
Sections:

17.74.010    State statutes adopted.

17.74.020    State plumbing, building and electrical standards adopted.

17.74.030    Definition.

17.74.040    Camping sites prohibited.

17.74.050    Enforcement.

17.74.060    Division of Housing defined.

17.74.070    Use permitBuilding permitTime limits.

17.74.080    Parking on private land.

17.74.090    Driveway requirements.

17.74.100    ViolationPenalty.

17.74.110    Establishment, expansion standards.

17.74.120    Construction standards.

17.74.130    Mobilehome installation.

17.74.010 State statutes adopted.
The Mobilehome Park Act of the state, contained in Part 2 of the Health and Safety Code, is adopted as the primary code for the city and such shall constitute the laws regulating mobilehomes and mobilehome parks within the city except as modified by this chapter. The fee schedule set forth by the state as it may be amended from time to time is also adopted as the fees charged by the city as it pertains to mobilehomes and mobilehome parks. (Ord. 323  23, 1975: Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.020 State plumbing, building and electrical standards adopted.
Articles 4, 5, 6, and 7 of Chapter 5 of the California Administrative Code, as now existing or as hereafter may be amended by the Division of Housing of the Department of the Industrial Relations of the state, are adopted as a primary code of the city, and shall constitute the rules and regulations concerning plumbing installations in mobilehome parks, rules and regulations for structures in mobilehome parks, and rules and regulations for electrical standards in mobilehome parks in the city. (Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.030 Definition.
Section 18,200 of the Mobilehome Park Act shall read as follows:

Mobilehome park as used in this part, means any tract of land where space is rented or held out for rent to one or more owners of mobilehomes. Mobilehome parks shall be located in residential mobilehome zone known as RMH Zone and shall be subject to issuance of a Use Permit.

(Ord. 262  1, 1970: Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.040 Camping sites prohibited.
Notwithstanding any provision of the Mobilehome Park Act, no camping sites, or tent sites, or tent houses shall be maintained within the city. (Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.050 Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by such city employee as the city council may, from time to time, determine. (Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.060 Division of housing defined.
Reference to the Division of Housing in Chapter 4 of the Mobilehome Park Act, shall be construed to mean the city. (Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.070 Use permitBuilding permitTime limits.
All use permits issued in conformance with this chapter shall expire six months from the date of issuance if work of construction is not commenced under such permit within such time. Any building permit issued for the construction of a mobilehome park shall expire sixty days from the date of issuance if work is not commenced pursuant to such building permit. Either permit may be renewed at any time within one year from date of issuance, without further public hearing upon a showing of due diligence by the owner of the land. (Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.080 Parking on private land.
No mobilehome shall be parked on private land outside a regularly established mobilehome park for a period of more than forty-eight hours except as provided under Section 17.58.055. Trailers eighteen feet in length or less may be kept in rear yards within set back lines if such trailer is uninhabited and not visible from a front street. (Ord. 445 Exh. A (part), 1981; Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.090 Driveway requirements.
Section 18,278 of the Mobilehome Park Act shall be construed to read:

Each mobilehome site shall front upon a driveway of not less than thirty feet in clear width. All driveways shall have clear and unobstructed access to a public thoroughfare.

(Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.100 ViolationPenalty.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or of the code incorporated in this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.110 Establishment, expansion standards.
No mobilehome park shall be established nor shall any extension or expansion of a mobilehome park be approved unless it meets one of the following two standards:

1.    The mobilehome park is developed to contain a maximum average of seven mobilehome sites per gross acre. (EXAMPLE: a seventeen acre development could have a maximum of seven by seventeen equals one hundred nineteen mobilehome sites); or

2.    Each mobilehome site has the following dimensions:

a.    Forty-two feet by seventy feet for twelve feet wide mobilehomes,

b.    An additional one foot in width for each additional foot in width of the mobilehome. (Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.120 Construction standards.
The following standards shall be complied with by all mobilehome parks within the city on which construction is commenced after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, or to which additions are made after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein:

1.    Each mobilehome site shall have at least two improved automobile parking spaces of a minimum size of ten feet by twenty feet. One such space can be provided off the mobilehome site itself. Said parking spaces shall be improved with an adequate base approved by the building department and either two inches of macadam topping or four inches of concrete topping as approved by the building department;

2.    Each mobilehome park shall have a minimum entrance of at least thirty-six feet and the radius of each cul-de-sac within such park shall be a minimum of at least thirty feet. Streets shall be a minimum of thirty-three feet where parking is allowed on one side, and shall be a minimum of forty-two feet where parking is allowed on both sides. All mobilehome spaces shall be served from internal park streets within the park and there shall be no direct access from mobilehome spaces to a public street or alley;

3.    Each mobilehome parking area shall be provided with a stand area completely paved with cement or asphalt or in a suitable manner to provide drainage, sanitation and prevention of uncontrolled growth in and around each mobilehome parking space with the requirement that the mobilehome be skirted;

4.    All roadways within the mobilehome park shall be paved with asphalt or concrete surfacing and shall have adequate concrete curbs and/or gutters to provide proper surface drainage. Such paving shall meet the standards required for city streets;

5.    Adequate underground storm drains shall be provided to prevent flooding of the mobilehome sites;

6.    Each mobilehome park shall provide a minimum recreation area or areas within the park of not less than two hundred square feet per mobilehome site. This area may include recreational rooms, buffer zones, if developed for recreational purposes, walking paths, playgrounds and other recreational areas, but shall not include roadways, auto parking areas, or the mobilehome site itself;

7.    Where mobilehome units are situated adjacent to public roadways, they shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five feet. Setback on roadways inside mobilehome parks shall be a minimum of five feet;

8.    Mobilehome sites shall be so situated that no mobilehome shall be closer than ten feet from another mobilehome or permanent structure. Where canopies, awnings or carports are erected between mobilehomes, a minimum of ten feet clearance shall be maintained between structures;

9.    All garbage and refuse cans shall be located underground or in an enclosed area and each park shall provide adequate holding facilities for waste materials;

10.    Street names within parks shall be approved by the planning commission;

11.    Each park shall provide, within the perimeter of the mobilehome park, parking space off the roadways and in addition to other required space, sufficient to store camp and boat trailers, in a ratio of one camp or boat trailer to each five mobilehome sites. If the developer fails to provide such area, no storage of camp or boat trailers shall be permitted within the mobilehome park;

12.    Occupancy and/or Utility Hook-up Inspection Fee. A fee of twenty dollars for inspection and fifteen dollars for reinspection shall be charged per space. No occupancy shall occur until inspection has been made for utility hook-ups, set-back requirements and minimum space requirements;

13.    Adequate landscaping details and plans shall be approved by the planning commission as a condition of the use permit;

14.    Utilities. All utility distribution facilities (including, but not limited to electric, communication and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any mobilehome park shall be placed underground, except as follows:

Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. The developer is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved for the installation of said facilities. The planning commission may waive the requirements of this paragraph if topographical, soil, or any other conditions make underground installation of said facilities unreasonable or impractical;

15.    Mobilehome parks that adjoin R-1 or R-2 zoned property must be buffered by one or a combination of the following methods noted below and as approved by the planning commission:

a.    An area buffer zone, with controlled usage for recreational purposes containing no storage and no structures. Such buffer zone shall be no less than one hundred feet in width and landscaping plans in detail must be submitted to and approved by the planning commission,

b.    A zoned buffer zone, consisting of R-3, R-4, commercial or industrial zoning. A minimum setback of twenty-five feet shall be maintained. Where RMH zoned property adjoins R-1 and R-2 zoned property, a buffer zone will be required on all sides. No buffer zones are required where RMH zoned property adjoins R-3, R-4, commercially or industrially zoned property,

c.    A physical buffer zone which consists of a planted buffer zone not less than fifteen feet in width and approved by the planning commission, or natural barriers such as cliffs or hillsides; provided, that such terrain substantially obstructs viewing the property from adjacent property;

16.    Areas shall not be considered suitable for use permits for a mobilehome park which do not have direct access to a select major thoroughfare and which contain less than five acres of land. (Ord. 360  1, 1977; Ord. 323  25, 1975; Ord. 258  2 (part), 1970)

17.74.130 Mobilehome installation.
Pursuant to Sections 37039, 18300, 18613 and 18614 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, the city does hereby adopt those certain regulations and amendments thereto contained in Title 25, Chapter 5 of the California Administrative Code, pertaining to mobilehome installation. In accordance therewith, a developer, lessee or individual, must apply to the city building inspector for an installation permit prior to the placing of a mobilehome upon any mobilehome site.

For the issuance of such a permit, the city building inspector will charge the following:

A.    Application filing fee, five dollars;

B.    Installation permit fee, fifteen dollars;

C.    Reinspection fee, fifteen dollars. (Ord. 317  1, 1974)

Chapter 17.90
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX
Sections:

17.90.010    Purpose.

17.90.020    Definitions.

17.90.030    Residential construction service charge imposed.

17.90.040    Time of payment.

17.90.050    Place of payment.

17.90.060    Use of tax for acquisition, improvement and expansion of public park, playground and recreation facilities.

17.90.070    Exemption.

17.90.010 Purpose.
The city council declares that the fees required to be paid hereby are assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the city of Folsom and solely for the purpose of producing revenue. The continued increase in the development of dwelling units in the city with the attendant increase in the population of the city has created an urgent need for the planning, acquisition, improvement and expansion of public parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities to serve the increasing population of the city and the means of providing additional revenues with which to finance such public facilities. (Ord. 318  1, 1974)

17.90.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings described to them in this section.

A.    Bedroom means any room containing a closet of a size sufficient to hold clothing, excluding therefrom one living room with entry closet per dwelling.

B.    One-family dwelling means a detached building of permanent character, placed in a permanent location, which is planned, designed or used as a residence for one family only, living independently of other families or persons.

C.    Two-family dwelling, three-family dwelling, and four-family dwelling means buildings of permanent location, which are planned, designed or used for residential purposes, for two, three or four families living independently of each other in independent dwelling units.

D.    Multiple dwelling means a building of permanent character, placed in a permanent location, which is planned, designated or used for residential purposes, for five or more families living independently of each other in independent dwelling units.

E.    Family means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house.

F.    Mobilehome means a vehicle other than a motor vehicle, designed or used for residential purposes, for carrying persons and property on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.

G.    Mobilehome park means any area or tract of land containing one or more mobilehome lots.

H.    Mobilehome lot means any area or portion of a mobilehome park designated, designed or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis.

I.    Person means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society or individual.

J.    Residential dwelling unit means a building or a portion of a building planned, designed or used as a residence for one family only living independently of other families or persons and having its own bathroom and housekeeping facilities included in said unit (for example, a one-family dwelling, each unit of a two-family, three-family, or four-family dwelling, each unit of a multiple dwelling, and each apartment in an apartment house). (Ord. 318  2, 1974)

17.90.030 Residential construction service charge imposed.
A residential construction fee is imposed on the privilege of constructing in the city any mobilehome lot or residential dwelling unit, and every person to whom a permit to construct any residential dwelling unit in the city is issued, and every person to whom a permit to construct a mobilehome park in the city is issued shall pay to the city such fee at the following rates:

 

Dwelling Type

Fee

A.

Single-family dwelling units

$400.00

B.

Multi-family dwelling units

 

 

One bedroom per unit

230.00

 

Two or more bedrooms per unit

300.00

C.

Mobilehome dwelling units

60.00

(Ord. 365  2, 1978)

17.90.040 Time of payment.
The residential construction tax herein required to be paid shall be due and payable upon issuance by the city of a building permit for the construction of any residential dwelling unit, or upon issuance by the city of a permit to construct a mobilehome park. In the case of a mobilehome park the developer of the park shall pay the tax for each mobilehome lot within the park. (Ord. 318  4, 1974)

17.90.050 Place of payment.
The residential construction tax shall be paid to the building inspector or his authorized agent at the Folsom City Hall. (Ord. 318  5, 1974)

17.90.060 Use of tax for acquisition, improvement and expansion of public park, playground and recreation facilities.
All of the residential construction taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be placed into a special fund which is created and established for such purpose and which shall be known as the residential construction tax fund.

Taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used and expended solely for the acquisition, improvement and expansion of the public park, playground and recreational facilities of the city and/or in accordance with applicable law for the installation and development of playground and recreational facilities having immediate public street access owned by elementary and high school districts and devoted to public school purposes. It shall be the policy of the city to expend such taxes in accordance with the parks and recreational element of the master plan of the city. (Ord. 318  6, 1974)

17.90.070 Exemption.
Any dwelling to be constructed upon a lot or parcel of land which is located within a subdivision which is covered by a final subdivision map or parcel map upon which there have been imposed the land dedication and/or in lieu fee requirements of Chapter 16.16, shall be exempt from the residential construction fee imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 581-A  1, 1986: Ord. 318  7, 1974)

Chapter 17.95
DRAINAGE FACILITY IMPROVEMENT CHARGES
Sections:

17.95.010    Establishment of drainage fund.

17.95.020    Collection of drainage fund.

17.95.030    Fee adjustment.

17.95.040    Fees.

17.95.050    Credits.

17.95.010 Establishment of drainage fund.
The city council declares and finds that it is necessary to adopt and establish the entire city as a zone for the improvement and construction of trunk and collection drainage facilities, including waterways, pumping plants, levees and other facilities utilized for controlling drainage and storm waters within the city in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare from uncontrolled drainage and storm water. (Ord. 620  1, 1988: Ord. 368 (part), 1978)

17.95.020 Collection of drainage fund.
Fees for drainage improvements shall be collected at the building permit stage of the improvement process. The city shall establish a fund to be used only for the purposes outlined in the chapter. Administrative, operation and engineering costs in connection with the facilities outlined in Section 17.95.010 shall be an allowable expenditure under this chapter. (Ord. 620  1, 1988: Ord. 449  1, 1981: Ord. 368 (part), 1978)

17.95.030 Fee adjustment.
Drainage fees shall be evaluated and revised periodically to insure the level is sufficient to fund anticipated project costs. Estimated construction cost shall be adjusted in accordance with the construction cost index for the west coast as published in the Engineering News Record. (Ord. 620  1, 1988: Ord. 368 (part), 1978)

17.95.040 Fees.
For any residential structure, residential subdivision or parcel map, whether for single-family or multiple-family use the fee shall be $540 per dwelling unit.

For commercial or industrial buildings, commercial or industrial subdivision and all other land uses not otherwise provided for in this chapter, or improvements appurtenant thereto, the fee shall be $3,280 per acre. When only a portion of a site is being developed, the city engineer may, by written agreement with the property owner, defer that portion of the fees due on the undeveloped portion of the site. (Ord. 620  1, 1988)

17.95.050 Credits.
Whenever the city engineer requires construction of trunk and collector drainage facilities and the cost thereof exceeds the amount of the fee, a reimbursement shall be made for the amount in excess of the required fee pursuant to a written reimbursement agreement, provided such installation is not financed by an assessment district. (Ord. 620  1, 1988)

Chapter 17.97
SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION
Sections:

17.97.010    Purpose and intent.

17.97.020    Exemptions.

17.97.030    Permit and reclamation plan requirements.

17.97.040    Content of reclamation plan.

17.97.050    Review procedure.

17.97.060    Undertaking.

17.97.070    Public records.

17.97.080    Periodic review.

17.97.090    Amendments.

17.97.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Public Resources Code Section 2710 et seq.

B.    The council hereby finds and declares that the extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well-being of the city and to the needs of the society, and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety.

C.    The council further finds that the reclamation of the mined lands as provided in this chapter will permit the continued mining of minerals and will provide for the protection and subsequent beneficial use of the mined and reclaimed land.

D.    The council further finds that surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the specifications therefor may vary accordingly. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.020 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Excavations or grading conducted for farming or onsite construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster;

B.    Any surface mining operation that does not involve either the removal of a total of more than one thousand cubic yards of minerals, ores, and overburden, or involve more than one acre in any one location;

C.    Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if such operations are conducted solely for that purpose; and

D.    Such other mining operations that the city determines to be of an infrequent nature, and which involve only minor surface disturbances and are categorically identified by the State Board pursuant to Sections 2714(d) and 2758(c) of the Act. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.030 Permit and reclamation plan requirements.
A.    Except for vested rights as provided for in Section 2776 of the Act and subsections B and C of this Section 17.97.030, no person shall engage in surface mining operations, unless prior to the commencement of such operations, a surface mining permit has been issued and approval has been obtained for a reclamation plan under the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the Act. Applications for a permit shall be filed with the planning commission under Chapter 17.60 of this code. Reclamation plan applications shall be submitted concurrently on forms provided by the planning commission and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The State Geologist shall be notified of all applications.

B.    No person who has obtained a vested right to conduct a surface mining operation prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit under this chapter as long as such vested right continues, provided that no substantial change is made in that operation except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A person shall be deemed to have vested rights if, prior to January 1, 1976, he has in good faith and in reliance upon a permit or other authorization, if such permit or other authorization was required, diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and materials necessary therefor. Expenses incurred in obtaining the enactment of an ordinance in relation to a particular operation or the issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work or materials.

C.    A person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976 shall within six months after the effective date of this chapter submit to the city for approval a reclamation plan for operations to be conducted after January 1, 1976, unless a reclamation plan was approved by the city prior to January 1, 1976 and the person submitting that plan has accepted responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with that plan. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the filing of a reclamation plan for, or the reclamation of, mined lands on which surface mining operations were conducted prior to, but not after, January 1, 1976. The reclamation plan shall be heard and acted upon by the city within twelve months after it is filed. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.040 Content of reclamation plan.
A.    The reclamation plan shall include the following information and documents.

1.    The name and address of the operator and the names and addresses of any persons designated as agents for the service of process.

2.    The anticipated quantity and type of minerals for which the surface mining operation is to be conducted.

3.    The proposed dates for the initiation and termination of such operation.

4.    The maximum anticipated depth of the surface mining operation.

5.    The size and legal description of the lands that will be affected by such operation, a map that includes the boundaries and topographic details of such lands, a description of the general geology of the area, a detailed description of the geology of the area in which surface mining is to be conducted, the location of all streams, roads, railroads, and utility facilities within, or adjacent to such lands, the location of all proposed access roads to be constructed in conducting such operation, and the names and addresses of the owners of all surface and mineral interests of such lands.

6.    A description of and plan for the type of surface mining to be employed and a time schedule that will provide for the completion of surface mining on each segment of the mined lands so that reclamation can be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance by the surface mining operation.

7.    A description of the proposed use or potential uses of the land after reclamation and evidence that all owners of a possessory interest in the land have been notified of the proposed use or potential uses.

8.    A description of the manner in which reclamation, adequate for the proposed use or potential uses, will be accomplished, including:

a.    A description of the manner in which contaminants will be controlled, and mining waste will be disposed; and

b.    A description of the manner in which rehabilitation of affected streamed channels and streambanks to a condition minimizing erosion and sedimentation will occur.

9.    An assessment of the effect of implementation of the reclamation plan on future mining in the area.

10.    A statement that the person submitting the plan accepts responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan.

11.    Any other information which the planning commission may require.

B.    The reclamation plan shall be applicable to a specific piece of property or properties, and shall be based upon the character of the surrounding area and such characteristics of the property as type of overburden, soil stability, topography, geology, climate, stream characteristics, and principal mineral commodities. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.050 Review procedure.
The surface mining permit application and the reclamation plan shall be noticed and heard concurrently by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.60, beginning with Section 17.60.010 through Section 17.60.090 inclusive. (Ord. 613  2, 1988: Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.060 Undertaking.
Upon a finding by the planning commission that an undertaking for the reclamation of the mined land is necessary, and upon a determination of the cost of the reclamation of the mined land according to the reclamation plan, a surety bond, lien, or other undertaking authorized under C.C.P. 995.710 conditioned upon the faithful performance of the reclamation plan shall be filed with the city. Each undertaking shall be executed in favor of the city and reviewed biannually and as necessary, revised. Such undertaking shall be maintained in an amount equal to the cost of completing the remaining reclamation of the site as prescribed in the approved or amended reclamation plan during the succeeding two year period, or other reasonable term. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.070 Public records.
Reclamation plans, reports, applications, and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter are public records, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information, or part thereof, would reveal production, reserves, or rate of depletion entitled to protection as proprietary information. The city shall identify such proprietary information as a separate part of each application. A copy of all permits, reclamation plans, reports, applications and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter, including proprietary information, shall be furnished to the District Geologist of the State Division of Mines by the city. Proprietary information shall be made available to persons other than the State Geologist only when authorized by the mine operator and by the mine owner in accordance with Section 2778 of the Act. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.080 Periodic review.
As a condition of approval of the permit or the reclamation plan, or both, a schedule for periodic inspections of the site shall be established to evaluate continuing compliance with the permit and the reclamation plan. Such inspections shall be made by the city and the permit holder shall reimburse city for any cost and expense incurred by it. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

17.97.090 Amendments.
A.    Amendments to an approved reclamation plan may be submitted to the city at any time, detailing proposed changes from the original plan. Substantial deviations from the original plan shall not be undertaken until such amendment has been filed with and approved by the city.

B.    Amendments to an approved reclamation plan shall be approved by the same procedure as prescribed for approval of a reclamation plan. (Ord. 527  2, 1984)

Chapter 17.98
WETLAND AND RIPARIAN HABITAT MANAGEMENT
Sections:

17.98.010    Purpose and intent.

17.98.020    Definitions.

17.98.030    Resource protection management plan application.

17.98.040    Exemptions.

17.98.050    Actions to protect sensitive habitat.

17.98.060    ViolationsEnforcement.

17.98.070    Appeal of administrative determination.

17.98.071    Appeals of conditions of discretionary entitlements.

17.98.080    Fees, general.

17.98.010 Purpose and intent.
The 1988 city general plan identifies wetlands and riparian habitats as featured resources for preservation, enhancement and management for the use and enjoyment of present and future generations. The city council finds that the importance of wetlands and riparian habitat as open space, wildlife habitat and an educational resource as well as for the maintenance of water quality, flood control and groundwater recharge has made wetland and riparian habitat protection and enhancement vital to the general welfare of all residents. Therefore, a wetland and riparian habitat management ordinance must be established for the preservation and enhancement of the citys wetlands and riparian habitats. It is necessary for the city to ensure maximum protection for these resource areas by discouraging development activities in wetlands and riparian habitat and those activities at adjacent sites that may adversely affect functions and values, to encourage restoration and enhancement of wetland and riparian systems, and to encourage creation of new wetland and riparian habitat.

It is the intent of the city to require site planning that avoids or minimizes damage to wetlands and riparian habitat, and to require restoration or enhancement of wetlands or creation of new wetlands and riparian habitat to offset losses that are unavoidable. In addition, it is the intent of the city that activities in affected wetlands and riparian habitat not threaten public safety, cause nuisances, or destroy or degrade natural wetland functions and values.

The city requires that site planning and management of wetland and riparian resources meet the following performance standards:

A.    Increase public awareness of wetland and riparian habitats as an important factor by incorporating wetlands and riparian habitats in the layout and patterning of the development;

B.    Increase the preservation and protection of the citys natural beauty, diversity, natural resources, and a high quality of life for current and future residents of the city;

C.    Preserve, protect, restore and enhance wetlands and riparian habitats and their buffers;

D.    Provide city officials with information to evaluate, approve, condition or deny public or private development proposals;

E.    Recreate wetlands and riparian habitat within the same watershed location and setting, and achieve no net loss of wetlands function, values and acreage;

F.    Locate mitigation wetlands and riparian habitat within the city or within the citys sphere of influence;

G.    Link preserved or created wetlands to adjacent existing wetlands, buffer areas, open space areas or parks, when possible;

H.    Utilize created wetlands as a natural filtration system for meeting National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements (created wetlands for water quality functions can not be used as credit for mitigation of lost habitat values);

I.    Develop aesthetic designs and provide diverse habitats for created wetland areas;

J.    Incorporate mosquito abatement measures into the planning of wetland and riparian mitigation. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

17.98.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings. These definitions are to be broadly interpreted and construed to provide maximum protection to the environmentally sensitive lands and resources.

Buffer areas means land surrounding wetlands which provides area of an appropriate size to protect the environmental and functional habitat values of the wetland, or which is integrally important in supporting the full range of the wetland and adjacent upland biological community.

Creation means actions performed to intentionally establish a wetland or riparian area at a site where it does not presently exist.

Ecosystem means a system made up of a community of organisms and its interrelated physical and chemical environment.

Enhancement means actions performed to improve the condition of existing wetlands or riparian area so that the functions they provide are additional, and are of a higher value.

Functions, or functions and values means the beneficial roles served by wetlands or riparian habitat including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, conveyance and attenuation, groundwater recharge and discharge, erosion control, aesthetic value protection, and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority.

Riparian habitat means an ecosystem associated with the banks and other land adjacent to freshwater bodies, rivers, streams, creeks and surface-emergent aquifers (such as springs and seeps). Riparian habitat is characterized by plant and animal communities which require high soil moisture conditions maintained by transported freshwater in excess of that otherwise available through local precipitation.

Riparian woodland means a grouping of alder, willow, sycamore, cottonwoods, oak trees or other woody species commonly associated with riparian habitat.

Sensitive habitat means habitat which supports unique vegetation communities as defined in the 1988 Folsom general plan open space and conservation element goal #25, or the habitats of rare or endangered species or subspecies of animals or plants as defined by Section 15380 of the State of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines (14 Cal. Admin. Code Section 15000 et seq.). Sensitive habitat includes the area which is necessary to support a viable population of any of the above species in perpetuity, or which is critical to the proper functioning, of a balanced natural ecosystem or which serves as a functioning wildlife corridor.

Vernal pools means specialized habitats that are typically inundated long enough into the growing season to prevent colonization by grassland plants but usually too dry in summer to allow the establishment of marsh species.

Wetlands means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by permanent or seasonal shallow water. For the purposes of this definition, wetlands are lands which have all of the following attributes:

1.    At least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes;

2.    The substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil; and

3.    The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing season of each year.

Examples of wetland areas include swamps, freshwater marshes, bogs, vernal pools, wet meadows, wet pastures, springs and seeps; portions of lakes, ponds, rivers and streams; and all other areas which are periodically or permanently covered by shallow water, or dominated by hydrophytic vegetation, or in which the soils are predominantly hydric in nature. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

17.98.030 Resource protection management plan application.
A resource protection management plan shall be prepared and submitted to the community development department concurrently with the associated discretionary entitlement permit application if the property contains sensitive habitat. The plan shall address site planning and management methods to preserve, enhance or create wetland and/or riparian habitat. The resource protection management plan shall be accompanied by a plot plan and any such information, maps, plans, documentation, data and analyses as may be required by the director of community development.

Applicable discretionary entitlements are as follows:

A.    General plan amendments;

B.    Specific plans;

C.    Rezones;

D.    Tentative parcel and subdivision maps;

E.    Planned development permits;

F.    Use permits;

G.    Development agreements.

Where any portion of a parcel contains sensitive habitat, this chapter shall be applicable to the portions of the parcel containing the sensitive habitat, and to the remainder of the parcel only to the extent necessary to achieve the purpose and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

17.98.040 Exemptions.
Exemptions from this chapter may be granted at the discretion of the community development director in the following circumstances:

A.    Condominium conversions;

B.    Wetland or riparian areas less than 1 acre, unless the wetland area is a vernal pool;

C.    The community development director may identify additional exemptions on a case-by-case basis subsequent to the ratification by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

17.98.050 Actions to protect sensitive habitat.
A.    If the resource protection management plan identifies the presence of environmentally sensitive habitat, 1 or more of the following actions may be required as a condition of approval for the discretionary entitlement:

1.    Apply open space easements to portions of the project site that contain sensitive lands; or

2.    Rezone the sensitive habitat area to the habitat conservation district zone; or

3.    Require that wetland and riparian habitat buffer zones adjacent to regulated resources shall be of sufficient size so as to preserve the biological and hydrologic functions and values of the resource area protected; or

4.    Require a mitigation plan outlining specific criteria such as water quality standards, survival rate of planted vegetation, species abundance and diversity targets, habitat diversity indices, or other ecological, geological or hydrological performance standards; or

5.    Require a contingency plan if the goals and objectives of the mitigation plan are not met; or

6.    Require an annual monitoring report documenting milestones, successes, problems and contingency actions for a period not less than 5 years from when wetland mitigation is implemented, or for 10 years from when riparian mitigation is implemented; and

7.    Other actions as determined by the decision-making body.

B.    For approvals of any applicable entitlements, the decision-making body considering an application shall make the following findings:

1.    The facility or project is consistent with the provisions of this chapter;

2.    Feasible mitigation measures have been incorporated into the facility or project, and there are no feasible, less environmentally damaging, location, alignment or nonstructural alternatives that would meet project objectives;

3.    Where the facility or project encroaches into a wetland or riparian habitat, mitigation measures are required that result in a net gain in the wetland and/or riparian habitat;

4.    No mature riparian woodland is destroyed or reduced in size due to otherwise allowed encroachments;

5.    Mitigated wetlands are located within the city or within the citys sphere of influence. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

17.98.060 ViolationsEnforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.03 of this title. (Ord. 858  16, 1997)

17.98.070 Appeal of administrative determination.
A.    The community development director shall have the responsibility to administer and interpret this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the instructions of the planning commission.

B.    A determination or decision of the community development director pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the planning commission within 10 days of the determination or decision. The appeal shall be in writing, must state the grounds for the appeal, and shall be accompanied by a fee for the costs of processing the appeal.

The hearing on appeal shall be set for a time not later than 30 days from the date the appeal is filed.

C.    When an appeal is filed, no action shall be taken in reliance on the decision being appealed until the appeal is decided.

D.    A decision of the planning commission pursuant to this section may be appealed to the city council within 10 days of the date of the planning commissions decision pursuant to the procedures in Section 17.60.070 for use permits. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

17.98.071 Appeals of conditions of discretionary entitlements.
Any condition of a discretionary entitlement imposed pursuant to this chapter may be appealed at the same time and in the same manner set forth in Title 16 or Title 17 for the underlying entitlement to which the condition is attached. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

17.98.080 Fees, general.
Fees to defray the cost of processing applications pursuant to this title shall be established by resolution of the city council. No part of such fees are refundable. (Ord. 783  1 (part), 1994)

Chapter 17.100
SCHOOL FACILITIES FINANCING PLAN FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT
Sections:

17.100.010    Findings and purpose.

17.100.020    Overlay zoning district.

17.100.030    Zoning consistency.

17.100.040    Mitigation options.

17.100.050    Definitions.

17.100.060    Mitigation plan.

17.100.070    Administrative exemptions.

17.100.080    Credits.

17.100.090    Appeal procedure.

17.100.010 Findings and purpose.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to implement the general plan goals and policies and to provide for adequate capital school facilities and infrastructure to serve new residential development through the city. The city council finds that the existing school facilities are inadequate to accommodate the needs generated by projected new residential growth in the city, and that additional school facilities are needed to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of school children. This finding is based upon data included in Folsom Cordova Unified School District, Folsom Attendance Area Nexus Study, dated November 4, 1992, as amended and supplemented (Nexus Study, dated November 4, 1992, and including supplemental information on the Nexus Study) and other information provided to the city council.

B.    The cumulative and growth-inducing environmental impacts of the facilities described in the Nexus Study have been identified in the final environmental impact report (EIR) prepared for the 1988 general plan. Prior to action on site-specific projects, subsequent environmental review will be undertaken as necessary pursuant to Section 15162 of the CEQA Guidelines, no new effects would occur as a result of this action beyond those identified in the general plan EIR, and no new mitigation measures are required. Therefore, the city council further finds that adoption of the zoning ordinance codified in this chapter is within the scope of the final EIR prepared for the city general plan project, and certified by the city council in Resolution No. 2522.

C.    Pursuant to general plan policies 11.5, 11.6, 11.7, 33.7, 40.1, 40.3, and similar policies and goals throughout the general plan, it is the citys policy to require new development to pay its fair share of expansion of public facilities to serve new growth. The purpose of this chapter is to implement these general plan requirements and, under the authority of Article XI, Section 7, of the California Constitution and the authority of Title 7 of the Government Code, to establish the appropriate method of ensuring that sufficient funding for school facilities is available. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.020 Overlay zoning district.
There is created a school facilities financing overlay zoning district which will apply to all undeveloped land which is now or in the future zoned for residential purposes. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.030 Zoning consistency.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, all approvals for building permits based on rezonings, prezonings, development agreements, tentative subdivision maps, parcel maps, use permits, or any other similar entitlement requested for the ultimate purpose of residential development for property within the city, must be consistent with this chapter. These regulations shall apply to building permits for projects with entitlements approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter if such projects were previously conditioned upon mitigating school impacts of the project. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.040 Mitigation options.
Except as provided in Section 17.100.070, on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each applicant for a building permit for residential development as listed in Section 17.100.030 shall do one of the following:

A.    Form or join a Mello-Roos community facilities district (CFD) to finance school construction and commit to a CFD tax which fully mitigates the impacts of the project on school facilities; or

B.    Pay a development fee for each dwelling units fair share of its impact on capital facilities as established by the city council in its proposed school facilities fee resolution; or

C.    Comply with an approved mitigation plan which demonstrates how the development to which the entitlement applies is participating in a program to construct or fund permanent school facilities within the city. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.050 Definitions.
Approved mitigation plan as used in this chapter, means a mitigation plan or program which fully mitigates the impacts of the project on school facilities and which is approved by the city manager or his designee (city manager). The city manager shall consult with the Folsom Cordova Unified School District in approving any such plan. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.060 Mitigation plan.
An approved mitigation plan may include facility financing, site dedication, phasing of development, reduction in density, a development agreement, or other methods to provide for permanent school facilities to fully mitigate the impact of the applicants residential development project on the school facilities in the city. An approved mitigation plan may also include participation in an assessment district or a Mello-Roos community facilities district. A combination of these different mechanisms may also be used. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.070 Administrative exemptions.
These regulations shall not apply to building permits for project with a tentative map, vesting tentative map, and development agreement approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that the tentative map, vesting tentative map or development agreement did not include a condition for mitigation for impacts on school facilities. Moreover, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit these regulations from applying to such projects if existing entitlements expire and/or the applicant applies for a new approval subject to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager or his designee may issue regulatory guidelines to administratively implement this chapter. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.080 Credits.
If an applicant for a building permit has previously paid a school impact fee to the Folsom Cordova Unified School District for a fee imposed by the district pursuant to Government Code Section 53080, the applicant shall receive credit in the same amount toward payment of any fees paid pursuant to subsection B of Section 17.100.040. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

17.100.090 Appeal procedure.
The following appeal procedure shall apply to any decision regarding any regulation pursuant to this chapter.

A.    The city manager or his designee is responsible for interpreting this chapter. A decision by the city manager, regarding any regulation pursuant to this chapter, is appealable in accordance with this section. Any person seeking judicial review shall first seek an appeal hearing under this section.

B.    Any person appealing a decision under this chapter shall file a request with the city clerk within 10 days of the city managers decision. The city clerk is responsible for processing the appeal. The request shall be accompanied by a deposit for the reasonable estimated administrative costs of conducting the hearing, including the citys legal fees. The appeal shall be in writing, stating the factual and legal grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed within ten calendar days following the action being appealed.

C.    The city manager shall schedule the matter for hearing before the city council within 60 days and notify the person appealing in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

D.    The city council shall conduct the hearing and issue a written decision on the matter, including factual findings. The city council shall consider relevant evidence presented by the appellant and by the city manager, and may consider other information.

E.    The decision of the city council is final, and is not subject to reconsideration. It is reviewable by a court under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. (Ord. 753  1 (part), 1992)

Chapter 17.102
DENSITY BONUS AND OTHER DEVELOPER INCENTIVES
Sections:

17.102.010    Purpose and intent.

17.102.020    Definitions.

17.102.030    Implementation.

17.102.040    Development standards.

17.102.050    Additional incentives or concessions.

17.102.055    Additional density bonus for child care facility.

17.102.060    Application requirements and review.

17.102.065    Resale and occupancy restrictions on moderate income units.

17.102.070    Expiration and extension.

17.102.080    Appeal procedure.

17.102.090    Other provisions.

17.102.010 Purpose and intent.
This density bonus chapter is intended to provide incentives for the production of housing in accordance with Sections 65915 and 65917 of the California Government Code for very low, low, and moderate income households and senior households. In enacting this chapter, it is the intent of the city of Folsom to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the citys housing element. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section:

A.    Additional incentives or concessions means such regulatory incentives or concessions as specified in California Government Code Section 65915(i) which include the reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements, approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development, direct financial assistance, or other regulatory incentives or concessions which result in identifiable cost reductions.

B.    Affordable rent means monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities (excluding telephone), for rental target units reserved for very low or low income households, not exceeding the following calculations:

1.    Very low income: thirty percent of fifty percent of area median income (adjusted for household size).

2.    Low income: thirty percent of eighty percent of area median income (adjusted for household size).

C.    Affordable sales price means a sales price at which moderate, low, or very low income households can qualify for the purchase of target units, calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the development.

D.    Affordable unit means a housing unit affordable to a low income household or very low income household.

E.    Area median income means the median income for the Sacramento Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) (El Dorado, Placer and Sacramento Counties) as established and periodically updated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

F.    Condominium means and includes:

1.    Condominium as defined by Section 783 of the Civil Code;

2.    Community apartment project as defined by Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code;

3.    Stock cooperative as defined by Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code; and

4.    Planned development as defined by Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code.

The term condominium specifically includes, but is not limited to, the conversion of any existing structure for sale pursuant to a method described in subsections (F)(1) through (4) of this section.

Condominium conversion or conversion means a change in the ownership of a parcel or parcels of property, together with structures thereon, whereby the parcel or parcels and structures previously used as rental units are changed to condominium ownership.

Condominium project or project includes the real property and any structures thereon, or any structures to be constructed thereon, which are to be divided into condominium ownership.

Condominium units or units means the individual spaces within a condominium project owned as individual estates.

G.    Density bonus means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the citys land use element of the general plan, zoning ordinances and any applicable specific plan as of the date of application by the applicant/developer to the city. (Government Code Section 65915(g).)

H.    Density bonus units means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which exceed the otherwise maximum residential density for the development site.

I.    Housing cost means the sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following associated with for-sale target units: principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities (excluding telephone).

J.    Housing development means one or more groups of projects for residential units, including (1) a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use, or (2) the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in Government Code Section 65863.4(d), where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

K.    Low income household means households as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, whose income does not exceed the low income limits applicable to the city as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

L.    Nonrestricted unit means all units within a housing development excluding the target units.

M.    Senior citizen housing development means a residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens that has at least thirty-five dwelling units and complies with the requirements in Civil Code Section 51.3.

N.    Target unit means a dwelling unit within a housing development which will be reserved for sale or rent to very low, low, or moderate income households, or senior residents.

O.    Very low income household means households as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50105, whose income does not exceed the very low income limits applicable to the city, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

P.    Moderate income household means households as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093, whose income does not exceed the moderate income limits applicable to the city, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

Q.    Child care facility means a facility installed, operated, and maintained for the nonresidential care of children as defined under applicable state licensing requirements for the facility. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, school-age child care centers, or family day care homes. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.030 Implementation.
A.    Density Bonus.

1.    The city shall grant a density bonus to an applicant or developer of a housing development, consisting of five or more dwelling units, who agrees to provide the following:

a.    At least ten percent of the total units of a housing development for low income households; or

b.    At least five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low income households; or

c.    A senior citizen housing development.

All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

2.     In determining the number of target units to be provided pursuant to this section, the maximum residential density shall be multiplied by 0.05 where very low income households are targeted, or by 0.10 where low income households are targeted. The density bonus units shall not be included when determining the total number of target units in the housing development. When calculating the required number of target units, any fractions of units shall be rounded to the next larger number.

3.     Amount of Density Bonus.

a.    General Density Bonus. The density bonus shall be a density increase of at least twenty percent, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant/developer over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density. The amount of density bonus to which the applicant/developer is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable units exceeds the percentage set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section. For each percent increase above ten percent in the percentage of units affordable to low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent. For each one percent increase above five percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent. For senior citizen housing developments, the density bonus shall be a flat twenty percent.

b.    Density Bonus for Condominium Projects. If a development does not meet the requirements set forth above, but the applicant/developer agrees or proposes to construct a condominium project as defined in Section 1351(f) or a planned development as defined in Section 1351(k) of the Civil Code, in which at least ten percent of the total dwelling units are reserved for persons and families of moderate income as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, a density bonus of at least five percent shall be granted, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density. For each one percent increase above ten percent of the percentage of units affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent.

c.    Density Bonus for Land Dedication. When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential approval donates land to the city and otherwise satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section 65915(g), the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density. For each one percent increase above the minimum ten percent land donation, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent. The land donation density bonus and general density bonus can be used together, up to a combined maximum of thirty-five percent (Government Code Section 65915(g).)

4.    Upon request by the applicant, the city shall not require that a housing development meeting the requirements of this section provide a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that exceeds:

a.    Zero (studio) to one bedrooms: one on-site parking space per unit;

b.    Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces per unit;

c.    Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces per unit.

If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subsection, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

B.    Incentives or Concessions.

1.     The city shall grant an incentive or concession unless the city makes one of the following findings:

a.    The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for affordable rents for the targeted units.

b.    The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households.

c.    The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law.

2.     Number of Incentive(s) or Concession(s). In addition to the eligible density bonus percentage described in this section, and in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(d)(2), the applicant shall receive the following number of incentive(s) or concession(s):

a.    One incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten percent of the total units for low income households, at least five percent for very low income households, or at least ten percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

b.    Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least twenty percent of the total units for low income households, at least ten percent for very low income households, or at least twenty percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

c.    Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least thirty percent of the total units for low income households, at least fifteen percent for very low income households, or at least thirty percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.040 Development standards.
A.    Target units shall be constructed concurrently with nonrestricted units unless both the city and the applicant/developer agree, in writing, to an alternative schedule for development.

B.    If the applicant/developer is entitled to a density bonus pursuant to this chapter and the city grants at least one additional incentive, the applicant/developer shall agree to and ensure the continued affordability of all low income and very low income target units for a minimum of thirty years or such longer period of time as required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. The target units for low income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty percent of eighty percent of area median income. The target units for very low income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty percent of fifty percent of area median income.

C.    In determining the maximum affordable rent or affordable sales price of target units, the following household and unit size assumptions shall be used, unless the housing development is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations:

SRO (single room occupancy) unit

75 percent of 1 person

0 bedroom (studio)

1 person

1 bedroom

2 person

2 bedroom

3 person

3 bedroom

4 person

4 bedroom

5 person

D.    Target units shall be dispersed within the housing development wherever possible. Where feasible, the number of bedrooms of the target units shall be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the nontarget units of the housing development, except that the developer may include a higher proportion of target units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the target units shall be compatible with the design of the total housing development. Housing developments shall comply with all applicable development and design standards, except those which may be modified as provided by this chapter.

E.    Compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits (e.g., tentative subdivision maps, tentative parcel maps, site plans, planned development permits, conditional use permits, etc.) for all housing developments.

F.    Applicant/developer shall execute and record any agreements or documents reasonably deemed necessary by the city to ensure compliance with and implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.050 Additional incentives or concessions.
The need for additional incentives or concessions will vary for different housing developments. Therefore, the allocation of additional incentives or concessions shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. The additional incentives or concessions may include any of the following:

A.    A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to:

1.    Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.

2.    Reduced minimum lot setbacks.

3.    Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area.

4.    Increased maximum lot coverage.

5.    Increased maximum building height and/or stories.

6.    Reduced on-site parking standards, including the number or size of spaces and garage requirements.

7.    Reduced minimum building separation requirements.

B.    Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if commercial, office, industrial, or other nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing development will be located.

C.    Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant/developer or the city that result in identifiable cost reductions.

D.    Priority processing of a housing development that provides income-restricted units or a senior citizen housing development. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.055 Additional density bonus for child care facility.
A.    Housing developments meeting the requirements of this section and including a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of or adjacent to, the housing development shall receive either of the following:

1.    An additional density bonus that is an amount of square footage of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square footage in the child care facility.

2.    An additional incentive or concession to be determined by the city at its sole and complete discretion that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

B.    The density housing bonus agreement for the housing development shall ensure that:

1.     The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the target units are required to remain affordable.

2.    Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, low income households, or moderate income households shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of target units that are required pursuant to this section.

C.    The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive or concession for a child care facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.060 Application requirements and review.
A.    An application pursuant to this chapter for a density bonus and an additional incentive or concession shall be processed concurrently with and in the same manner as any other application(s) required for the housing development unless the development is granted priority processing. If an applicant/developer is entitled to a density bonus pursuant to this chapter, final approval or denial of a request for an additional incentive or concession shall be made by: (1) the planning commission if no concurrent application requires city council approval and the applicant/developer only requests a reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code or architectural design requirements; or (2) the city council if a concurrent application requires city council approval or the applicant/developer requests an additional incentive or concession other than a reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code or architectural design requirements.

B.    If an applicant/developer is requesting a waiver or modification of development and zoning standards on the grounds that existing development and zoning standards would otherwise inhibit utilization of a density bonus, such request shall be made concurrently with any request for an additional incentive or concession and shall be processed with and approved or denied in accordance with the provisions herein for the processing and approval or denial of a request for an additional incentive or concession. Waiver or modification of development and zoning standards shall only be allowed if the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.

C.    Any approval or denial of a request for a waiver or modification of development and zoning standards or an additional incentive or concession shall be supported by written findings in support of such approval or denial. Nothing in this chapter requires the city to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon health, safety, or the physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact, or if the waiver or reduction would have an adverse impact on any real property listed in the California Register of Historic Resources or be contrary to state or federal law.

D.    An applicant/developer may submit a preliminary proposal for the housing development prior to the submittal of any formal requests for general plan amendments, zoning amendments, or subdivision map approvals. Applicants are encouraged to schedule a pre-application conference with the community development director or designated staff to discuss and identify potential application issues, including prospective additional incentives or concessions pursuant to Section 17.102.050. A preliminary application shall include the following information:

1.    A brief description of the proposed housing development, including the total number of units, target units, and density bonus units proposed.

2.    The zoning and general plan designations and assessors parcel number(s) of the project site.

3.    A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway and parking layout.

4.    If a waiver or modification of development and zoning standards is requested, the application shall demonstrate how the existing development and zoning standards inhibit the utilization of the density bonus on the specific site and that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.

5.    If an additional incentive or concession is requested, the application should describe why the additional incentive or concession is necessary to provide the target units in accordance with this chapter.

E.    The city shall, within ninety days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the applicant/developer, in writing, of project issues of concern and the procedures for compliance with this chapter, including procedures for waiving or modifying development and zoning standards that would otherwise inhibit the utilization of the density bonus on specific sites. The procedures for the waiver or modification of development and zoning standards shall include, but not be limited to, such items as minimum lot size, side yard setbacks, and placement of public works improvements.

F.    The community development director shall inform the applicant/developer whether the requested waiver or modification of development and zoning standards and/or the additional incentive or concession shall be recommended for consideration with the proposed housing development, or whether alternative or modified development and zoning standards and/or additional incentive or concession shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested waiver or modification of development and zoning standards or additional incentive or concession. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.065 Resale and occupancy restrictions on moderate income units.
An applicant shall agree, and the city shall ensure, that the initial occupants of moderate income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a condominium project are persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093, and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5. The city shall enforce an equity sharing agreement in accordance with Government Code Section 65915. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.070 Expiration and extension.
A.    Any waiver or modification of development and zoning standards and/or the granting of additional incentives or concessions is project specific. In any case where a housing development with approved waivers or modifications of development and zoning standards and/or additional incentives or concessions has not commenced construction within the time limit set by either the planning commission or the city council (whichever has final approval authority over the particular housing development) or within one year, if no specific time limit has been set, then without further action such waivers or modifications of development and zoning standards and/or additional incentives or concessions shall be null and void. Construction is deemed commenced, for purposes of this section, upon issuance of a building permit for an approved dwelling unit.

B.    The planning commission or the city council (whichever has final approval authority over the particular housing development) may extend the deadline for commencement of construction for a period or periods not to exceed twelve months upon receipt of a written request which shall include the reason for the delay and the requested extension and any other information as reasonably deemed necessary by the community development director. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.080 Appeal procedure.
A.    Any person dissatisfied with any final action of the planning commission on a request for a density bonus and an additional incentive or concession and/or waiver or modification of development and zoning standards may appeal therefrom to the city council, at any time within ten days after the rendition of the decision of the planning commission. The appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal with the community development director. Upon filing of the notice of appeal, and payment of a filing fee, the community development director must, within ten days, transmit to the city clerk all exhibits and documents on file, together with the finding of the planning commission.

B.    The city council shall hold a hearing upon said appeal after giving written notice to the applicant, property owners within three hundred feet of the subject property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and any other persons who have filed a written request for notice. Such notices shall be mailed at least ten days prior to said hearing. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

17.102.090 Other provisions.
No official action such as the issuance of a building permit, license or other type of permit shall be taken while an appeal or proceeding for a density bonus and an additional incentive(s) or concession(s) and/or waiver or modification of development and zoning standards is pending. (Ord. 1145  2 (part), 2011)

Chapter 17.104
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING
Sections:

17.104.010    Purpose and intent.

17.104.020    Definitions.

17.104.030    Inclusionary housing requirement.

17.104.040    Inclusionary housing plan.

17.104.050    Specific plan requirement.

17.104.060    Alternative methods to meet the inclusionary housing requirement.

17.104.070    Incentives and assistance.

17.104.080    Exempted residential development.

17.104.090    Restrictions on inclusionary units.

17.104.100    Administration of the inclusionary housing requirement.

17.104.110    Monitoring of inclusionary housing.

17.104.120    Administrative fees.

17.104.130    Taking determination.

17.104.140    Enforcement and penalties.

17.104.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter is intended to provide that new development projects in the city contain or assist in the production of a defined percentage of housing affordable to low income and very low income households, to provide for a program of incentives, and to implement the inclusionary policies of the housing element of the citys general plan. (Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.020 Definitions.
Adjusted basis means the adjustment to the basis of a home for purposes of determining capital gains. Adjusted basis shall be defined and determined consistently with the Internal Revenue Service publication 523 Selling Your Home.

Affordable means rented at an affordable rent or sold at an affordable housing price.

Affordable housing price means a sales price at which low income or very low income households as provided in this chapter can qualify for the purchase of for-sale inclusionary units. A sales price shall be considered affordable only if each owner-occupied housing monthly payment is equal to or less than one-twelfth of thirty-five percent of gross income for the specified income level of the household (i.e., very low or low). For purposes of such calculation, housing expenses shall include mortgage principal and interest, taxes, insurance, and assessments. For purposes of this section, the interest rate shall be calculated based on an average of three major California lending institutions for thirty-year fixed rate FHA PAR financing.

Affordable rent means (1) for a unit whose occupancy is restricted to a low income household, that the monthly rent consists of no more than one-twelfth of thirty-five percent of eighty percent of the median income applicable to Sacramento County less a reasonable allowance for utilities; and (2) for a unit whose occupancy is restricted to a very low income household, that the monthly rent consists of no more than one-twelfth of thirty-five percent of fifty percent of the median income applicable to Sacramento County less a reasonable allowance for utilities. In each case, the median income applicable to Sacramento County is as determined annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for household size.

Affordable rental agreement means legal restrictions by which the rents for rental inclusionary units will be set at such rates to ensure that rents remain affordable for a period of thirty years or longer.

City means the city of Folsom.

Community development director means the director of the community development department of the city, or his or her designee.

Condominium means and includes:

1.    Condominium as defined by Section 783 of the Civil Code;

2.    Community apartment project as defined by Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code;

3.    Stock cooperative as defined by Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code; and

4.    Planned development as defined by Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code.

The term condominium specifically includes, but is not limited to, the conversion of any existing structure for sale pursuant to a method described in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition.

Condominium conversion or conversion means a change in the ownership of a parcel or parcels of property, together with structures thereon, whereby the parcel or parcels and structures previously used as rental units are changed to condominium ownership.

Condominium project or project includes the real property and any structures thereon, or any structures to be constructed thereon, which are to be divided into condominium ownership.

Condominium unit or units means the individual spaces within a condominium project owned as individual estates.

Density bonus means increases in density in a development project above the density otherwise permitted for the applicable land use designation as provided in the Folsom Municipal Code or in an amount specified in this chapter.

Developer means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks the citys approvals for all or part of a development project. Developer includes owner.

Development agreement means an agreement entered into between the city and developer pursuant to Section 65864 of the Government Code.

Development project means any residential real estate project or mixed residential and commercial real estate project consisting of residential units, including homes, multifamily residences or other residential structures. Projects at one location undertaken in phases, stages or otherwise developed in distinct sections shall be considered a single development project for purposes of this section. Development projects are those projects for which the developer is applying for new legislative entitlements which are not otherwise exempt under the provisions of this chapter.

Dwelling unit means a residential unit within a development project.

External subsidy means any source of funds that is not local public funding, including federal or state grants, loans, bond funds, tax credits or other tax-based subsidy.

Final decision-making body means the entity with final approval authority on the development project.

First-time home buyer means that neither the purchaser nor spouse has owned a home during the past three years, or that the purchaser meets at least one of the following criteria:

1.    The purchaser is a displaced homemaker, defined as a person who has not worked full-time for at least three years, worked primarily without remuneration to care for the home and family, is unemployed or underemployed, is experiencing difficulty in obtaining or upgrading employment, and, while a homemaker, owned a home with a previous spouse;

2.    The purchaser is single (unmarried or legally separated), has one or more minor children of whom purchaser has custody, and, while previously married, owned a home with a previous spouse; or

3.    The purchaser owns or owned, during the past three years, a mobile home or trailer which is/was not permanently affixed to a permanent foundation as their principal residence.

Housing trust fund means the fund created and administered by the city for use on affordable housing projects in the city.

Inclusionary housing agreement or agreement means the agreement described in Section 17.104.100 between a developer and the city setting forth the manner in which the inclusionary housing requirement will be met in the development project.

Inclusionary housing plan means the plan described in Section 17.104.040 setting forth the manner in which the developer proposes to implement the inclusionary housing requirement or alternatives permitted in this chapter within the development project.

Inclusionary housing requirement means the provision of the inclusionary housing units in a development project as specified in Section 17.104.030 of this chapter.

Inclusionary housing unit or inclusionary unit means an ownership or rental dwelling unit developed as a part of the inclusionary housing requirement of a development project as provided in this chapter.

Inclusionary incentives means the fee waivers or reductions, planning and building standards waivers or reductions, regulatory incentives or concessions, and density bonuses provided by the city to a development project to assist in the provision of the inclusionary housing requirement.

Initial owner means the first person or persons to purchase a new for-sale inclusionary unit for his, her or their primary residence.

Land dedication fee means a fee paid to the housing trust fund of the city of Folsom for purposes of affordable housing in the city as a method of meeting the inclusionary housing requirement for a development project as provided in Section 17.104.030.

Legislative entitlements means and includes general and community plan amendments, zoning and rezoning, planned development permits and conditions and amendments thereto, tentative and final maps and development agreements.

Low income household means a household whose income does not exceed eighty percent of median income applicable to Sacramento County, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Market rate means not restricted to an affordable housing price or affordable rent.

Moderate income household means a household whose income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent of median income applicable to Sacramento County, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Multifamily residential means residential units at duplex, halfplex or greater intensity, planned, approved, or built on land planned or zoned for other than single-family residential.

Off-site means outside of the boundaries of a development project, but within the city limits of the city of Folsom.

One location means all adjacent land owned or controlled by the same owner or a related owner, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road, or other public or private right-of-way.

Owner means and includes the person, persons, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or public or private entity having sufficient proprietary interest in real property to commence, maintain, and operate a development project.

Project level approval means and includes a tentative subdivision map, a parcel map, a planned development permit, or other administrative or adjudicatory approval or determination in connection with a development project.

Related owner means a person or entity, including but not limited to partnerships, limited liability corporations, limited partnerships and corporations, which has any of the following relationships with an owner: (1) they share the majority of members of their governing boards; (2) they share two or more officers; (3) they are owned or controlled by the same majority shareholder(s) or general partner(s); (4) they are in a parent-subsidiary relationship; or (5) the person is a sibling, offspring or parent of an individual owner. For purposes of this definition, a controlling interest means fifty percent or more of the voting power of a corporation, and a parent-subsidiary relationship exists when one corporation owns, directly or indirectly, fifty percent or more of the voting power of another corporation. For purposes of this definition, a person and any general partnership in which the person is a general partner, or a person and any corporation in which the person owns a controlling interest, shall be treated as one and the same.

Residential project means the entirety of market rate residential development in a development project subject to the requirement to provide an inclusionary housing requirement as specified in this chapter.

Single-family residential means planned, approved or built on land planned or zoned solely for a permitted residential density of one unit per parcel. Where such a planning or zoning single-family designation also allows as a conditional use duplexes, halfplexes, second units, or similar uses, the designation is nonetheless considered single-family residential for purposes of the inclusionary housing requirement and the other provisions of this chapter.

Very low income household means a household whose income does not exceed fifty percent of the median income, adjusted for household size, applicable to Sacramento County, as published and periodically updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Zoning code means Title 17 of the Folsom Municipal Code as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1033  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.030 Inclusionary housing requirement.
A.    Number and Affordability of Inclusionary Units. All for-sale development projects consisting of ten or more units, including condominium conversion projects, as well as residential rental projects of ten or more units receiving funding assistance from the city or that are otherwise subject to a voluntary affordable housing agreement with the city, shall include inclusionary housing units equal to ten percent of the total number of units in the project, excluding density bonus units. The ten percent shall consist of three percent very low income units and seven percent low income units.

When four or fewer inclusionary units are required, the inclusionary units shall be provided in the following manner: one inclusionary unit: one low income unit; two inclusionary units: one low income unit and one very low income unit; three inclusionary units: two low income units and one very low income unit; four inclusionary units: three low income units and one very low income unit.

1.    Calculation of Units Required. Where the number of units required to be constructed in the development project or condominium conversion project results in a percentage other than a whole number, the developer shall round to the nearest whole number the resulting percentage from the total inclusionary housing requirement calculated as provided in this chapter and provide only the whole units resulting from the inclusionary housing requirement calculation. If, after rounding to the nearest whole number, the total number of inclusionary units provided is less than ten percent of the total project units, any difference in units shall be provided as low income units.

2.    Various Methods for Compliance. The inclusionary housing requirement may be satisfied by: including the units within the development project; providing an alternative as set forth in Section 17.104.060; providing the units off site; dedicating land for other affordable development projects; acquisition, rehabilitation, and conversion of existing market rate units; conversion of existing market rate units; paying an in-lieu fee as described in this chapter; other methods as approved by the city council that meet the intent of this chapter; or a combination of these methods or other alternatives set forth in this chapter.

B.    Implementation. The developer shall propose an inclusionary housing plan as provided in this chapter and incorporate the agreed upon plan into conditions on the project and an inclusionary housing agreement as provided in this chapter.

C.    Unit Size. The inclusionary housing requirement shall accommodate diverse family sizes by including a mix of studio, one-, two- and/or three-bedroom units and the mix of inclusionary unit sizes shall generally accommodate the household sizes identified in the citys general plan, unless otherwise negotiated in the inclusionary housing agreement. A developer may propose an alternative mix of the size of units as part of its inclusionary housing plan.

1.    Projects of forty residential units or less are exempt from the unit size requirement.

D.    Exterior Appearance. Inclusionary units shall be visually compatible with and shall have similar external building materials and finishes as the market rate units in the immediate neighborhood.

E.    Access to Common Amenities. Tenants and residents of inclusionary units shall be provided the same rights and access to common amenities in the development project as tenants and residents occupying market rate units.

F.    Smaller Parts of Larger Projects. The city shall not approve projects which reasonably appear to be smaller parts of a greater project and have the effect of circumventing the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1273  2, 2017; Ord. 1177  2, 2013: Ord. 1033  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.040 Inclusionary housing plan.
A.    Submittal Requirements. The inclusionary housing plan must include:

1.    The method by which the developer intends to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The developer shall describe the location of the inclusionary units within the development project, unit sizes, and any incentives requested.

2.    Where an alternative to constructing inclusionary units on-site is intended, the developer shall provide the following information:

a.    Detailed information on the proposed parcel(s), site, or existing market rate units including the location, assessors parcel number(s), size, color photographs, an appraisal of the property dated within the prior six months, known information on physical, environmental or other constraints affecting the use of the property, and known information regarding the positive aspects of the use of the property for affordable housing including proximity to schools, transit routes, shopping and other services.

b.    Site Suitability. The site proposed to fulfill the inclusionary housing requirement must be suitable from the perspective of size, configuration, physical characteristics, physical and environmental constraints, access, location, adjacent use, proximity to other affordable housing units and other relevant planning criteria.

c.    Current market rate rents, condition of units, and vacancy rate information for alternatives proposing to fulfill the inclusionary housing requirement through conversion of market rate units or acquisition, rehabilitation, and conversion of market rate units.

d.    A written representation that the proposed parcel(s), site, or existing market rate units is/are available and capable of being dedicated to the city by the developer and that the site and/or units shall be deed restricted as affordable housing.

3.    Timing of Development. The inclusionary housing plan and inclusionary housing agreement shall include a phasing plan that provides a schedule for the timely development of the inclusionary units as the residential project is built out. In instances where the developer demonstrates that phasing, other than concurrent with market rate units, is necessary in order to account for the different financing and funding environments, economies of scale, or infrastructure needs applicable to the development project, a phasing plan shall be provided that includes definitive dates for construction and does not inhibit the intent of this chapter to create affordable housing units. The community development director shall review the phasing plan and reasons for phasing and make recommendations to the final decision-making body on the timing of the development. The city may condition projects seeking alternative phasing to require posting of bonds, cash deposits, or other securities satisfactory to the city (i.e., deed restriction, development agreement, or withholding of building permit) in an amount sufficient to assure timely construction of the required inclusionary units and to require construction of the units within a specified period of time.

B.    Community Development Directors Scope of Authority. The community development director shall be responsible for review of the inclusionary housing plan submitted by the developer, preparation of the inclusionary housing agreement and providing recommendations on these items and other matters as provided in this chapter to the planning commission for action by the planning commission. In any case where the final authority on a project rests with the planning commission or the city council, the community development director shall make recommendations to the planning commission or the city council.

C.    Standard for Approval. The community development director shall recommend approval of the inclusionary housing plan, provided the inclusionary housing plan meets all the requirements of this chapter and is included in the inclusionary housing agreement, and based upon a determination by the community development director that the inclusionary housing plan would meet the intent of this chapter. Factors to be considered by the community development director in his/her determination to recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the proposed inclusionary housing plan include the criterion provided in this section and Sections 17.104.030 and 17.104.060, the suitability of the proposed site for single- or multifamily affordable housing, the availability of and access to infrastructure, schools, shopping and transit, current zoning of the property, and proximity to and concentration of other affordable housing locations. If a method other than on-site development is proposed to meet the inclusionary housing requirement, the proposed method must further the goal of the ordinance codified in this chapter and provide no less units or opportunity for creation of units than if the units had been included within the development project. The recommendation of the community development director shall be included in the staff report to the final decision-making body who shall approve, reject or modify the inclusionary housing plan. (Ord. 1033  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.050 Specific plan requirement.
A.    Number and Affordability of Inclusionary Units. All specific plans approved pursuant to Chapter 17.37 on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which are not otherwise exempt shall include three percent of the dwelling units restricted to and affordable to very low income households and seven percent of the dwelling units restricted to and affordable to low income households (inclusionary housing requirement).

1.    The inclusionary housing requirement required by this section shall be determined at the specific plan stage, rather than on a project by project basis. Where the inclusionary component is not included in the specific plan, it shall be included with individual projects as provided in this section.

2.    The specific plan shall include an inclusionary housing plan that establishes, as a minimum but not limited to, the following:

a.    The number of market rate units in the specific plan.

b.    The inclusionary housing requirement for very low and low income units over the entire specific plan.

c.    The location of multifamily parcels (if applicable), subdivisions and/or mixed-use development sites designated to receive the inclusionary units.

d.    The requirements for an inclusionary housing plan specified in Section 17.104.040.

3.    If the specific plan is initiated by developer(s) or property owners, the implementation of this section shall be through the inclusionary housing agreement signed and approved at the time of adoption of the specific plan.

4.    A general provision requiring that an inclusionary housing agreement shall be made a condition of all future discretionary permits for development within the specific plan. The provision shall establish that all relevant terms and conditions of any inclusionary housing agreement shall be filed and recorded as a restriction on the project as a whole and those individual lots, units, or projects which are designated as inclusionary units. The inclusionary housing agreement shall be consistent with Section 17.104.100.

5.    Every existing specific plan proposed for amendment shall incorporate into the amended specific plan an inclusionary housing plan, consistent with this section. (Ord. 1177  3, 2013: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.060 Alternative methods to meet the inclusionary housing requirement.
Alternatives to the on-site construction of the inclusionary housing requirement shall be encouraged and allowed in order to meet the housing needs for low and very low income households, consistent with the criteria in subsections A through I of this section. Alternatives may include:

A.    Land Dedication. The developer may dedicate sufficient land within the city of Folsom on which to construct at least the same number of units and infrastructure to support that number of units as the developer would be required to construct on site subject to the inclusionary housing requirement; provided, that the site will support the same number of units the developer is required to construct, has zoning of a minimum density necessary to accommodate the inclusionary housing requirement, that the site is acceptable to the city, and that the site is restricted for affordable housing. The developer shall dedicate the land to the city, an affordable housing developer, or special needs developer acceptable to the city at no cost to the city.

B.    Off-Site Construction (Off-Site). The developer may develop housing to satisfy the inclusionary housing requirement at an off-site location within the city of Folsom.

C.    Acquisition, Rehabilitation, and Conversion of Market Rate Units. The developer may propose to acquire and rehabilitate existing market rate units in the city of Folsom which are at or above existing affordable rents, which require repair, rehabilitation, modernization or other work, and convert those units to affordable for-sale housing units.

D.    Conversion of Market Rate Units. A developer may propose to convert existing market rate units in the city of Folsom which do not require rehabilitation and are at or above existing affordable rents to affordable for-sale housing units by way of deed restrictions, recorded covenants or other legal mechanisms to assure that the units remain affordable housing units.

E.    Deleted.

F.    Inclusionary Housing Credits. A developer may use inclusionary housing credits, as defined in this chapter, to meet the inclusionary housing requirement.

G.    In-Lieu Fee. A developer may pay an in-lieu fee calculated as follows to satisfy all of the inclusionary housing requirements: multiply one percent of the lowest priced for-sale residential unit in the proposed subdivision by the total number of for-sale residential units in the proposed subdivision. For custom lot subdivisions where only lots will be sold, multiply one-half percent of the estimated cost of the least expensive homes anticipated for the proposed subdivision by the total number of for-sale lots in the proposed subdivision. The in-lieu fee is payable at the time of the building permit on a per-unit basis, and may be deferred upon application by the developer and approval in the citys sole and complete discretion pursuant to Section 16.80.030. Once the in-lieu fee has been set for an initial twelve months, the amount of the fee shall be evaluated on January 1st of each following year. In the event the lowest priced for-sale residential unit or anticipated home in the subdivision changes by ten percent or more, the amount of the in-lieu fee shall be adjusted to the new amount using the formula set forth above, applicable prospectively to the remaining units or lots in the subdivision.

H.    Combination. Combination of the above alternatives.

I.    Other Alternatives. Other alternatives proposed by the developer which are accepted by the city and meet the requirements and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 1243  2, 2015; Ord. 1177  4, 2013: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.070 Incentives and assistance.
A.    Request for Incentives and Assistance. The developer of a development project which is subject to the inclusionary housing provisions of this chapter may request, and the city, in its sole discretion, may grant or deny the provision of inclusionary incentives as set forth in this section and other provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code.

B.    Fee Waivers or Deferrals. The city may grant to a developer a program of waivers, reductions or deferrals of development fees, administrative and financing fees for inclusionary units as provided in Chapter 16.60 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

C.    Modification of Planning and Public Works Development Standards. To the extent feasible in light of the uses, design, and infrastructure needs of the development project, modifications for inclusionary units may include: (1) applicable public works development standards contained in the Folsom Municipal Code, such as alternative standards relating to road widths and parking; and (2) applicable planning standards contained elsewhere in this code such as minimum lot size, alternative housing types, lot coverage, locational and other requirements for approval of duplexes and half-plexes. Nothing in this provision is intended to permit deviation from the nature and character of buildings erected in the historic district and design shall be consistent with the design guidelines adopted for that portion of the city.

D.    Density Bonuses. The city may grant to a developer fulfilling its inclusionary housing requirement through either on site or off-site development a density bonus as provided in Chapter 17.102 of the Folsom Municipal Code. As referenced in Chapter 17.102 of the Folsom Municipal Code, the definition of housing development shall be interpreted to include both the market rate and inclusionary unit components of a development project.

E.    Inclusionary Housing Credits. A developer may submit as part of the inclusionary housing plan a proposal to provide more affordable housing units or donate additional land in connection with a development project than the 15 percent required under this chapter, and may credit the additional amount of land or additional number of affordable housing units against future projects subject to the provisions of this chapter which are proposed in the city. Credits may be transferred or sold to any other person or entity subject to compliance with following conditions:

1.    The transfer or sale of the credits shall not interfere with one of the goals of the ordinance codified in this chapter which is to provide affordable housing dispersed throughout the city of Folsom.

2.    Any credits must be applied to another development project within 5 years of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the inclusionary unit(s) or implementation of an alternative method of meeting the inclusionary housing requirement (i.e., land dedication) which gives rise to the credit. For purposes of this section, applied shall mean that the credits are committed for use at a development project and included in a developers proposed inclusionary housing plan. A developer who has not used, transferred or sold credits within the time specified in this section may apply to the city for a 1 year extension on the life of the credits. A request for extension of credits shall be reviewed by the city council who shall grant or deny the request for extension. The city council shall consider progress and efforts the developer has made to utilize the credits during the previous 5 years, the impact on affordable housing if the extension is granted, any proposals for use of the credits should the extension be granted and other relevant factors.

3.    Inclusionary units receiving monetary subsidies through the city shall not receive credits unless the city has been reimbursed for its financial assistance.

F.    Mixed Use. In order to provide additional opportunity for development of inclusionary units, residential development that would fully or partially fulfill the inclusionary housing requirement of a development project may be implemented in conjunction with commercial or office use in the central business (C-2), general commercial (C-3), and business and professional office (BP) zoning districts as consistent with applicable provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code.

G.    Local Public Funding. The developer may apply to the Folsom Redevelopment Agency (RDA) for local public funding to assist in the financing and development of the inclusionary housing requirement.

H.    Local Public Subsidy. The developer of the development project may apply to the Folsom Redevelopment Agency (RDA) or to the administrator of the housing trust fund for local public subsidy.

1.    Inclusionary units provided through the acquisition, rehabilitation, and conversion alternative shall be eligible for funding assistance through the citys substantial rehabilitation program. (Ord. 1177  5, 2013; Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.080 Exempted residential development.
The following development projects are exempt from this chapter and generate no obligation to provide an inclusionary housing requirement:

A.    Residential projects proposed to contain nine or fewer market rate units.

B.    Parcels covered by development agreements which legally restrict the imposing of this chapter; however, nothing shall preclude modification of any development agreements with the consent of the property owner.

C.    Parcels which have tentative subdivision or final maps approved prior to September 24, 2002.

D.    Parcels where the developer can demonstrate that it has acquired vested rights to develop the property such that the city cannot legally require compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.090 Restrictions on inclusionary units.
Each inclusionary unit created as a result of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have limitations governing its occupancy and its sale and/or resale. The purpose of these limitations is to preserve the long-term affordability and to ensure its continued availability for income-eligible households.

A.    Duration of Affordability for Rental Inclusionary Units. Rental inclusionary units under subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section shall remain affordable for a period of no less than thirty years from the recordation of the affordable rental agreement unless state law requires a longer period. The affordable rental agreement shall be recorded no later than the issuance of the first building permit for the rental inclusionary project under subsection (C)(1) of this section, and prior to the first day of rental of the inclusionary unit under subsection (C)(2) of this section. Rental units under subsection (C)(2) of this section shall be rented to an income-eligible person at the same income level of the original for-sale affordable housing price.

B.    Affordability and Resale of For-Sale Units.

1.    Sale and Resale to an Income-Eligible PersonException. After the initial sale of inclusionary for-sale units at a price affordable to the target income level group, inclusionary for-sale units shall remain affordable to subsequent income-eligible buyers pursuant to a resale restriction with a term of twenty years, or longer if required by state law or other provisions of this code. The initial owner shall be a first-time home buyer as defined in this chapter. Subsequent owners are not required to be a first-time home buyer. The resale restriction shall require that the unit will be sold, by the initial owner and any subsequent owner, at the same affordable housing price income level as originally sold and will remain at that income level for the duration of the resale restriction term. For example, a home that was sold to the initial owner at a very low income level shall be sold to a subsequent owner who qualifies at the very low income level.

a.    If the owner is unable to sell the inclusionary unit within sixty days of offering and advertising the unit for sale, the owner may offer to sell the unit to the city at the affordable housing price at the time of offer. If the city or its assignee does not complete the purchase of the unit within ninety days of the owners offer of sale to the city, the resale obligations of this section shall terminate; however, the provisions of this section relating to recapture upon sale shall continue to apply and remain in full force and effect.

2.    Recapture upon Sale. If the inclusionary unit does not sell within sixty days of offering and advertising the unit for sale and if the city does not acquire the inclusionary unit as specified in this section, the inclusionary unit may be sold at the current market price, and the seller shall pay to the city housing trust fund all proceeds from the sale of the unit less a percentage of profit, if any, as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, profit is defined as the net proceeds from the sale after deducting loan(s), ordinary expenses attributed to the seller, including real estate commissions not to exceed six percent, and after deducting the current affordable housing price. If the owner has made improvements to the home, profit shall be determined by deducting the adjusted basis of the home, or the current affordable housing price, whichever is higher.

a.    The percentage of profit retained by the owner shall vary according to the number of years an owner owns the residential unit. The percentage of profit to be allocated to the owner is provided as follows:

Years Current Owner Owned Residence

Percentage of Profit to Current Owner

Percent Profit Paid to the Citys Housing Trust Fund

Less than 1

10

90

Less than 2

20

80

Less than 3

30

70

Less than 4

40

60

5 or more

50

50

3.    Evaluation of Owners Repayment Ability. On a biannual basis, owners of for-sale inclusionary units who have acquired a second mortgage or other secondary financing or loan provided by the city will be evaluated by the city housing coordinator as to their ability to initiate repayment procedures. Where the city determines the owners household income exceeds the affordable income level applicable to the inclusionary unit, the city may require repayment according to the terms provided in the deed of trust or other financing document(s).

4.    Guidelines. The city may adopt guidelines for the administration of this program by resolution of the city council.

5.    Home Ownership Incentive. The city and/or the RDA may establish guidelines by resolution to create incentives for home ownership, including partial loan forgiveness provisions relating to loans or second trust deeds provided by the city depending on the length of time a qualified owner has occupied the residence.

C.    Occupancy Requirement.

1.    Rental Units. Any person(s) who occupies a rental inclusionary unit produced or acquired with funding assistance from the city or is otherwise subject to a voluntary affordable housing agreement between the city and the units developer shall occupy that unit as his or her principal residence and shall annually certify that he/she qualifies for the applicable affordable rent level. The citys housing coordinator shall annually initiate this certification process. If and when any person(s) who rents an inclusionary unit no longer qualifies at the applicable affordable rent and income levels, that person(s) shall be required to quit the unit or pay the market rate for the unit provided another rental unit is made available at the income level of the inclusionary unit.

2.    For-Sale Units. Except as provided in this section, an initial owner who purchases a for-sale inclusionary unit shall occupy that unit as his or her principal residence. The inclusionary housing agreement shall provide that a for-sale inclusionary unit may be rented or leased only after the owner, initial or subsequent, has resided in the inclusionary unit for a period of not less than two years. If the owner rents or leases the inclusionary unit, the renter or lessee shall be an income-eligible person at the same income level of the original for-sale affordable housing price. For example, if the initial owner bought the unit at the very low income housing price, the unit shall be rented to tenants of very low income household.

a.    Any person offering a for-sale inclusionary unit for rent or lease shall notify the city housing coordinator in writing, prior to the renting of the unit, that the unit is offered for rent or lease. Any person offering a for-sale inclusionary unit for rent or lease shall notify prospective tenants of the income eligibility requirements.

b.    If the city has provided loans, incentives or other deeds of trust on a for-sale inclusionary unit, the city may include provisions, based on the ability of the owner to repay the loan or other financing instrument, in the deeds of trust to require repayment of the note secured by that deed of trust if the property is not owner occupied.

c.    If the city has provided loans, financial assistance or other incentives to purchaser of a for-sale inclusionary unit, the city shall require, in a recorded affordability covenant, that the unit, if rented or leased by the owner, initial or subsequent, pursuant to subsection (C)(2) of this section, shall be rented at an affordable rent level no greater a rental rate than the affordable rent level currently in effect. Any person(s) who occupies a rental inclusionary unit shall occupy that unit as his or her principal residence and shall annually certify that he/she qualifies for the applicable affordable rent level. The citys housing coordinator shall annually initiate this certification process. If and when any person(s) who rents an inclusionary unit no longer qualifies at the applicable affordable rent and income levels, that person(s) shall be required to quit the unit or pay the market rate for the unit provided another rental unit is made available at the income level of the inclusionary unit.

3.    Converted Units. Units which are converted from market rate units shall follow the requirements of subsections A, B, and C of this section based on the type of converted residential unit applicable.

4.    Resident or Work Eligibility for Affordable Housing Units. To the extent permissible under applicable state and federal law, people who work and/or reside in the city of Folsom shall have priority over other persons to rent or purchase inclusionary units constructed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Priority shall be established according to the following provisions:

a.    Work. First priority shall first be given to qualified applicants who work in the city of Folsom. To qualify as a person who works in the city of Folsom, the person responsible for renting or purchasing the inclusionary housing unit must demonstrate that both of the following criteria have been met:

i.    Type of Work. The applicant must have worked in the city of Folsom for a minimum of one year immediately preceding the date of application. Work is defined for purposes of this section as owning or operating a business, employment for wages or salary for an employer located in the city of Folsom, contract employment where the actual work is conducted at a city of Folsom location, or commission work where the applicants principal location from which he/she worked is located in the city of Folsom.

ii.    Hours of Work. The applicant must have been employed in the city of Folsom an average of at least twenty hours per week over the course of the qualifying year.

b.    Resident. Second priority shall be given to a qualified applicant(s) for rental or for-sale units who is a resident of the city of Folsom. To qualify as a resident of the city of Folsom, the person responsible for renting or purchasing the inclusionary unit must have their principal place of residence in the city of Folsom for a minimum of one year immediately preceding the date of application.

c.    Where no applicants meet the priority criteria set forth above, the inclusionary housing units may be made available to other qualified applicants.

d.    The owner or manager of inclusionary units, which are offered for rent, sale, or lease, shall require the applicant to provide proof that he/she meets the occupancy and income criteria set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1177  6, 2013: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.100 Administration of the inclusionary housing requirement.
A.    Proposed Inclusionary Housing Plan. At the time of and as part of the application for the first legislative entitlement, the developer of a development project shall submit a draft inclusionary housing plan consistent with the requirements of Section 17.104.040.

B.    Action on Inclusionary Housing Plan. The inclusionary housing plan shall be subject to the same review and approval as the legislative entitlements. No legislative entitlement shall be granted without an approved inclusionary housing plan. The elements of the inclusionary housing plan shall be incorporated into the terms and conditions of the applicable legislative entitlements and project-level approvals.

1.    Amendment of Inclusionary Housing Plan. The community development director shall have the authority to approve amendments of the inclusionary housing plan to reflect changes in the underlying development project. Where the proposed amendment(s) will result in a change in the phasing or timing of development of the inclusionary units, the amendment must be reviewed under the criteria in Section 17.104.040(A)(3).

2.    Amendment Process. Amendments which will result in the modification of conditions shall be subject to notice, review, approval and appeal in the same manner as the original approval.

C.    Inclusionary Housing Agreement.

1.    Requirement. No project-level approval may be issued by the city without an inclusionary housing agreement executed by the owner and recorded against the property, the developer (if not owner) and the community development director, and approved by the city attorney; provided, that a tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map may be approved prior to execution or recordation of an inclusionary housing agreement if (a) an inclusionary housing plan including a phasing plan has been approved; (b) any tentative map or parcel map contains conditions that enforce the applicable phasing and other requirements of the housing plan; and (c) the legislative entitlements contain provisions that condition approval of planned development permits, plan review, or building permits on execution and recordation of, and compliance with, an inclusionary housing agreement.

2.    Contents. The agreement shall be consistent with the inclusionary housing plan, and shall indicate ownership information, the number and size of very low and low income units, the developer of the inclusionary units, the phasing and construction scheduling of the inclusionary units, commitments for inclusionary incentives and any other information required by the city relative to the inclusionary housing requirement. In the case of alternatives to the inclusionary housing requirement, the agreement shall also contain the information required in this chapter pertaining to the alternative.

3.    Information Required from Developer. The developer of the development project shall present to the city: (a) plans, schematics, and details of phasing of the residential project as a whole, including the inclusionary housing requirement; (b) the name and address of the entity which will develop the inclusionary housing requirement if not the developer; (c) in the case of land dedication, an executed irrevocable offer of dedication at no cost to the city; (d) in the case of off-site location, the evidence of control or ownership of the site required in this chapter; and (e) any other information reasonably required by the city in connection with the agreement.

4.    Incentives. The community development director shall recommend to the final decision-making body which inclusionary incentives, if any have been requested by the developer, the city will make available in connection with the development project as provided in this chapter. The inclusionary housing agreement shall specify the nature of the incentives provided.

5.    Incorporation into Project-Level Approvals and Recordation. The developer obligations and the inclusionary incentives in the agreement shall be incorporated into the applicable project-level approvals. The executed agreement shall be recorded as a covenant running with the land against the real property of the residential project and, in the case of off-site inclusionary units, against the real property on which such inclusionary units are to be located.

D.    Affordable Rental and Affordable Housing Agreements. Upon approval of the entitlements for a for-sale development project which shall include inclusionary units, or a residential rental development project to be produced with funding assistance from the city or is otherwise subject to a voluntary affordable housing agreement with the city, the developer shall record with the county recorders office an affordable rent agreement or affordable housing agreement against the parcels identified in the inclusionary housing plan for the inclusionary units. Where the inclusionary unit is a for-sale unit within a development project, the developer shall record the affordable housing agreement relating to the lot(s) within the development project which are to be inclusionary units prior to the issuance of a building permit on any lot(s) within the development project.

E.    Administration of Affordability for Rental Inclusionary Housing. The owner of rental inclusionary units or for-sale inclusionary units offered for rent pursuant to Section 17.104.090(C)(2) shall be responsible for certifying the income of tenant to the city at the time of initial rental and annually thereafter. The owner of a for-sale inclusionary unit shall certify to the city the income of the initial purchaser and shall certify to the city that the initial purchaser is a first-time home buyer. The owner of rental inclusionary units shall apply the same rental terms and conditions (except rent levels, deposits and income requirements) to tenants of inclusionary units as are applied to all other tenants, except as otherwise required to comply with government subsidy programs. Discrimination based on subsidies received by the prospective tenant is prohibited. The city shall keep confidential the personal identifying information of the household members occupying an inclusionary unit.

F.    Reserved.

G.    Guidelines. The community development director may develop and adopt additional guidelines as necessary for the implementation of this chapter consistent with the terms contained herein and consistent with any guidelines adopted by the city council as provided in this chapter.

H.    Appeal. Where the provisions of this chapter vest the community development director with final decision-making authority, any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the community development director may appeal that decision to the planning commission. Any appeal of a decision of the community development director must be filed with the community development department within ten calendar days of the date the decision is rendered by the community development director. The community development department shall set the appeal before the planning commission at the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting, but in no case less than ten calendar days after the community development directors decision. (Ord. 1273  3, 2017; Ord. 1177  7, 2013: Ord. 1033  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.110 Monitoring of inclusionary housing.
A.    Developers. Developers that have an inclusionary housing agreement requiring the provision of inclusionary housing units will be monitored by the city annually to assure compliance with the inclusionary housing agreement.

B.    Inclusionary Units. Units will be monitored by the city to verify that the units are and will remain affordable.

1.    Rental Inclusionary Unit. Owners of the rental inclusionary units produced with funding assistance from the city or that are otherwise subject to a voluntary affordable housing agreement with the city will be monitored by the city annually to certify that tenant(s) occupying the unit(s) are income qualified to remain in the unit and that the rent is at or below the affordable rent as stipulated in Section 17.104.090. Owners of the for-sale inclusionary units offered for rent will be monitored by the city annually to certify that tenant(s) occupying the unit(s) are income qualified to remain in the unit. The city shall further monitor approximately ten percent of tenants annually by: (a) requiring the owner submit a copy of the signed rental or lease agreement to verify the rental rate, and (b) independently verifying that the tenant is income-eligible to reside in the inclusionary unit.

2.    For-Sale Inclusionary Unit. Owners of for-sale inclusionary units will be monitored by the city to certify that the unit: (a) if sold during the monitoring period, was sold at an affordable for-sale price and to an income qualifying person, (b) is being occupied by the original income-qualifying buyer, and (c) if the unit is being rented or leased it is to an income-eligible household for a rental rate that is at or below the affordable rent as stipulated in Section 17.104.090.

C.    Reporting. An annual reporting mechanism shall be created by the city to identify the number of inclusionary units, by very low or low income, that have been required by inclusionary housing agreements during the annual reporting period, the number of inclusionary units, by very low or low income, planned for creation in inclusionary housing agreements during the annual reporting period, the number of inclusionary units, by very low or low income, created during the annual reporting period, and the number of inclusionary housing credits, by very low and low income, both made available and used during the annual reporting period. The report shall also include the results of the monitoring of developers and inclusionary units in subsections A and B of this section and any corrective actions taken if the units were not being rented, sold, or occupied as stipulated in Section 17.104.090. The report shall identify in shortfall between the number of inclusionary units planned for creation and the number of units actually created. This information may be used for future change and amendments to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1177  8, 2013; Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.120 Administrative fees.
The city council may, by resolution, establish reasonable fees and deposits to defray cost of processing applications, proposals and for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.130 Taking determination.
A.    Commencing upon execution of the inclusionary housing agreement and within fifteen days thereafter, a developer may request a determination that the requirements of this chapter, taken together with the inclusionary incentives, as applied to the residential project through the inclusionary housing agreement, would legally constitute a taking of property of the residential project without just compensation under the California or federal Constitutions. If the developer and the city have been unable to reach agreement on the terms of an inclusionary housing agreement, the applicable draft for purposes of the taking determination shall be the final draft proposed by the city which the developer may execute under protest without recordation. The developer has the burden of providing economic information and other evidence necessary to establish that application of the provisions of the inclusionary housing agreement to the residential project would constitute a taking of the property of the proposed residential project without just compensation.

B.    The community development director shall make the takings determination based on all information provided to him/her. The community development directors determination shall be a final decision subject to appeal as provided in this chapter. In making the taking determination, the community development director shall assume each of the following: (1) incorporation of the inclusionary housing requirement in the residential project; (2) application of the inclusionary incentives; (3) incorporation into the residential project of the most cost-efficient product type for the inclusionary units; and (4) external funding where reasonably likely to occur.

C.    If it is determined by the community development director that the application of the provisions of this chapter through the inclusionary housing agreement would be a taking, the inclusionary housing plan and the inclusionary housing agreement shall be reviewed by the decision-making body to be modified to reduce the obligations in the inclusionary housing requirement to the extent, and only to the extent, necessary to avoid a taking. If it is determined by the community development director that no taking would occur though application of the inclusionary housing agreement to the residential project, the requirements of this chapter remain applicable, and no project-level approval shall be issued unless the developer has executed and recorded the inclusionary housing agreement as proposed by the city. (Ord. 1033  2 (part), 2005: Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

17.104.140 Enforcement and penalties.
It shall be unlawful to sell any inclusionary unit without compliance with each and every provision of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to offer for lease or rent, or to enter into a lease or rental agreement, or to collect lease or rental payments without compliance with each and every provision of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or an administrative violation punishable as follows:

A.    A violation of this chapter shall be an administrative violation as defined in Section 1.08.020. In addition to enforcement as set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, inclusive, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Notwithstanding the procedure for administrative violations provided in Chapters 1.08 through 1.10, no notice to correct as provided in Section 1.09.023 shall be required prior to issuance of a notice of administrative violation.

C.    Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified in Section 1.09.013 shall be available for enforcement of this chapter.

D.    Based on the criteria for the imposition of administrative violations set forth in Section 1.09.014, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a Level B violation, as that term is described in Section 1.09.012. The range of monetary sanctions available for a violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.09.012(A).

E.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof and, shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 958  2 (part), 2002)

Chapter 17.105
SECOND DWELLING UNITS
Sections:

17.105.010    Purpose.

17.105.020    Permitted locations.

17.105.030    Definitions.

17.105.040    Ministerial approval.

17.105.050    Guest house/pool house exemption.

17.105.060    Development standards.

17.105.070    Density.

17.105.080    Appeal.

17.105.090    Appeal hearings.

17.105.100    Action on appeal.

17.105.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit second dwelling units in single-family residential zoning districts and on residential property consistent with state law (California Government Code Sections 65852.1 through 65852.2). This chapter is intended to expand housing opportunities by increasing the number of housing units available within existing neighborhoods while maintaining the primarily residential character of the area. Second dwelling units are intended to provide livable housing at lower cost while providing greater security, companionship and family support for the occupants, consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.020 Permitted locations.
A.    Second dwelling units shall be permitted in conjunction with existing single-family dwelling units in single-family residential zoning districts as provided under this chapter. Except as herein noted, second dwelling units shall not be permitted in other zoning districts.

B.    Second dwelling units in the historic district shall be subject to the requirements in this chapter and Chapter 17.52 and, in the event of a conflict, the requirements in Chapter 17.52 shall control as to the conflict and the remaining provisions in this chapter shall continue to apply. (Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A.    Accessory building or structure means a detached, subordinate building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot, or to the use of the land but is not used or intended for habitation. Accessory buildings may be located as close as five feet to side and rear property lines.

B.    Efficiency unit means a dwelling unit having a living area of not less than one hundred fifty square feet of total floor area and an additional space for a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower. The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear work area of not less than thirty inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to the adopted uniform codes shall be provided.

C.    Guest house/pool house means an attached or detached habitable structure with only sleeping, living, and bathroom provisions, without indoor kitchen or cooking facilities.

D.    Living area means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including basements and attics, but does not include a garage or any accessory structures.

E.    Primary dwelling unit means an existing single-family residential structure on a single parcel with provisions for living, sleeping, eating, a single kitchen for cooking, and sanitation facilities occupied and intended for one household.

F.    Second dwelling unit means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation sited on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. A second dwelling unit may also be referred to as a granny flat, a second unit, or an accessory dwelling unit.

G.    Passageway means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the second dwelling unit.

H.    Car share vehicle means a motor vehicle that is operated as part of a regional fleet by a public or private car sharing company or organization and provides hourly or daily service. (Ord. 1273  4, 5, 2017; Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.040 Ministerial approval.
If the application for a second dwelling unit complies with all of the requirements of this chapter, and the project does not present any adverse impacts on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Places, this application shall be considered ministerially without discretionary review, within one hundred twenty days of submittal of a complete building permit application. (Ord. 1273  6, 2017: Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.050 Guest house/pool house exemption.
One guest house or pool house per parcel is permitted on parcels with a minimum six-thousand-square-foot lot area. For purposes of this chapter, pool houses/guest houses shall comply with all requirements of accessory buildings under this title, including but not limited to a minimum five-foot setback requirement to side and rear property lines. (Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.060 Development standards.
The development standards in this section only apply to second dwelling units.

A.    Maximum Number. Only one second dwelling unit shall be permitted per parcel or lot in conjunction with an existing primary dwelling unit, regardless of the number of single-family dwellings on the lot.

B.    Minimum Lot Size. The parcel on which the second dwelling unit is proposed shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand square feet.

C.    Maximum Dwelling Size. If attached, the second dwelling unit shall have a living area not to exceed fifty percent of the living area of the primary dwelling unit, up to a maximum of one thousand two hundred square feet; however, if the floor area of the primary dwelling unit is less than one thousand two hundred square feet, then, notwithstanding the foregoing, the floor area of an attached secondary dwelling unit may exceed fifty percent of the living area of the primary dwelling unit, up to a maximum of one thousand two hundred square feet as long as all other requirements of this chapter are met. If detached, the second dwelling unit shall not exceed a maximum of one thousand two hundred square feet of living area.

D.    Minimum Dwelling Size. A second dwelling unit shall be no smaller than, and shall at a minimum meet the description of, an efficiency unit.

E.    Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the single-family residential zoning district may be increased for second dwelling units up to a maximum of ten percent, except in the historic district where the maximum lot coverage may only be increased up to a maximum of five percent.

F.    Utilities. All necessary public and private utilities and services shall be required for the second dwelling unit. Second dwelling units shall not be considered new residential uses for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service.

G.    Severability. The residential lot, on which a second dwelling unit has been constructed, shall not be subdivided to create separate parcel ownership for the primary dwelling unit or the second dwelling unit.

H.    Entrance. A separate entrance, independent of the entrance for the primary dwelling unit, shall be provided. Any entrances to a second dwelling unit shall not be located on the same building elevation as the entrance to the primary dwelling unit. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of a second dwelling unit.

I.    Parking. The second dwelling unit shall be required to provide no more than one off-street parking space per unit. Additional parking may be required, up to a maximum of one parking space per bedroom; provided, that a finding is made by the director of community development department that the additional parking requirements are directly related to the use of the second dwelling unit and are consistent with any existing neighborhood standards applicable to the existing primary dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a second dwelling unit is not required to provide parking in any of the following instances:

1.    The second dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit.

2.    The second dwelling unit is located in the historic district.

3.    The second dwelling unit is part of an existing primary dwelling unit or an existing accessory building or structure.

4.    When there is a car share vehicle, as defined in this chapter, located within one block of the second dwelling unit.

J.    Conformity with Regulatory Requirements.

1.    Attached or detached second dwelling units shall comply with the height, setback, and lot coverage standards as well as fees, charges and other zoning requirements applicable to construction in the permitted single-family residential zoning district.

2.    A second dwelling unit may be within, attached to, or detached from the existing primary dwelling unit. If within or attached, the second dwelling unit shall comply with all required building setbacks for the primary dwelling unit. If detached, the second dwelling unit shall be separated from the primary dwelling unit by a minimum of six feet or a separation defined in the California Building Code as being adequate to prevent fires from moving from one building to the next, whichever is the greater requirement to maximize fire safety, and shall maintain a minimum setback from property lines of five feet.

3.    Notwithstanding the foregoing, a second dwelling unit may be located as close as five feet from a rear property line; provided, that the structure is no higher than eighteen feet tall measured from the highest part of the structure to natural grade. The maximum allowed height of a second dwelling unit may increase as the distance between the second dwelling unit and the property line increases as follows: for every additional foot of setback, the maximum height may be increased by one-half foot; however, except in the historic district, the height of the second dwelling unit may not exceed the height of the primary dwelling unit or the maximum height allowed in the single-family residential zoning district, whichever is lower. In the historic district, the height of the second dwelling unit shall be governed by Chapter 17.52 and the historic district design and development guidelines.

K.    Design. The second dwelling unit shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible with adjacent and nearby buildings, and shall appear subsidiary in mass and scale to the primary dwelling unit. The visual relationship between adjacent and nearby buildings shall be consistent and architecturally appropriate in terms of materials, colors, building elements, building mass, and other constructed elements of the urban environment such that abrupt or severe differences are avoided. An appropriate design should emphasize the primary/secondary nature of the buildings relationship to each other as well as the need to ensure, to the greatest extent possible, the privacy of neighboring parcels. Special care should be taken concerning the location and orientation of the detached second dwelling unit so that it does not materially reduce the privacy otherwise enjoyed by residents of an abutting property. Considerations shall include the slope or grade of the lot, placement of windows, decks, balconies, and landscape.

L.    In the historic overlay zoning district, the design of second dwelling units shall be consistent with the design and development guidelines of Chapter 17.52 (H-D, Historic District) and the historic district design and development guidelines (HDDDG).

M.    Owner-Occupancy Requirement. Either the primary dwelling unit or the second dwelling unit must be occupied by the owner of the residential lot. If neither of the units is occupied by the property owner, the approval of the second dwelling unit shall terminate immediately and the unit shall not be rented, leased or occupied as a separate dwelling. A restrictive covenant, in a form acceptable to the community development director, shall be recorded prior to the issuance of any building permits for the second dwelling unit which specifies the owner-occupancy requirement.

N.    The second dwelling unit may be rented but shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling unit.

O.    All other zoning requirements generally applicable to residential construction in the zone in which the second dwelling unit is located, as well as all applicable building and uniform codes, shall apply to the second dwelling unit. Second dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary dwelling unit.

P.    The second dwelling unit must be eligible to receive city water and sewer services.

Q.    The creation of a second dwelling unit through the conversion of all or a portion of a garage is prohibited. (Ord. 1273  7, 2017; Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.070 Density.
Second dwelling units in compliance with this chapter shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which they are located. (Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.080 Appeal.
A.    If an applicant or other person whose property rights may be affected is dissatisfied with any determination made by the director of the community development department, such person may appeal to the planning commission. If an applicant or other person whose property rights may be affected is dissatisfied with any determination made by the planning commission, such person(s) may appeal to the city council.

B.    Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the specific reason for the appeal and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the director of the community development department not later than ten calendar days after the date of the action being appealed. The appeal must be accompanied by an appeal fee as established by resolution of the city council. If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of the action against which the appeal is made shall be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.090 Appeal hearings.
Appeal hearings shall be conducted no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting following thirty calendar days after the date of filing an appeal. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be served on the applicant at least ten calendar days preceding the date of the hearing. Notice specifying the date, time and place of the hearing shall be posted on the subject property at least ten calendar days preceding the date of the hearing. (Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

17.105.100 Action on appeal.
The appeal body shall review the entire proceeding relating to the act or decision being appealed, de novo, and may make any order it deems just and equitable, including granting of a permit. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appeal body shall prepare a written decision which either grants or denies the appeal, and contains findings of fact and conclusions. The decision shall be served on the applicant. The decision shall become final upon the date of filing and service. (Ord. 1110  2 (part), 2008)

Chapter 17.108
EMERGENCY SHELTERS
Sections:

17.108.010    Purpose and intent.

17.108.020    Definitions.

17.108.030    Location of emergency shelters.

17.108.040    Standards.

17.108.050    Expiration.

17.108.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter establishes use and development regulations for emergency shelter facilities in accordance with state law and the citys adopted housing element. In accordance with state law, local communities have a responsibility to provide adequate sites for emergency shelters that serve homeless individuals and families. The goal of emergency shelters is to address acute needs of individuals and families by providing basic residential facilities and may include programs, which help residents find available social services. Consistent with the findings of the state legislature, the city recognizes the need for and the benefit of temporary housing and services for homeless persons and families. This chapter is intended to allow for the development of emergency shelter facilities in conjunction with specified uses and in particular zoning districts, subject to development and operational standards that minimize potential adverse impacts on nearby properties and the community as a whole. (Ord. 970  2 (part), 2002)

17.108.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section.

Emergency shelter means a temporary residential facility, which provides overnight accommodations and incidental services for homeless persons and/or families on a short-term basis.

Religious facility means a building used for the assembly of people for public worship or other religious ceremonies. Buildings used for residential, educational, recreational or other uses not normally associated with worship are excluded. (Ord. 970  2 (part), 2002)

17.108.030 Location of emergency shelters.
Emergency shelters are permitted in conjunction with religious facilities, subject to the location restrictions identified in this section. Emergency shelters are further permitted by right in the neighborhood apartment (R-3) and general apartment (R-4) districts as an allowed use. Emergency shelters are also permitted within the citys industrial zoning districts (light industrial (M-1), general industrial (M-2), and limited manufacturing (M-L) districts) with approval of a use permit in accordance with provisions of Chapter 17.60 (Use Permits) and subject to the location restrictions identified in this section. With respect to use permit applications, the city shall set the matter for public hearing within thirty days of receiving a complete application. Emergency shelters shall not be located within three hundred feet of any other existing emergency shelter facility. (Ord. 1146  2 (part), 2011: Ord. 970  2 (part), 2002)

17.108.040 Standards.
In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district, the following standards apply to emergency shelters and each emergency shelter shall comply with the standards set forth in this section. In the event of conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply. Nothing in this section modifies the requirements for approval of a religious facility as otherwise provided in this code.

A.    Facility compliance with applicable state and local standards and requirements.

1.    Federal, state, and local licensing as required for any program incidental to the emergency shelter.

B.    Physical Characteristics.

1.    Compliance with applicable state and local housing, building, and fire code requirements.

2.     The facility shall have on-site security during all hours when the shelter is open.

3.    Facilities shall provide exterior lighting on pedestrian pathways and parking lot areas on the property. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

4.    Facilities shall provide secure areas for personal property.

5.    If the emergency shelter is proposed in conjunction with a religious facility, the area utilized for emergency shelter facilities may not exceed fifty percent of the total floor area used for the religious facility.

6.    Where a day care facility or elementary or middle school is operated on the same site as an emergency shelter, the day care and school facilities must be separated from the emergency shelter facilities by means to prevent access from one facility to the other.

C.    Limited Number of Beds per Facility. Emergency shelters accessory to a religious facility shall not exceed twenty beds. Other emergency shelters located in the citys residential or industrial zoning districts shall not exceed forty beds.

D.    Limited Terms of Stay. The maximum term of staying at an emergency shelter is six months in a consecutive twelve-month period.

E.    Parking. The emergency shelter shall provide on-site parking at a rate of two spaces per facility for staff plus one space per six occupants allowed at the maximum capacity.

F.    Emergency Shelter Management. A management plan is required for all emergency shelters to address management experience, good neighbor issues, transportation, client supervision, client services, and food services. Such plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning, inspections, and permitting department prior to operation of the emergency shelter. The plan shall include a floor plan that demonstrates compliance with the physical standards of this chapter. The operator of each emergency shelter shall annually submit the management plan to the planning, inspections and permitting department with updated information for review and approval. The city council may establish a fee by resolution to cover the administrative cost of review of the required management plan. (Ord. 1146  2 (part), 2011: Ord. 970  2 (part), 2002)

17.108.050 Expiration.
Unless a building permit has been issued for the development within one year after the granting of the conditional use permit, as required by this chapter, or such further time as the commission shall allow, then without further action the conditional use permit shall be null and void. (Ord. 970  2 (part), 2002)

Chapter 17.110
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
Sections:

17.110.010    Purpose and intent.

17.110.020    Definitions.

17.110.030    Condominium conversion permit.

17.110.040    Condominium conversion permit application.

17.110.050    Application review and action.

17.110.060    Condominium conversion requirements.

17.110.070    Administrative fees.

17.110.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    On November 9, 2004, the city council adopted Resolution No. 7470 directing staff to draft a condominium conversion ordinance. The resolution was published as required by law. On March 22, 2005, the city council adopted uncodified emergency Ordinance No. 1035 relating to condominium conversions, and Ordinance No. 1042 was adopted by the city council on June 28, 2005, to extend the previously adopted emergency ordinance to October 26, 2005.

B.    On December 14, 2004, the city council approved a vesting tentative map for the Lakeridge Apartment Complex. This 324-unit apartment project is being converted to condominiums. In the past three months, three additional apartment projects, Ashton Place, Sherwood and Canyon Terrace have submitted applications for vesting tentative maps and intend to convert the apartments to condominiums. On April 26, 2005, the city council approved the vesting tentative map and condominium conversion application for Ashton Place. Staff has received other inquiries pertaining to conversion of large apartment projects to condominiums.

C.    A trend exists statewide to convert apartments to condominiums.

D.    Condominium conversion projects differ from other subdivisions and apartments as they were not, in most cases, originally constructed or designed with single-family ownership in mind. Consequently, the projects were not reviewed, nor were conditions in place to address issues that might apply to ownership projects, but not to the same project if it remained a rental apartment project.

E.    Conversion of apartment rental units to for-sale condominium units may conflict with the policies of the city to provide a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing within the city and within the citys neighborhoods, to provide a variety of individual choice of tenure, type, price and location of housing, and to ensure an adequate supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons and families.

F.    It is also recognized that condominium conversion projects may benefit the city by providing a source of more affordable ownership housing.

G.    The city, in exercising its police power to enact ordinances designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and to assure that the conversion of apartments to condominiums does not have an adverse effect on the citys housing alternatives for people of all income levels, adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter to provide reasonable regulations and standards to govern conversion of apartment rental units. To ensure that any negative impacts involving conversion projects are avoided in both the short and long term, while maximizing the benefits of such projects, the city council finds it necessary to establish reasonable requirements and procedures for the review and approval of residential condominium conversions, as well as regulations to govern the operation of the converted projects after the units are sold.

H.    This chapter is intended to apply only to residential condominium conversion projects and to ensure such projects are approved consistently with policies and objectives of the city, particularly the following:

1.    To make adequate provision for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community;

2.     To facilitate ownership opportunities for condominium units which will be occupied by owners;

3.     To recognize the need to provide for a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing;

4.     To help mitigate the impact of eviction for residents of rental units as a result of their units being converted to condominiums;

5.     To inform existing tenants and prospective condominium purchasers of the conversion application, its overall impacts, and the physical conditions of the structure offered for purchase; and

6.     To ensure that units being converted to condominiums meet the reasonable physical standards as required by this chapter and all other provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code. (Ord. 1041  1 (part), 2005)

17.110.020 Definitions.
The following definitions pertain to this chapter related to condominium conversions and new construction:

A.    Applicant means the owner(s) or subdivider(s) with a controlling interest in the proposed project, and any successors in interest.

B.    Association means the organization created to own, lease, manage, maintain, preserve and control the lots, parcels or areas of a project, or any portions thereof or interests therein owned in common by the owners of the separately owned condominium units.

C.    Common area means an entire condominium project excepting all units therein.

D.    Condominium means and includes:

1.    Condominium as defined by Section 783 of the Civil Code;

2.    Community apartment project as defined by Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code;

3.    Stock cooperative as defined by Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code; and

4.    Planned development as defined by Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code.

The term condominium specifically includes, but is not limited to, the conversion of any existing structure for sale pursuant to a method described in subsections (D)(1) through (4) of this section.

E.    Condominium conversion or conversion means a change in the ownership of a parcel or parcels of property, together with structures thereon, whereby the parcel or parcels and structures previously used as rental units are changed to condominium ownership. Condominium conversion includes projects which have previously obtained final map approval, but have not proceeded to sell any of the apartment units to individual unit owners.

F.    Condominium project or project includes the real property and any structures thereon, or any structures to be constructed thereon, which are to be divided into condominium ownership.

G.    Condominium unit or units means the individual spaces within a condominium project owned as individual estates.

H.    Eligible tenant means any tenant who was a resident of the project proposed for conversion on the date notice of intent to convert is given as required by state law.

I.    Low income, when used by itself or as a modifier of a person or household or other term, means a household whose income does not exceed eighty percent of the median income applicable to Sacramento County, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

J.    Moderate income, when used by itself or as a modifier of a person or household or other term, means a household whose income is eighty-one to one hundred twenty percent of the median income applicable to Sacramento County, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

K.    Notice of intent to convert means the notice required to be served upon tenants or prospective tenants pursuant to the requirements of Section 66427.1, 66452.8, 66452.9 or 66459 of the Subdivision Map Act. The definition includes both sixty- and one-hundred-eighty-day notices as further defined in the applicable section.

L.    Residential condominium project means a residential condominium project intended for residential occupancy, the conversion of a building used for multiple-family rental housing to condominium ownership intended for residential or nonresidential occupancy, and the conversion of a nonresidential building to condominium ownership intended for residential occupancy.

M.    Special category tenants refers to persons or tenants who fall within one or more of the following categories:

1.    Elderly means individuals sixty-two years of age or older;

2.    Handicapped or permanently disabled mean as defined in Section 50072 of the California Health and Safety Code or 42 USC 423 and 24 CFR 8.3;

3.    Low income or very low income mean as defined in this section.

N.    Unreasonable economic hardship means a hardship which renders the project economically infeasible and incapable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time.

O.    Vacancy rate means the actual physical vacancy rate of nonrented apartments in the project.

P.    Very low income, when used by itself or as a modifier of a person or household or other term, means a household whose income does not exceed fifty percent of the median income applicable to Sacramento County, adjusted for family size as published and annually updated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. (Ord. 1041  1 (part), 2005)

17.110.030 Condominium conversion permit.
A.    Condominium Conversion Permit Required. No condominium conversion shall be permitted in any zoning district unless the city council has approved the granting of a condominium conversion permit. The permit application shall be submitted to the community development department, shall be reviewed by the planning commission and the project shall meet all the requirements of this chapter.

B.    Standard for Approval. No application for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be approved unless the following findings are made:

1.    The proposed condominium conversion meets all the development and other standards set forth in this chapter.

2.    All notices required by the Folsom Municipal Code or state law pertaining to condominium conversions have been properly and timely served.

3.    That at the time the application to convert is deemed complete, the percentage of multifamily rental units is at or above fifteen percent of the total number of housing units in the city of Folsom.

4.    That during the current calendar year, the city council has not approved applications for the conversion of more than fifteen percent of the existing multifamily housing stock of rental projects of fifty or more units without provision being made by the applicant to replace the rental housing units. Where multiple applications are on file with the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, then the order of priority shall be determined by the project which submitted a deemed complete application satisfying all provisions of emergency Ordinance No. 1035 or this chapter first.

5.    That conversion of the project to condominiums will not be contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city, the surrounding residential community or the city of Folsom.

6.    That the proposed conversion is consistent with the general plan, zoning code and other applicable provisions of the Folsom Municipal Code.

7.    That the proposed condominium conversion will not cause a net reduction in the number of rental or for sale multifamily units in the city which are affordable for low and/or very low income tenants.

In addition to the standards set forth above, the city council, in its discretion, may deny an application for a condominium conversion permit if it finds that the vacancy rate for multifamily apartment projects of fifty or more units is less than five percent averaged over the prior four quarters, or five percent in the quarter the application is reviewed by the city council or that converting additional apartment units would be detrimental to the general welfare of the residents of, and/or businesses in, the city.

C.    Hearing. The planning commission shall hear any application for a condominium conversion permit and shall make a recommendation to the city council pertaining to the permit. The city council shall have final authority to approve or deny an application for a condominium conversion permit. The hearing shall be held concurrently with any tentative subdivision map application.

1.    Where the city council has approved the maximum number of units for a calendar year, the community development department may process applications for condominium conversion permits and the planning commission may review such applications at dates determined by the community development director during any calendar year. Where the maximum number of conversion units has been reached, the city council shall review the application in the next calendar year.

D.    Expiration of Condominium Conversion Permit for Failure to Establish Use. An approved condominium conversion permit shall expire two years following the date the permit was approved by the city council.

1.    If an application for an extension of an approved condominium conversion permit is submitted prior to the expiration of the permit, the city council may grant a one-year extension of the permit upon a showing that: (a) the applicant has submitted an application to convert to the Department of Real Estate and is diligently pursuing conversion with the Department of Real Estate, and (b) that the applicant has submitted a final map for the project for approval by the city. Any extension of a permit shall be conditioned to require compliance with any new provisions applicable to such conversion projects and payment of all fees in effect at the time the extension is granted. (Ord. 1041  1 (part), 2005)

17.110.040 Condominium conversion permit application.
A.    Acceptance of Application to Convert. The community development director shall accept applications for a condominium conversion permit and shall determine whether the standards and prerequisites for issuance of a permit as set forth in this chapter are met. Notwithstanding the review process set forth in this chapter, if the community development director determines that the project does not meet the approval criteria in this chapter, nothing shall prohibit the community development director from submitting the application to the planning commission for review and recommendation and then to the city council for final action.

B.    No application for a condominium conversion permit shall be approved if the standards for approval set forth in this chapter are not met.

C.     Condominium Conversion Application Contents. Recognizing that the conversion of existing structures that have been previously occupied and constructed as rental units may present unique issues for present tenants and future buyers, the application for a condominium conversion permit shall include the following information:

1.     A boundary map drawn to scale showing the location of all existing easements and structures.

2.     The applicants proposal for the following:

a.     Parking for each owner; and

b.     The management of common areas within the projects and minimum maintenance requirements for continued compliance with applicable health and safety standards as established by the city.

3.     Preliminary Site Plan. The applicant shall submit a preliminary site plan. The preliminary site plan shall show all existing and proposed structures, parking areas, drive aisles, driveways, parking lot lighting, utilities (water, sewer, drainage, electrical, cable television, and gas), garbage collection and pickup locations, and any other information required by the community development director. The preliminary site plan shall show all existing and proposed landscaping, including existing trees, and irrigation facilities.

4.     Physical Elements Report. A report on the physical element of each structure and facility shall be prepared and submitted to the city. The report shall be full and complete, meeting all the requirements of this section, and in sufficient detail to evaluate the project. The report shall address the items set forth in this section and shall have been prepared within six months of submittal of the application.

a.    A report detailing the structural condition of each major element of the property including roofs, foundations, exterior siding and paint, electrical systems, outdoor lighting, plumbing systems, utilities, irrigation systems, drainage systems, mechanical equipment, paved and concrete surfaces, parking facilities, recreational facilities, and fire protection systems, including fire alarm and sprinkler systems. Regarding each element, the report shall state: (1) when the element was originally constructed or installed; (2) when the element was last repaired or replaced; and (3) any variation in the current physical condition of the element from the requirements of the building codes in effect on the date that the last apartment building was constructed. The report shall further identify each defective or unsafe element and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed and a timeline for completion of the corrective measures. The report shall be prepared by an appropriately licensed contractor, architect, registered civil or structural engineer or specialized inspector approved by the city, other than the owner. For purposes of this section, a specialized inspector is defined in the California Building Code.

i.    Each structure and facility (pools, recreation area, garages, etc.) shall be inspected as part of the report. A representative sample of not less than twenty-five percent of the individual units within a structure shall be inspected. The community development director shall approve the representative sample and, in his/her discretion, may require a greater percentage of individual units to be inspected based on the age or condition of the project or information received or observed pertaining to the condition of the project.

b.    A structural pest control report shall be provided for each structure. This report shall be prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator in accordance with applicable state law.

c.     A summary statement of repairs and improvements proposed to be made by the applicant necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of safety and aesthetic appeal.

d.    A phasing plan indicating the order and the locations of repairs and improvements to be made by the applicant.

e.    For those projects that have deemed complete applications for a tentative subdivision map to convert apartments to condominiums as of the date of adoption of emergency Ordinance No. 1035, the physical elements report may be submitted to the city up to three weeks prior to the date the city council is scheduled to hear the condominium conversion and tentative subdivision map application.

5.     Rental History Report. The applicant shall submit a rental history report of rental rates for the units, detailing the current rental rates and the rates for the prior twelve months, including any rental incentive(s) provided to the tenants.

6.     Relocation Assistance/Ownership Incentive Report. A report describing the relocation assistance and ownership incentives, as identified under Section 17.110.060, shall be submitted.

7.     Report on the Sales Program for Qualified Low, Very Low and Moderate Income, Disabled and Senior Tenants. A report describing the methods by which the applicant is providing incentives to qualified low and very low income, disabled and senior tenants to assist in the purchase of their apartment units shall be submitted.

8.    Inclusionary Housing Plan. The applicant shall submit an Inclusionary Housing Plan pursuant to Chapter 17.104 of the Folsom Municipal Code.

9.     Additional Information. If deemed necessary, based on the size, age, condition and/or improvements required in the proposed conversion project, the community development director, the planning commission, or the city council may require the applicant to submit additional information to supplement that required by this section. Such additional information shall be used to better evaluate the application for a condominium conversion permit, and make proper findings and/or imposed conditions in accordance with the purposes, objectives and requirements of this chapter, the general plan, or any specific plan or element thereof in effect at the time of such application.

D.     Notice of Proposed Conversion.

1.    It is the intent of the notice provisions in this chapter that all tenants and prospective tenants receive all available information pertaining to the proposed conversion project in a timely manner. Any ambiguities in the notice provisions are intended to be read as broadly as possible to ensure full and complete information is provided to residents and prospective residents.

2.    Notice of Intent to Convert. In addition to any notices required by state law, the applicant shall, at least sixty days prior to filing an application for a condominium conversion permit, notify all the tenants of the project, and the community development director for city of Folsom in writing, of the intended conversion. The notice must be provided in a single document and written in nontechnical language reasonably comprehensible to tenants and prospective tenants of the project. The notice shall include at least the following information and attachments:

a.     A general description of the proposed project;

b.     The name of the current owner and applicant and where such person or persons can be contacted;

c.     The anticipated schedule of approval and conversion;

d.     A copy of the citys condominium conversion ordinance;

e.     Notification of the tenants right to receive notice of hearings;

f.     Notification of the tenants right to purchase the unit he/she is renting; to receive notice of intention to convert prior to termination of tenancy due to the conversion, and to receive notice of final approval of the application within ten days of approval of the final map;

g.    A copy of the proposed relocation assistance and ownership incentive plans as required by Section 17.110.060;

h.    Notification that the tenants will be given ten days written notice that an application for a public report has been or will be submitted to the Department of Real Estate and that such report will be available on request.

3.    The notice of intent to convert shall be conspicuously posted at the on-site rental office location and in at least two common areas including a community club house pool area or mail pick-up area. In addition, said notices shall also be posted at each driveway entrance to the project site. All required notices of intent shall remain posted until the converted units are first offered for sale.

4.    Notice to Prospective Tenants. All prospective tenants shall be provided the written notice in this section at the time they are shown an apartment unit and prior to the time a rental/lease agreement is executed. A signed copy of the notice shall be retained by the applicant as proof of compliance with this provision.

5.    Projects that have provided existing tenants with a notice of intent to convert as required by the Subdivision Map Act, prior to the date Ordinance No. 1035 was adopted, and have publicly posted the notices as required in this section, shall be deemed to have satisfied the notice provisions for existing tenants of this section. Prospective tenants, and any new tenant who commenced occupancy after the initial notice, shall be provided the notices.

6.    All notices required by the Subdivision Map Act shall be served by the owner as required by statute. The owner shall bear the cost of all publication, printing and delivery costs for required notices. Owner shall submit proof of noticing for all owner-served notices. (Ord. 1041  1 (part), 2005)

17.110.050 Application review and action.
A.    The community development department shall review all applications for permits submitted pursuant to this chapter and make a recommendation to the planning commission and city council based on the standards set forth in this chapter.

B.    Review by Staff.

1.    When corrective work is identified in the reports required to be submitted with the application, or by subsequent site inspections by staff, or at staffs direction, such work shall be incorporated as conditions of approval on the project if not corrected in advance of the first public hearing. All corrective work required shall be completed prior to the approval of a final map or the applicant shall enter into an improvement agreement with the city committing to the completion of the improvements in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the Folsom Municipal Code.

2.    The city shall charge a reasonable hourly fee (estimated as the actual cost to the city) for inspections required by this chapter. The applicant shall post a cash deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost of inspection, as determined by the community development director, prior to any inspection services being provided.

C.    Design Review. Where the applicant proposes any modifications to the project site that fall within the review criteria of Chapter 17.06 of the Folsom Municipal Code, such modifications shall be reviewed according to the requirements of said chapter.

D.    Review by Planning Commission. The planning commission shall review the proposed condominium conversion project at a public hearing and shall make a recommendation to the city council.

Notice of action by the planning commission shall be provided to all tenants and notice of the public hearing shall be provided as set forth in Government Code Chapter 2.7, commencing with Section 65090. All notices required by the Subdivision Map Act shall be served by the owner or city as required by statute. Owner shall bear the cost of all publication, printing and delivery costs for required notices incurred by the city. Owner shall submit proof of compliance with the notice provisions of this chapter not less than thirty days prior to a hearing by the planning commission.

E.    Review by the City Council. The city council shall have final review of a proposed condominium conversion project. The city council may approve or reject the project based on the standards set forth in the condominium conversion permit portion of this chapter, and the city council may impose additional conditions consistent with the review criteria.

Notice of action by the city council shall be provided to all tenants and notice of the public hearing shall be provided as set forth in Government Code Chapter 2.7, commencing with Section 65090. All notices required by the Subdivision Map Act shall be served by the owner or city as required by statute. Owner shall bear the cost of all publication, printing and delivery costs for required notices incurred by the city. Owner shall submit proof of compliance with the notice provisions of this chapter not less than thirty days prior to a hearing by the city council. (Ord. 1109  5, 2008: Ord. 1041  1 (part), 2005)

17.110.060 Condominium conversion requirements.
All condominium conversion projects must comply with the following requirements, which shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval on the project:

A.    The applicant shall prepare a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) which shall be recorded and apply to each owner of a condominium unit within the project. The CC&Rs shall be subject to the approval of the community development director and shall be recorded at, or prior to, the time of final map approval, and shall include all applicable conditions of approval and requirements of the city. The CC&Rs shall, at a minimum, provide:

1.    That any amendment to the CC&Rs related to the conditions of approval or other requirements of this chapter may not be approved without prior consent of the city.

2.    That there shall be an entity created (e.g., a property or homeowners association) which shall be financially responsible for and shall provide for the effective establishment, operation, management, use, repair and maintenance of all common areas and facilities.

3.    A provision containing pertinent information regarding the conveyance of units and the assignment of parking, an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for maintenance of common areas and facilities, and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit.

4.    A provision addressing the payment of water, utilities, gas and electricity by the homeowner or through the association.

5.    A provision prohibiting storage of anything but vehicles in any garage on the premises, except where such storage does not impede parking of the maximum number of vehicles intended for the garage.

6.    A provision prohibiting storage of property, except patio furniture, barbecues, outside fixtures and decorations, on exterior decks where the property is visible to the public or other units in the project.

7.    A provision requiring that any owner who rents his/her condominium unit shall utilize a professional property management company to manage the rental unit or that there exists a homeowners association which is responsible for management of the common areas and enforcement of the CC&Rs.

8.    A provision specifying that the number of people who may occupy a unit shall not exceed that specified in the Uniform Building Code.

B.    Standards. The following standards shall apply to condominium conversion projects:

1.    Building Regulations. All structures within the project shall conform to applicable building and zoning codes in effect at the time the last building was constructed on the site, except as provided herein.

2.    Fire Prevention. Each living unit shall be provided with a fire-warning system conforming to current applicable codes in effect in the city. All common walls of units shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with current building codes. The number and locations of fire extinguishers and hydrants shall be in accordance with current fire codes. Existing fire sprinkler systems shall be verified to be in good working order and meet standards for the system installed.

3.    Vibration Transmission. All permanent mechanical equipment (such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors) which are determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or structural-borne noise shall be vibration-isolated with inertia blocks or bases or vibration isolator springs in accordance with the standards in effect at the time the last building was constructed on the site.

4.    Noise Standards. The structures shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the California Code of Regulations and applicable sections of the California Building Code. Where these standards cannot be feasibly met, in the discretion of the building official, reduced requirements may be allowed by the building official and the subdivider shall include notice of the deficiency in the final physical elements report.

5.    Utility Metering. Each unit shall be individually metered for gas and electricity. If this requirement cannot be feasibly met, in the discretion of the community development director, this requirement may be waived in the conditions of approval and a home or property owners association, or similar entity, shall be formed for the payment and billing of the applicable utility. At a minimum, separate exterior shut-off valves for water, gas and electricity shall be provided for each unit.

6.    Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit unless the city council approves a common laundry area. If a common laundry area is approved, it shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof that do not have separate laundry facilities.

7.    Parking. All parking required for the project shall be provided interior to the project. The Folsom Municipal Code parking requirements for multifamily projects shall apply to condominium conversion projects. The city council, on recommendation from the community development director, may require additional parking spaces per unit for units of three or more bedrooms. At least one of the required parking spaces provided for each unit shall be a covered parking space or garage, and at least one guest parking space shall be provided for every five units. No RV or boat storage shall be permitted on the premises or in the garages.

8.    Disabled Access. The project site and every unit within the project shall comply with current building codes related to disabled access.

9.    No television or radio antennas, dishes, or similar devices may be installed on the exterior of any building, except as required by law. All mechanical equipment and roof top antennas shall be shielded from view.

10.    The applicant shall also provide not less than a two-year warranty on all appliances and mechanical equipment located in or servicing the unit, including heating and air conditioning units.

11.    No existing residential use that does not conform to parking, setback, height or other provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be eligible for conversion to condominiums.

C.     Compliance with Inclusionary Housing Ordinance. Condominium conversion projects shall be subject to the citys inclusionary housing ordinance.

D.    Tenant Provisions.

1.    No lease in good standing shall be terminated as a result of the conversion. Any tenant under an existing lease shall be offered the opportunity to remain in the unit until the lease expires. Tenants under an existing lease may terminate the lease after approval of the tentative map and the condominium conversion permit without penalty, but if terminated by the tenant prior to the owner serving the one-hundred-eighty-day notice required by Government Code Section 66427.1, shall not be entitled to any relocation or other benefits as provided in this chapter.

2.    No tenant who occupies a unit with children who are in school and who is not in default under the rental agreement or lease under which they occupy their unit shall be required to move from their unit prior to the end of the grade year. For purposes of this chapter, grade year shall refer to the Folsom Cordova Unified School District year.

3.     Tenants Right to Purchase. The applicant shall provide proof, in a form acceptable to the community development director, that it has complied with all state law provisions, including, but not limited to, Government Code Section 66427.1(d) prior to approval of a final map.

4.     Ownership Incentives. In order to reduce the number of tenants being displaced, the applicant shall provide incentives that would aid tenants in becoming owners in the converted project. Any such incentives, including terms and conditions, shall be documented by the applicant and approved by the community development director. Incentives may include, but are not limited to, low-interest loans, reduced prices, application of a percentage of rent payment toward a down payment for purchase of a unit within the project, or other similar items approved by the community development director. At a minimum, the incentives offered to existing tenants for purchase of a unit within a project shall be equal to, or greater than, the dollar value of relocation benefits provided to similarly situated tenants who are relocated.

5.     Tenant Relocation Plan. A tenant relocation plan shall be prepared and shall meet and provide at least the following requirements:

a.    All nonpurchasing present tenants who are not in default under the rental agreement or lease under which they occupy their unit shall have not less than one hundred eighty days notice from the date of receipt of notification from the applicant of its intent to convert as provided in Government Code Section 66427.1.

b.    All nonpurchasing tenants shall be provided with up-to-date information on available apartments of comparable size, quality and price located within a fifteen-mile radius of the apartments to be converted. Transportation shall be provided to assist each elderly or disabled nonpurchasing tenant in seeking alternative housing.

c.    The economic terms of the tenants tenancy, including, but not limited to, rent and utilities allowance, shall not be modified to the detriment of the tenant during the period between the filing of a tentative map application or submittal of the condominium conversion application, whichever is sooner, and the date the tenant is required to relocate, or the date of the denial, withdrawal or expiration of the tentative map or condominium conversion permit.

d.    The approved tenant relocation plan shall be incorporated into the conditions on the project and shall be provided to each tenant in the project within ten days of approval of the condominium conversion permit.

E.     Rental Assistance.

1.    A rental assistance payment shall be provided to all nonpurchasing tenants equal to one months current rent. Said payment shall be paid in one lump sum within fourteen days of the date of their relocation. No more than one payment per unit is required. Payments under this section only apply to qualifying nonpurchasing tenants who are not in default at the time they vacate the premises and were tenants at the time the sixty-day notice of intent to convert, required by Government Code Section 66452.9, was served.

2.    Special Category Tenant. In addition to the rental assistance payment provided to all nonpurchasing tenants, any nonpurchasing special category tenant shall be offered a one-time payment equal to one years rent in effect at the time they were provided a notice of intent to convert, or an eighteen-month lease extension in which the annual rent increase shall coincide with the increases as shown in the rent, residential component of the housing component in the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers in the Sacramento Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area. Either option identified above is determined by the applicant and shall be identified in the tenant relocation plan.

3.    All tenants who commence their tenancy after the date the notice of intent to convert required by Government Code Section 66452.9 and this chapter was served shall be notified in writing whether they will receive any rental assistance upon conversion. Tenants not properly noticed pursuant to the Government Code and required by this chapter shall receive relocation benefits regardless of date of tenancy.

F.     Relocation Assistance. For all tenants entitled to rental assistance, the applicant shall arrange for the physical move of all nonpurchasing tenants, at no cost to tenant, within a fifteen-mile radius of subject property or, at the applicants option, provide five hundred dollars in relocation assistance. No more than one such payment shall be made per unit.

1.    No tenant, by virtue of the provisions of this chapter, shall have a vested right from the city to any of the benefits or other interest provided herein. Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge any rights of tenants or obligations of owners as provided in state law.

G.    Sale of Units.

1.    To the extent permissible by law, the applicant shall make a good faith effort, in the judgment of the city, to provide preference to people who presently live or work in the city of Folsom to purchase the for-sale units.

2.    All units, except as specified in this section or approved by the city council, must be sold to people intending to occupy the premises as their personal residence or to people purchasing the unit as a residence for an immediate family member or members for at least the first eighteen months. The applicant shall prepare a deed restriction or other acceptable recordable document which shall be recorded at the time of sale of the unit. An immediate family member shall include spouse, parents, grandparents, children, and siblings. The applicant shall require certification from the purchaser in a form satisfactory to the community development director to assure satisfaction with this requirement. The applicant shall be permitted to sell up to fifty percent of the one-bedroom units in the project to nonoccupant buyers. The applicant shall notify the community development department as to those units that are sold to nonoccupant buyers on a form satisfactory to the community development department.

a.    The following events shall be deemed to constitute hardship situations under which purchasers may transfer, sell, assign, convey or lease their rights, titles, and interests in the property prior to occupying and holding title to the property for a period of eighteen months:

i.    A transfer resulting from the death of purchaser.

ii.    A transfer by purchaser where the spouse of purchaser becomes the only co-owner of the property with purchaser.

iii.    A transfer resulting from a decree of dissolution of marriage or legal separation or from a property settlement contract incident to such decree.

iv.    A transfer by purchaser into a revocable inter vivos trust in which purchaser is a beneficiary.

v.    A transfer necessitated by a medical or financial emergency, proof of which emergency has been delivered to the subdivider/project applicant, and has been approved by the subdivider/project applicant in its reasonable discretion.

vi.    A transfer which in the reasonable judgment of the subdivider/project applicant constitutes a hardship situation consistent with the intentions of this condition.

H.    Phasing Plan. The applicant shall work with the building division to limit unnecessary interference with existing occupants. A phasing plan shall be incorporated into the conditions of the project.

1.    No remodeling or improvements planned as part of the conversion shall be performed in a unit occupied by a nonpurchasing tenant without first receiving their written permission.

I.    The applicant or the homeowners association shall have an on-site manager responsible for rental units during the sales period so long as twenty or more units are used as rental units.

J.    Security Inspection and Plan. The property and all common areas shall be inspected by the Folsom police department, who shall provide security recommendations to the applicant to address any physical safety and security issues such as lighting, landscape, and similar physical elements. Items identified shall be incorporated into conditions of approval of the application and shall be completed prior to the approval of a final map or issuance of the first building permit, whichever is sooner. The applicant may request of the community development department that it enter into an improvement agreement with the city committing to the completion of the improvements prior to the occupancy of the sale of the first unit within the project.

K.    Homeowners Association. Prior to the approval of a parcel or final map, a home or property owners association or similar entity shall be formed for any condominium conversion project. The association shall, at a minimum, provide for the administration, management and maintenance of all common areas including landscaping, drive aisles and parking areas, maintenance of the exterior of all buildings, the collection of dues, payment of public utilities not billed separately to each unit, and enforcement of standards within the project. (Ord. 1041  1 (part), 2005)

17.110.070 Administrative fees.
The city council may, by resolution, establish reasonable fees and deposits to fully defray the cost of processing applications, proposals, inspections and for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1041  1 (part), 2005)

Chapter 17.112
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
Sections:

17.112.010    Definition.

17.112.020    Medical marijuana dispensary as a prohibited use.

17.112.010 Definition.
Medical marijuana dispensary or dispensary means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marijuana is made available to, or distributed by, or distributed to one or more of the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a patient with an identification card. All three of these terms are identified in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. Medical marijuana dispensary or dispensary shall also include any and all modes of delivery service or transportation, including but not limited to vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles, scooters and similar equipment where medical marijuana is transported, transferred, delivered, or stored within the city of Folsom. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a healthcare facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; or a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as such use complies strictly with applicable law, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. (Ord. 1251  2, 2016: Ord. 1059  2 (part), 2006)

17.112.020 Medical marijuana dispensary as a prohibited use.
A medical marijuana dispensary as defined in Section 17.112.010 is prohibited in all zones and districts of the city of Folsom. (Ord. 1059  2 (part), 2006)

Chapter 17.113
COMMERCIAL NONMEDICAL MARIJUANA USE
Sections:

17.113.010    Purpose and intent.

17.113.020    Definitions.

17.113.030    Prohibition.

17.113.010 Purpose and intent.
The city council finds and declares that the purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit all commercial nonmedical marijuana land uses in the citys zoning code in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. This chapter is not intended to interfere with a patients right to medical marijuana, as provided for in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362, nor does it criminalize medical marijuana possession or cultivation by specifically defined classifications of persons, pursuant to state law. This chapter is to expressly prohibit the use of property in all zones and districts of the city of Folsom for purpose of engaging in commercial nonmedical marijuana activities such as, for example, the sale, use, storage, transport, distribution, delivery, testing, grading, marketing, processing, manufacturing or packaging of nonmedical marijuana and related products containing marijuana. This chapter is intended simply to impose zoning restrictions on the use of real property in the city for commercial nonmedical marijuana purposes. (Ord. 1266  2 (part), 2016)

17.113.020 Definitions.
A.    Commercial nonmedical marijuana uses means any commercial or business enterprise, whether for-profit or nonprofit, engaged in, for example, the sale, use, storage, transportation, cultivation, distribution, delivery, testing, grading, marketing, processing, manufacturing or packaging of nonmedical marijuana and related products containing marijuana.

B.    Marijuana shall have the meaning as provided in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.

C.    Medical marijuana means marijuana for medical purposes upon the recommendation of a physician under the Compassionate Use Act of 1996. (Ord. 1266  2 (part), 2016)

17.113.030 Prohibition.
Commercial nonmedical marijuana uses as defined in Section 17.113.020(A) is prohibited in all zones and districts of the city of Folsom. (Ord. 1266  2 (part), 2016)

Chapter 17.114
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION
Sections:

17.114.010    Purpose and intent.

17.114.020    Definitions.

17.114.030    Outdoor cultivation.

17.114.040    Cultivation of marijuana for personal useRegulations for residential zones.

17.114.050    Indoor cultivation of marijuana restricted to authorized growers.

17.114.060    Public nuisance prohibited.

17.114.070    Penalties not exclusiveViolation constitutes a crime.

17.114.080    Sunset clause.

17.114.010 Purpose and intent.
The city council finds as follows:

A.    Purpose. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate the cultivation of marijuana in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the community consistent with Proposition 64, also known as the Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act (AUMA). This chapter is not intended to interfere with a patients right to medical marijuana, as provided for in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, nor does it criminalize medical marijuana possession or cultivation by specifically defined classifications of persons, pursuant to state law. This chapter is not intended to give any person unfettered legal authority to grow marijuana; it is intended simply to impose zoning restrictions on the personal indoor cultivation of marijuana permitted under AUMA when it is authorized by California state law for medical or other lawful purposes under the state law.

B.    Applicability. As authorized by AB 243 (Section 11362.777 of the Health and Safety Code), marijuana cultivation as defined in Section 17.114.020, whether indoor or outdoor, remains prohibited in all zones and districts of the city of Folsom until and unless AUMA is passed at the November 8, 2016, statewide general election. Upon the passage of AUMA at said election, the cultivation of marijuana in the city shall be controlled and regulated by the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Nonconflicting Enactment. No part of this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with federal law as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 800 et seq., nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that Act or any other local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1251  3 (part), 2016)

17.114.020 Definitions.
As used herein the following definitions shall apply:

A.    Authorized grower means a person twenty-one years and older who is authorized by, and in compliance with, federal or state law to cultivate marijuana indoors for personal or medical use.

B.    Cultivation means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or otherwise processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof.

C.    Fully enclosed and secure structure means a fully enclosed space within a building that complies with the California Building Code (CBSC), as adopted in the city of Folsom, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBSC, that has a complete roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, is accessible only through one or more lockable doors, and is not visible from a public right-of-way. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two inch by four inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement. If indoor grow lights or air filtration systems are used, they must comply with the California building, electrical, and fire codes as adopted in the city of Folsom.

D.    Immature marijuana plant means a marijuana plant, whether male or female, that has not yet flowered and which does not yet have buds that are readily observed by unaided visual examination.

E.    Indoors means within a fully enclosed and secure structure as that structure is defined in subsection C of this section.

F.    Mature marijuana plant means a marijuana plant, whether male or female, that has flowered and which has buds that are readily observed by unaided visual examination.

G.    Outdoor means any location within the city of Folsom that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

H.    Parcel means property assigned a separate parcel number by the Sacramento County assessor.

I.    Private residence means a house, apartment unit, mobile home, or other similar dwelling unit. (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1251  3 (part), 2016)

17.114.030 Outdoor cultivation.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance, and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the city to cause or allow such premises to be used for the outdoor cultivation of marijuana plants. (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016: Ord. 1251  3 (part), 2016)

17.114.040 Cultivation of marijuana for personal useRegulations for residential zones.
A.    When authorized by state law, an authorized grower shall be allowed to cultivate marijuana only in a private residence in a residential zone, only indoors, and only for personal use, subject to the following regulations:

1.    The marijuana cultivation area shall be located indoors within a residential structure and shall not exceed fifty square feet and not exceed ten feet in height, nor shall it come within twelve inches of the ceiling or any cultivation lighting. Cultivation in a greenhouse on the property of the residence but not physically part of the home is permitted, as long as it is fully enclosed, secure, not visible from a public right-of-way and meeting all requirements in this chapter.

2.    Marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred watts in total for the total cultivation area within the residence.

3.    The use of gas products such as but not limited to CO2, butane, methane, or any other flammable or nonflammable gas for marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited.

4.    There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of marijuana cultivation outside the private residence from the public right-of-way, including but not limited to any marijuana plants, equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation, and any light emanating from cultivation lighting.

5.    The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where the marijuana cultivation occurs.

6.    The authorized grower shall not participate in marijuana cultivation in any other location within the city.

7.    The residence shall include fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for marijuana cultivation.

8.    The marijuana cultivation area shall be in compliance with the current adopted edition of the California Building Code Section 1203.4, Natural Ventilation, or Section 402.3, Mechanical Ventilation (or equivalent), as amended from time to time.

9.    The building official may require additional specific standards to meet the California Building Code and Fire Code, including but not limited to installation of fire suppression sprinklers.

10.    The marijuana cultivation area shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes.

11.    No more than six marijuana plants, mature or immature, are permitted for indoor personal cultivation under this chapter.

12.    Marijuana in excess of twenty-eight and one-half grams produced by plants kept for indoor personal cultivation under this chapter must be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private residence not visible from the public right-of-way.

B.    Outdoor cultivation of marijuana and cultivation of marijuana for nonpersonal uses are expressly prohibited in all zones and districts of the city of Folsom. (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016)

17.114.050 Indoor cultivation of marijuana restricted to authorized growers.
A.    It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the city to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the cultivation of marijuana, unless the person is authorized by state law to grow marijuana for a specifically authorized purpose within a private residence in a residential zone, and such authorized grower is complying with all requirements of this chapter.

B.    No person shall grow marijuana upon any parcel until and unless they first secure a permit from the building department and pay such fee as may be required and set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016)

17.114.060 Public nuisance prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the city to create a public nuisance in the course of cultivating marijuana plants or any part thereof in any location, indoor or outdoor. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist, if such activity produces:

A.    Odors which are disturbing to people of reasonable sensitivity residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public.

B.    Repeated responses to the parcel by law enforcement personnel.

C.    A repeated disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the neighborhood, excessive noise which is disturbing to people of normal sensitivity on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public.

D.    Any other impacts on the neighborhood which are disruptive of normal activity in the area including, but not limited to, grow lighting visible outside the dwelling, excessive vehicular traffic or parking occurring at or near the dwelling, and excessive noise emanating from the dwelling.

E.    Outdoor growing and cultivation of marijuana. (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016)

17.114.070 Penalties not exclusiveViolation constitutes a crime.
The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other criminal, civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by, or set forth in, the Folsom Municipal Code shall prevent the city from using any other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this section or to abate a public nuisance. Violation of this chapter shall constitute a crime punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction in the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016)

17.114.080 Sunset clause.
A.    Sections 17.114.030, 17.114.040, 17.114.050, and 17.114.060 shall automatically sunset and have no force of effect in the event AUMA fails to pass at the November 8, 2016, statewide general election.

B.    In the event AUMA fails to pass at the November 8, 2016, statewide general election, marijuana cultivation as defined in Section 17.114.020, whether indoors or outdoor, shall be prohibited in all zones and districts of the city of Folsom, as authorized by AB 243 (Section 11362.777 of the Health and Safety Code). (Ord. 1265  2 (part), 2016)

Chapter 17.116
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Sections:

17.116.010    Purpose.

17.116.020    Applicability.

17.116.030    Procedure.

17.116.040    Approval findings.

17.116.050    Conditions of approval.

17.116.060    Appeals.

17.116.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for individuals with disabilities to request reasonable accommodation in seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (hereafter Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies, and procedures. (Ord. 1147  2 (part), 2011)

17.116.020 Applicability.
A.    A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability or their representative, when the application of a requirement of this zoning code or other city requirement, policy, or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. For the purposes of this chapter, a person with a disability is any person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This chapter is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts.

B.    A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards, and practices for the siting, development, and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice.

C.    A reasonable accommodation is granted only to the household that needs the accommodation and does not apply to successors in interest to the site.

D.    A reasonable accommodation may be granted in compliance with this chapter without the need for the approval of a variance. (Ord. 1147  2 (part), 2011)

17.116.030 Procedure.
A.    A request for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the community development department or in the form of a letter to the director of the community development department, and shall contain the following information:

1.    The applicants name, address, and telephone number;

2.    Address of the property for which the request is being made;

3.    The current use of the property;

4.    The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts, including verification of such claim;

5.    The zoning code provision, regulation, or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested; and

6.    Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

B.    If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made requires some other discretionary approval (such as use permit, design review, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by subsection A of this section for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval.

C.    A request for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the director of the community development department or his/her designee, if no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation. The director or his/her designee shall make a written determination within forty-five days of the application being deemed complete and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation.

D.    A request for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the planning commission or the historic district commission. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the planning commission or the historic district commission upon consideration of the findings in Section 17.116.040. (Ord. 1147  2 (part), 2011)

17.116.040 Approval findings.
The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

A.    Whether the housing in the request will be used by a person with a disability under the Acts;

B.    Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to a person with a disability under the Acts;

C.    Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial, administrative or enforcement burden on the city;

D.    Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning;

E.    Potential impact on surrounding uses;

F.    Physical attributes of the property and structures; and

G.    Other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit. (Ord. 1147  2 (part), 2011)

17.116.050 Conditions of approval.
In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the director of the community development department or his/her designee, or the planning commission or the historic district commission as the case might be, may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings. The conditions shall also state whether the accommodation granted shall be removed in the event that the person for whom the accommodation was requested no longer resides on the site. (Ord. 1147  2 (part), 2011)

17.116.060 Appeals.
A.    Any person dissatisfied with any action of the director of the community development department pertaining to this chapter may appeal to the planning commission or the historic district commission within ten days after written notice of the directors decision is sent to the applicant. The appeal is taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of the community development department and shall specify the reasons for the appeal and the grounds asserted for relief.

B.    Any person dissatisfied with any action of the planning commission or the historic district commission pertaining to this chapter may appeal to the city council within ten days after the rendition of the decision of the planning commission or the historic district commission. The appeal is taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk and shall specify the reasons for the appeal and the grounds asserted for relief.

C.    The city council shall, by resolution, adopt and from time to time amend a fee for the filing of appeals. Such fee shall be for the sole purpose of defraying costs incurred for the administration of appeals. The fee for an appeal shall be paid at the time of and with the filing of an appeal. No appeal shall be deemed valid unless the prescribed fee has been paid.

D.    If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed in this section, the right to review of the action against which the complaint is made shall be deemed to have been waived.

E.    After filing an appeal, the appropriate hearing body shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether the appeal should be granted. Written notice of the time, date and place of hearing shall be given to the appellant, and to any other persons who have filed a written request for notice. Such notices shall be mailed to the appellant and the applicant at least ten days prior to the hearing.

F.    The planning commission, the historic district commission, or city council shall review de novo the entire proceeding or proceedings relating to the decision, and may make any order it deems just and equitable, including the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application. Any hearing may be continued from time to time.

G.    At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing body shall prepare a written decision which either grants or denies the appeal and contains findings of fact and conclusions. A copy of the written decision shall be provided to the appellant and the project applicant. (Ord. 1147  2 (part), 2011)