Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 BUSINESS PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Title 7 ANIMAL CONTROL, WELFARE AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 8 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Title 9 (RESERVED)
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 12 PUBLIC PROPERTY
Title 13 PUBLIC WORKS
Title 14 WATER AND SEWERS
Title 15 (RESERVED)
Title 16 OIL WELLS
Title 17 FIRE PREVENTION
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 18 BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
Title 19 (RESERVED)
Title 20 (RESERVED)
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 21 DEVELOPMENT CODE

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.04 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1.12 CITATIONS
Chapter 1.13 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.17 HEARINGS
Chapter 1.18 ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS—LIMITATIONS

Chapter 1.04 CODE ADOPTION
1.04.010 Code adopted.
     The Fountain Valley Municipal Code, as compiled from the ordinances of the city of Fountain Valley, California, and edited and published by Book Publishing Company of Seattle, Washington, is hereby adopted as the official code of the city of Fountain Valley, California. (Ord. 547 § 1, 1969)

 

1.04.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
    This code shall be known as the “Fountain Valley Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Fountain Valley Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in that code. (Ord. 547 § 2, 1969)

 

1.04.030 Reference applies to amendments.
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Fountain Valley Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Fountain Valley, California that reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. (Ord. 547 § 3, 1969)

 

1.04.040 Codification authority.
    This code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances codified pursuant to Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 inclusive of the California Government Code. (Ord. 547 § 4, 1969)

 

1.04.050 Definitions and construction.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases where used in the ordinances of the city of Fountain Valley shall have the meaning and construction given in this section:

    (a)    “Code” means the “Fountain Valley Municipal Code.”

    (b)    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley.

    (c)    “City council” means the city council of the city of Fountain Valley.

    (d)    “County” means the county of Orange.

    (e)    “Person” means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or their manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee or any of them.

    (f)    “State” means the state of California.

    (g)    “Oath” includes affirmation.

    (h)    Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

    (i)     Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.

    (j)     Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and future tense includes the present tense.

    (k)    Shall, May. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

    (l)     Title of office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Fountain Valley.

    (m)   Owner. “Owner” when pertaining to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or part of such building or land.

    (n)    Street. “Street” includes all streets, highways, public roads, county roads, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, parkways, or other public ways in Fountain Valley which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

    (o)    Tenant or Occupant. “Tenant or occupant” when pertaining to a building or land includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

    (p)    Goods. “Goods” includes wares and merchandise.

    (q)    Operate. “Operate” or “engage in” includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained.

    (r)    Across. “Across” includes along, in or upon.

    (s)    Sale. “Sale” includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.

    (t)     Ex-officio. “Ex-officio” means by virtue of office. (Ord. 547 § 5, 1969)

 

1.04.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 547 § 6, 1959)

 

1.04.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 547 § 7, 1969)

 

1.04.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
    Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinances or any part of any ordinances of the city, nor the future amendment of this code, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, nor of this code, which violations were committed prior to the effective date thereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances or code relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance or code, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 547 § 8, 1969)

 

1.04.090 Effective date.
    The Fountain Valley Municipal Code shall become effective on the date that the ordinance codified herein becomes effective. (Ord. 547 § 9, 1969)

 

1.04.100 Severability.
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or part of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council of Fountain Valley hereby declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 547 § 10, 1969)

Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
1.08.010 Designation.
    The seal, a drawing of which follows this section, shall henceforth be the official seal of the city of Fountain Valley. (Ord. 147 § 2, 1962)

1.08.020 Use.
    The seal shall be used on all official documents where a seal is required, pursuant to city business. (Ord. 147 § 3, 1962)

Chapter 1.12 CITATIONS
Note
*   Prior ordinance history: Ord. 53.

 

1.12.010 Authority of public officers and employees to make arrests.
    (a)    The following designated officers and employees shall have the power to arrest persons for the misdemeanor violations of this title whenever the officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed the offense in his or her presence:

    (1)    All sworn officers of the Fountain Valley police department;

    (2)    Other persons authorized by the chief of police for parking control;

    (3)    Sworn officers of the Fountain Valley fire department when exercising powers within the scope of their duties;

    (4)    Code enforcement officers authorized by the planning/building director to enforce the provisions of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code;

    (5)    Code enforcement officers authorized by the fire chief or planning/building director to enforce the construction codes;

    (6)    The license collector or deputy license collector, when enforcing the provisions of Titles 4 or 5 of this code;

    (7)    The fire marshal when enforcing any law within the scope of the duties of that position;

    (8)    Authorized inspectors when enforcing the city’s stormwater regulations.

    (b)    Except for citation arrests as provided in Section 1.12.020, only peace officers employed within the police department as sworn officers, arson investigators and other fire department personnel authorized by the Penal Code and fire chief shall be entitled to make custodial arrests. (Ord. 1447 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1326 § 6, 2002; Ord. 1256 § 1, 1996)

 

1.12.020 Citation procedure.
    (a)    If any person is arrested for misdemeanor violation of this title, and such person is not taken before a magistrate as is more fully set forth in the California Penal Code Section 853.6 or successor statute, the arresting officer shall prepare in triplicate a written notice to appear in court containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court.

    (b)    The time specified in the notice to appear shall be not less than ten days after such arrest.

    (c)    The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either:

    (1)    Before a judge of the municipal court in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or

    (2)    Before an officer authorized to receive a deposit of bail.

    (d)    The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his or her written promise so to appear in court by signing the triplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. The officer may require the arrested person, if the arrested person has no satisfactory identification, to provide a fingerprint in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Penal Code. Such print shall not be used to create a data base.

    (e)    The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate notice with the magistrate specified in such notice. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which the defendant promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail set by such magistrate. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may at his or her discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid in the county treasury for distribution as provided by Section 1463 of the California Penal Code.

    (f)    A warrant shall not issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has given such written promise to appear in court unless and until the person has violated such promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law.

    (g)    As provided in Penal Code Section 853.7, every person willfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which the person was originally arrested.

    (h)    In accordance with Penal Code Section 853.8, when a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for the person’s arrest within twenty days after the person’s failure to appear as promised. (Ord. 1256 § 1, 1996)

Chapter 1.13 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.13.010 Applicability.
    (a)    This chapter subjects any violation of the provisions of this municipal code and any other city ordinance to administrative fines.

    (b)    This chapter establishes the administrative procedures that shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of the administrative fines pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4.

    (c)    The issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter is solely at the discretion of the enforcement official and is one option the city of Fountain Valley has to address violations of this code. The procedures established in this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to any criminal, civil or other remedy established by law or under the provisions of this code to address violations of this municipal code or violations of any other Fountain Valley ordinance. Issuance of an administrative citation shall be cumulative to, and shall not limit or be deemed a waiver of, the use of any other remedy.

    (d)    The purpose of issuing administrative citations pursuant to this chapter is to encourage compliance with the provisions of this code.

    (e)    This chapter is intended to impose strict administrative liability on responsible parties for violations of this code. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.020 Definitions.
    “Correction condition” shall mean a code violation that pertains to a continuing building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning violation that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety.

    “Enforcement official” shall mean any officer, employee, agent, or independent contractor with authority to enforce the Fountain Valley Municipal Code or any other code or ordinance adopted by the city of Fountain Valley.

    “Person” shall mean a natural person, legal entity, business, corporation, trust, or other entity and shall also include the owners, majority shareholders, corporate officers, trustees and general partners of any legal entity, business, corporation, trust or other entity.

    “Responsible party” shall mean any of the following:

    (1)    A person who causes a code violation to occur;

    (2)    A person who maintains or allows a code violation to continue by his, her or its action or failure to act;

    (3)    A person whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a code violation by its action or failure to act;

    (4)    A person who is the owner of, lessee or sublessee with a current right of possession of, real property where a property-related code violation occurs;

    (5)    The owner, operator or other person in charge of a business where a code violation occurs;

    (6)    A person who is the beneficiary under a deed of trust for property where a property-related code violation exists. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.030 Administrative citation generally.
    (a)    Issuance. An enforcement official, upon making a determination that any provision of this Municipal Code or any other Fountain Valley ordinance has been violated, has authority to issue an administrative citation to a responsible party or parties for the violation. An enforcement official may issue an administrative citation for a violation that is not committed in the enforcement official’s presence if the enforcement official has determined that the responsible party committed a code violation.

    (b)    Content. An administrative citation shall contain the following information:

    (1)    Name of the responsible party;

    (2)    Date of violation;

    (3)    Code section or ordinance violated;

    (4)    Address or other location where the violation occurred;

    (5)    Description of the violation;

    (6)    Amount of the fine;

    (7)    Procedure to pay the fine;

    (8)    Warning that a failure to make a timely payment of the fine will result in a late payment penalty;

    (9)    Description of the procedure for requesting an administrative review to contest the administrative citation;

    (10)  Description of the procedure for requesting a waiver of the fine deposit;

    (11)  Date the citation is issued;

    (12)  Signature of the enforcement official issuing the citation;

    (13)  A notice that unpaid fines, interest and penalties are subject to the assessment and lien collection procedures of this chapter.

    (c)    Service. An administrative citation may be served by any of the following methods:

    (1)    Personal Service. An enforcement official may personally serve the citation on the responsible party. If reasonably available, the enforcement official should obtain the signature of the responsible party. The failure of the enforcement official to request or obtain the signature of the responsible party shall not invalidate the service of the administrative citation and shall not invalidate the administrative citation.

    (2)    Mail. An enforcement official may mail the administrative citation by first class mail if the responsible party is not present for personal service when the enforcement official determines there has been a violation. The administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party’s address as shown on the county’s last equalized assessment roll for a property-related violation, or to any address known for the responsible party for all other violations. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the U.S. mail in a fully addressed envelope, postage prepaid.

    (3)    Posting. An enforcement official may post a copy of the administrative citation on the property in a conspicuous place for a property-related violation when the responsible party resides at an unknown address. A copy of the administrative citation will also be mailed to the responsible party at the address of the property.

    (4)    Other Manners of Service. An administrative citation may be served on the responsible party in any manner provided for service of summons. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.040 Administrative citation timing.
    Except as provided in Section 1.13.050, an administrative citation may be issued immediately and without a prior warning for any violation of this municipal code or any other city ordinance. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.050 Administrative citation for continuing building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning violations that do not create an immediate hazard.
    (a)    Applicability of this Section. This section shall only apply to a correction condition(s).

    (b)    Correction Period. A responsible party shall have thirty calendar days to correct or remedy a correction condition prior to the issuance of an administrative citation. A correction period longer than thirty calendar days may be granted if deemed necessary by the enforcement official.

    (c)    Correction Notice. Upon discovery of a correction condition, the enforcement official shall issue a written correction notice to the responsible party or parties. The correction notice shall refer to the code section(s) violated and describe how that code section(s) was violated. The correction notice shall also describe the action necessary to correct the violation(s) and state the final date by which the correction must be completed, which shall not be less than thirty calendar days from the date the correction notice is issued. In addition, the correction notice shall include a warning that failure to correct the violation may result in the imposition of an administrative fine and shall state the amount of the fine imposed for the violation.

    (d)    Procedure Upon Expiration of Correction Period. If the responsible party does not remedy the correction condition within the period set forth in the correction notice, the enforcement official may issue an administrative citation. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.060 Responsible party’s obligations.
    Within fifteen calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served by any of the methods of service specified in subsection (c) of Section 1.13.030, a responsible party shall: (a) pay the fine amount designated on the administrative citation; or (b) make a written request for an administrative hearing. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.070 Administrative fine.
    (a)    Amount. Fines for administrative citations shall be assessed in the following amounts:

    (1)    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

    (2)    A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same code section or ordinance within one year;

    (3)    A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same code section or ordinance within one year.

    (b)    Continuing Violation. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued, maintained or permitted shall constitute a separate offense.

    (c)    Payments. If the responsible party does not make a timely request for a hearing, he, she or it must pay the administrative fine directly to the city of Fountain Valley within fifteen calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.

    (d)    No Waiver. The payment of the administrative fine shall not constitute a waiver of the responsible party’s right to a hearing. A responsible party may pay the administrative fine within the fifteen calendar-day period and also obtain a hearing to protest the imposition of the administrative fine, provided that the responsible party makes a timely request for a hearing.

    (e)    Obligation to Correct Violation. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to mean that because a responsible party has paid the administrative fine he, she, or it is excused from correcting the violation. If the responsible party fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.080 Administrative hearing.
    (a)    Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due process of law to any person who is issued an administrative citation.

    (b)    Request for Hearing. To obtain an administrative hearing, the responsible party must make a written request for a hearing, together with an advance deposit of the fine, within fifteen calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served. The written request for a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. The failure to timely request an administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of the administrative hearing and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

    (c)    Hearing Officer.

    (1)    The city manager shall serve as the hearing officer or may appoint a person or persons who shall serve as hearing officer.

    (2)    The employment, performance, evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of the administrative citations or fines upheld by the hearing officer.

    (3)    Any person designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 170.1. The responsible party may challenge the hearing officer’s impartiality by filing a statement with the city manager objecting to the hearing before the hearing officer and setting forth the grounds for disqualification.

    (d)    Administrative Hearing Procedures.

    (1)    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and timely submitted and the fine has been deposited in advance. The fine deposit may be waived by the city manager upon a showing of financial hardship.

    (2)    The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement official shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents and the enforcement official shall not be required to attend the administrative hearing but may attend the hearing in his or her discretion.

    (e)    Administrative Order.

    (1)    Within fifteen calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall provide the responsible party with a decision in writing (“administrative order”). The hearing officer shall provide the responsible party with the administrative order by personal service or by registered or certified mail to the responsible party’s last known address.

    (2)    The administrative order shall contain the hearing officer’s findings of fact and conclusions and the procedure described in Section 1.13.090 for seeking judicial review.

    (3)    A decision in favor of the responsible party shall constitute a dismissal of the administrative citation. The city shall return any monies paid by the responsible party towards the dismissed administrative citation.

    (4)    The hearing officer’s administrative order is final.

    (f)    Failure to Attend Administrative Hearing.

    (1)    Waiver of Right to Hearing. The responsible party’s failure to appear at a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and shall be presumed an admission of guilt to the code violation(s) indicated on the administrative citation.

    (2)    Good Cause. Upon a showing of good cause by the responsible party, the hearing officer may excuse the responsible party’s failure to appear at the hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the hearing be rescheduled more than once unless the responsible party pays a deposit in the amount of the administrative fine. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to mean the responsible party is excused from the requirement of paying the administrative fine or appearing at a hearing. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.090 Judicial review.
    If an administrative order is rendered in favor of the city, the responsible party may seek judicial review of the administrative order in the Orange County Superior Court, West Justice Center, by doing one of the following:

    (a)    Appeal the administrative order pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4 within twenty calendar days after service of the administrative order. Pursuant to Section 53069.4, the appealing party shall serve a copy of the appeal notice in person or by first class mail upon the city. Appeal notices shall be sent to the city clerk.

    (b)    File a petition for a writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., within ninety calendar days after service of the administrative order.

    If a responsible party fails to timely seek judicial review as provided for in this section, the decision shall be deemed confirmed. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.100 Failure to comply.
    (a)    Event Defined. As used in this section the term “event” shall mean any of the following occurrences:

    (1)    The responsible party fails to either pay the administrative fine or request a hearing within fifteen calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served.

    (2)    The responsible party requests a hearing and fails to appear.

    (3)    The responsible party fails to either comply with the administrative order or seek judicial review of the administrative order.

    (b)    Penalty Fine. The occurrence of an event may result in the city increasing the administrative fine, not to exceed the maximum amounts set forth in Section 1.13.070 (Penalty fine).

    (c)    Account Receivable. Upon the occurrence of an event, the city may treat the administrative fine or penalty fine, whichever is applicable, as an account receivable subject to the city’s policy for delinquent accounts receivable.

    (d)    Misdemeanor. An event shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1.16.010.

    (e)    Public Nuisance. An event shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

 

1.13.110 Collection of unpaid fines.
    (a)    The city, at its discretion, may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines, interest and penalties. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines, interest and penalties owed by a person under this chapter have been collected.

    (b)    The city may refuse to issue, extend, or renew any permit, license, or other approval to any person who has unpaid delinquent fines, interest, penalties, liens or assessments due under this chapter related to the permit, license, or approval.

    (c)    The city may suspend any permit, license, or approval issued to a person who has unpaid fines related to the permit, license, or approval totaling five hundred dollars or more that have been delinquent for over thirty calendar days. The suspension shall become effective twenty calendar days after the notice of suspension is placed in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person and shall continue until the delinquency is paid in full. Continuing to operate under a suspended permit, license or approval shall be grounds for revocation of the permit, license or approval.

    (d)    Any violation of this chapter, including the failure to pay an administrative fine when due, shall constitute a public nuisance. To compel compliance, the city may seek to abate the nuisance and collect the costs incurred by means of a nuisance abatement lien and/or special assessment against the property where a property-related violation occurred. Any unpaid delinquent fines, interest and penalties may be recovered as part of any such lien or special assessment against the property of the responsible party who is the owner of the property where the violation occurred.

    (1)    To pursue an abatement of a code violation as a nuisance and recover the costs, including any delinquent civil fines, interest and penalties as an abatement lien or special assessment, the city may take the following steps:

    (A)   Submit to and receive from the city council a resolution certifying the amounts of the liens and special assessments sought to be collected from each property owner;

    (B)   Request the Orange County recorder to record a notice of any liens, or special assessments, and send the recorder the resolution certifying the amounts;

 

    (C)   Request the Orange County tax collector collect any special assessments certified by the city council; and

    (D)   Take any other necessary action to enforce collection of any liens, or special assessments provided for in this chapter.

    (2)    The city may pursue the lien and special assessment remedies whether or not the city is pursuing any other action to terminate an ongoing code violation that was the basis for the fine.

    (3)    The lien and assessment shall be imposed on the date the citation for the code violation is issued to the responsible person and becomes effective upon the recording of a notice of lien and/or assessment by the county recorder. This notice shall satisfy the notice requirements when an administrative citation is personally served on the responsible party. In addition, the city shall send notice by first class mail stating the date, time and location of the meeting to each property owner listed in the proposed resolution at least ten days before the city council considers the resolution and certifies the amounts of the liens and special assessments.

    (4)    A responsible party may contest the amount and/or validity of any lien or assessment for a civil fine at the public hearing to certify the amount of the lien or assessment by the city council. Such contests shall be limited to the issue of the amount and/or validity of the lien or assessment and may not consider whether the underlying code violation occurred. Pursuit of such a contest by a responsible party is necessary to exhaust the administrative remedies concerning a legal challenge to the validity of any such lien or assessment.

    (e)    The parent or legal guardian of a responsible party who is a minor shall be liable for any fines imposed upon the minor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such fines may be collected from the minor, parent or guardian. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY
1.16.010 Violations—Penalty.
    (a)    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. A violation of this code shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any other requirement of the code, any violation constituting a misdemeanor under this code may, in the discretion of the city attorney or other prosecutor, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any person charged and convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code is punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within the year; and (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. Each day such violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

    (b)    In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code is a public nuisance and may be, by this city, abated as such by any lawful means, including injunctive relief. Each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

    (c)    In addition to the penalties and remedies provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code is also subject to a civil penalty of up to one thousand dollars per day for each and every day such condition continues. (Ord. 1509 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1492 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1487 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1232 § 1, 1995; Ord. 546 § 1, 1969)

 

1.16.020 Continuation of legality.
    The repeal of ordinances or parts of ordinances effectuated by the enactment of the ordinance codified herein shall not be construed as abating any actions now pending under or by virtue of such ordinance or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provisions existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2013; Ord. 546 § 3, 1969)

 

1.16.030 Recovery of attorneys’ fees for enforcement of nuisance violations.
    (a)    Recovery of Attorneys’ Fees Authorized for Certain Nuisances upon Election by City. In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding commenced by the city to abate a public nuisance, if the city elects at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

    (b)    Prevailing Party. In addition to any other determination of prevailing party authorized pursuant to applicable law, the city shall be considered a prevailing party entitled to its attorneys’ fees under subsection (a) when it can demonstrate that:

    (1)    Its lawsuit was the catalyst motivating the defendant to provide the primary relief sought;

    (2)    The lawsuit was meritorious and achieved its result by “threat of victory”; and

    (3)    The city reasonably attempted to settle the litigation before filing the lawsuit.

 

    (c)    Remedies Cumulative. The remedies contained in this section are cumulative to one another and to any other remedy available by law or in equity to the city. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 1.17 HEARINGS
1.17.010 Hearing officer.
    Whenever a right to a hearing or appeal before the city council is granted pursuant to the provisions of this code, the city manager shall act as the hearing officer and shall render his or her decision without consulting with the city council. The city manager is delegated all of the duties and is empowered with all of the powers of the city council with respect to such hearings. The city council may, in its discretion, allow a rehearing before it or may simply review the administrative record, if any is produced at such hearing, and render its own decision. If the city council fails to act within fifteen days of the city manager’s decision, the city manager’s decision shall be deemed final. (Ord. 952 § 1, 1982)

 

1.17.020 Exceptions.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.17.010, whenever an appeal is taken from a decision of a duly authorized and appointed commission of the city, that appeal shall only be taken before the city council. The provisions of Section 1.17.010 shall also not apply when the city manager has already conducted a hearing in the first instance and a right of appeal of the city manager’s decision is specifically given to the city council. (Ord. 952 § 1, 1982)

 

1.17.030 Procedures for adjudicative hearings.
    The following shall be the basic procedures for adjudicative hearings including, but not limited to, conditional use permit revocations, business permit revocations and public nuisance determinations:

    (1)    Notice of the issues or charges should be provided at least ten days ahead of the hearing by staff.

    (2)    All evidence in existence at the time of the notice of hearing and intended to be used at the hearing should be provided by staff with the notice or as soon as it becomes available.

    (3)    Any procedural objections to the hearing, documentary evidence, legal authority or other writings intended to be used in the hearing by the subject of the hearing must be submitted at least seventy-two hours in advance of the hearing.

    (4)    The hearing officer will call the matter to order.

    (5)    The person having the burden of proof proceeds first. In revocation or public nuisance cases, the city staff proceeds first.

    (6)    Live unsworn testimony is permitted and hearsay is admissible. Written declarations, sworn or unsworn, shall be allowed. The trier of fact should consider the type of evidence and its weight.

    (7)    There is no general right of cross-examination. The trier of fact may allow limited cross-examination where the ends of justice so demand. Alternatively, the trier of fact may make inquiry.

    (8)    The subject of the hearing shall be allowed to present evidence.

    (9)    The public shall be allowed to present evidence.

    (10)  The parties shall be allowed to make closing remarks.

    (11)  The proceedings shall be recorded so that a record is made.

    (12)  The city attorney will provide advice on admissibility of evidence and will prepare the form of the decision.

    (13)  The trier of fact shall render a decision with findings of fact.

    (14)  The trier of fact reserves the right to alter the above procedure to ensure that due process and a fair trial are given. (Ord. 1356 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 1.18 ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS—LIMITATIONS
1.18.010 Purpose and effect.
    Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the city council enacts the ordinance codified in this chapter to limit to ninety days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus. (Ord. 816 § 1, 1976)

 

1.18.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings:

    A.    “Complete record” means and includes the transcript of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by a hearing officer, the final decision, all admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the city or its commission, board, officer or agent, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case.

    B.     “Decision” means and includes adjudicatory administrative decisions that are made after hearing, suspending, demoting or dismissing an officer or employee, or after revoking or denying an application for a permit or a license, or after denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance.

    C.     “Party” means an officer or employee who has been suspended, demoted or dismissed; a person whose permit or license has been denied; or a person whose application for a retirement benefit or allowance has been denied. (Ord. 816 § 1, 1976)

 

1.18.030 Time limit for judicial review.
    Judicial review of any decision of the city or its commission, board, officer, or agent may be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration in the procedures governing the proceedings the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is provision for reconsideration, the decision is final upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided, that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to such provision the decision is final for the purposes of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. Whenever the city manager’s decision is said to be final except for the reserved right of the city council to act as final authority, the decision is deemed final for the purposes of the time limit for judicial review on the date of the city manager’s decision; provided, that if the city council does act as the final authority, the petitioner must file within ninety days following the action of the city council. (Ord. 816 § 1, 1976)

 

1.18.040 Preparation of the record.
    The complete record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the city or its commission, board, officer or agent which made the decision and shall be delivered to the petitioner within ninety days after the petitioner has filed a written request therefor. The city may recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing or otherwise preparing the record. (Ord. 816 § 1, 1976)

 

1.18.050 Extension.
    If the petitioner files a request for the record within ten days after the date the decision becomes final, the time within which a petition pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure may be filed shall be extended to not later than the thirtieth day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or the petitioner’s attorney of record, if the petitioner has one. (Ord. 816 § 1, 1976)

 

1.18.060 Notice.
    In making a final decision, the city shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure and Chapter 1.18 of this code. (Ord. 816 § 1, 1976)

 

1.18.070 Prior restraints.
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, whenever the constitution requires that prompt judicial review is necessary for a decision impinging on First Amendment expression, the city shall ensure that prompt judicial review is available before the administrative decision is effective. (Ord. 1290 § 1, 1999)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.02 ORGANIZATION
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 OFFICE HOURS
Chapter 2.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 2.14 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.16 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.18 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 2.20 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.22 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.23 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.25 HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.30 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.31 PLANNING/BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.36 CONTRACTING PROCEDURES
Chapter 2.38 PUBLIC PROJECTS—UNIFORM COST ACCOUNTING AND ALTERNATE PROCEDURES ADOPTED
Chapter 2.52 HUMAN RESOURCES
Chapter 2.57 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Chapter 2.58 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
Chapter 2.59 RECORDS, INFORMATION, AND MANAGEMENT
Chapter 2.60 DEMANDS
Chapter 2.64 TAX COLLECTION
Chapter 2.68 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Chapter 2.72 POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION AT SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 2.76 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 2.78 PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURES FOR BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Chapter 2.82 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES
Chapter 2.86 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Chapter 2.90 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITS

Chapter 2.02 ORGANIZATION
2.02.010 Reorganization.
    This chapter reflects the organizational structure of the city resulting from consolidation, streamlining and more cost efficient operations as the city has evolved and as the city government’s mission has adapted to those changes. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.02.020 Definitions.
    Throughout this code, whenever references are made to previous organizational structures or positions, the following corresponding organizations and positions shall be recognized:

    “Building and safety department,” “fire/building department,” “building department,” “health and building department” or similar words used in this code with reference to the building or construction function shall hereinafter mean “planning/building department.”

    “Building director,” “building and safety director,” or similar words whenever used in this code with respect to a building or construction function shall hereinafter mean “planning/building director.

    “City attorney” The office of city attorney is hereby eliminated. The city will contract for legal services. Any reference in this code to city attorney shall refer to the city’s “contract legal services firm.”

    “Fiscal services manager” shall mean the director of finance.

    “Fiscal services division” shall mean the finance department.

    “Personnel manager” shall mean the human resources director.

    “Personnel,” “personnel system” or “personnel division” shall mean human resources, the human resources system and human resources department, respectively.

    “Recreation manager” or “community services manager” and “community services division” shall mean the recreation and community services manager and the recreation and community services division, respectively. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Agenda.
    The city manager or city clerk shall prepare the agenda of all such matters according to council policies and administrative regulations. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.020 Duties of presiding officer.
    The mayor, or in the mayor’s absence the mayor pro tempore, shall be the presiding officer and shall assume his or her place and duties as such immediately following his or her election. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of the city council, state questions coming before the city council, and decide all questions of order; subject, however, to an appeal to the city council as a whole, in which event a majority vote shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. He or she shall vote on all questions.

    The mayor shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted and contracts approved by the city council at meetings. In the event of the mayor’s absence, the mayor pro tempore shall sign such documents as have been adopted and approved by the city council. In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the temporary chairperson shall sign such documents as have been adopted and approved during the meeting at which he or she presided. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.040 Call to order—Presiding officer.
    The mayor, or in his or her absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall call the city council to order. In the absence of the mayor and the mayor pro tempore, the city clerk or the deputy city clerk shall call the city council to order, whereupon a temporary chairperson shall be elected by the councilmembers present. Upon the arrival of the mayor or the mayor pro tempore, the temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair at the conclusion of the business then before the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.050 Roll call.
    Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the city clerk shall enter in the minutes the names of all councilmembers present. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.060 Quorum.
    A majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. When there is no quorum, the mayor, mayor pro tempore, or a councilmember shall adjourn such meeting, or if no councilmember is present, the city clerk shall adjourn the meeting. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.065 Votes required to take action.
    Unless otherwise required by law, a majority of the quorum consisting of at least two affirmative votes are required to take action. Abstentions shall not be counted as affirmative votes. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.070 Preparation of minutes.
    The minutes of city council meetings shall be kept by the city clerk and shall not be required to record any remarks of councilmembers, or of any other person except at the special request of a councilmember. A record shall be made of the names of persons addressing the city council and whether they spoke in support of or in opposition to a matter under consideration by the city council.

    The city manager or clerk shall cause a copy of the minutes to be presented for approval and filed by the city council at a subsequent meeting. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.090 Rules of debate.
    (a)    Presiding Officer May Debate and Vote. The presiding officer may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all councilmembers, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a councilmember by reason of acting as the presiding officer.

    (b)    Getting the Floor—Improper References to be Avoided. Every councilmember desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine him or herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.

    (c)    Interruptions. A councilmember, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless to call him or her to order, or as herein provided. If a councilmember while speaking is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed.

    (d)    Rules of Order. The latest edition of Robert’s Rules of Order shall be used as a nonbinding guide to the conduct of meetings. Because Robert’s Rules of Order does not directly apply to city council meetings, Robert’s will not be strictly followed. When the city council is acting in an adjudicatory capacity, the hearing procedure shall afford due process. Reconsideration or rescission of adjudicatory matters may be allowed at the city council’s discretion. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order unless an appeal to the city council as a whole is made, in which case the majority vote shall govern and conclusively determine the matter. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.100 Addressing the city council.
    Any person desiring to address the city council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so; provided, however, that under the following headings of business, unless the presiding officer rules otherwise, any qualified and interested person shall have the right to address the city council upon obtaining recognition by the presiding officer:

    (a)    Commission/Committee and Staff Reports. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the city council with regard to written communications, reports, ordinances, resolutions or bids appearing on the agenda, whether scheduled in advance or placed on the agenda under Section 2.04.010.

    (b)    Public Hearings. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the city council in regard to matters then under consideration.

    (c)    Oral Communications. Any person or their authorized legal representatives may address the city council by oral communications on any matter over which the city council has authority. All communications shall be governed by the Ralph M. Brown Act. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.110 Manner of addressing city council—Time limit.
    (a)    Each person addressing the city council shall give his or her name for the record. Unless further time is granted by the presiding officer, each person shall limit his or her address to three minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the city council as a body and not to any councilmember. No person, other than a councilmember and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion without the permission of the presiding officer.

    (b)    Spokesperson for Group of Persons. Whenever any group of persons wishes to address the city council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the city council, and in case additional matters are to be presented at the time by any other member of said group, to limit the number of persons so addressing the city council, so as to avoid unnecessary repetition. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.120 Decorum.
    By Councilmembers. While the city council is in session, each councilmember must preserve order and decorum, and no councilmember shall, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the city council nor disturb any councilmember while speaking, or refuse to obey the orders of the city council or the presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.130 Persons authorized to approach city council table.
    No person, except city officials or their representatives, shall be permitted to approach the city council table without the consent of the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.140 Request for entry of protest in minutes.
    Any councilmember at his or her request shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent from or protest against any action of the city council entered in the minutes. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.150 Council initiated items.
    Any councilmember shall have the right to have an item considered at a subsequent meeting by raising the item at a council meeting and receiving at least one concurring vote to have the item placed on a future agenda. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.160 Meeting—Place.
    The official meeting place for the city council to conduct regular meetings shall be in the Council Chambers Building, 10200 Slater Avenue, Fountain Valley, California. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.170 Meeting—Time.
    Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month at a time fixed by resolution. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.180 Posting of agenda.
    Agendas shall be posted in accordance with state law. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.190 Compensation.
    Pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Sections 36516 and 36516.2, councilmembers shall receive as compensation five hundred dollars per month and such benefits as allowed by law. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.200 Term and selection—Mayor and mayor pro tempore.
    (a)    As soon as practical, following the certification of the city council election results after the November general municipal election, the city council shall make its selections of mayor and mayor pro tempore. In the nonelection years, the selection of mayor and mayor pro tempore shall be made at the city council meeting date closest to the anniversary date of the selections in the election years.

    (b)    The offices of mayor and mayor pro tempore shall have one-year terms and shall be filled in accordance with the following rotation procedure:

    (1)    The councilmember who has the longest consecutive council service since his or her last election or last service as mayor, whichever is longer, should become the mayor.

    (2)    In the event that two councilmembers have the same length of service as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the one having received the greatest number of votes in the last councilmember’s election should become mayor. If any person declines his or her term as it comes by in rotation, that person should remain in the same place in the rotation cycle as if he or she had served.

    (3)    Notwithstanding the rotation provided for in this section, the selection of the mayor and mayor pro tempore shall ultimately be at the discretion of the city council, which shall make its selection with at least four councilmembers present. Selection shall be made by a nomination from a councilmember, seconded by another councilmember, after which a vote is taken by the entire city council. This procedure shall be repeated until at least three votes have been given to one nominee. The city council, by vote with at least four members present, may remove a person from the office of mayor or mayor pro tempore at any time for any reason.

    (c)    In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall assume all of the duties of the mayor until a mayor is selected by the city council to serve the balance of the term of the vacated incumbent. The city council shall be free to appoint any councilmember for the balance of that term, but upon the conclusion of that term the rotational selection process should again be employed in the same order as if the vacated incumbent had served a full term.

    (d)    The selection of mayor pro tempore shall be in accordance with the same criteria as provided above, with the exception that the mayor pro tempore should be the person with the next greatest qualifications. (Ord. 1535 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.220 Municipal elections.
    All general municipal elections shall be held on the same day as the statewide general election. General municipal elections shall be consolidated and the Orange County Registrar of Voters shall be requested to conduct the election. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

2.04.230 Term limits.
    (a)    No person shall serve more than three consecutive full terms of office as a member of the city council. For the purposes of this section, “full term” shall mean a four-year term. No portion of a full term that is less than a full term will be counted in calculating the term limit.

    (b)    Any person who has served three consecutive full terms as a member of the city council shall not be eligible to serve again until the expiration of at least two years measured from the next regular election date to the regular council election date following. The intent of this subsection is to provide at least a two-year break in service on the council.

    (c)    The term limits established by this section shall apply prospectively only to those terms of office which commence on or after November 2, 2004. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.250 Ethics training.
    Councilmembers shall attend ethics training as required by Government Code Section 53234 et seq. The city clerk shall assist the councilmembers in attaining compliance with this law in a timely manner. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.04.260 Expense reimbursements.
    Councilmembers shall comply with the expense reimbursement law set forth in Government Code Section 53232 et seq., as follows:

    (a)    Expense reimbursements shall be in accordance with the city council policy implementing this law.

    (b)    Councilmembers shall provide a brief report on any event attended at the city’s expense at the next regular meeting of the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.08 OFFICE HOURS
2.08.010 Hours designated.
    Business hours for the City Hall of the city of Fountain Valley, and the holidays on which City Hall will be closed shall be set by resolution. The exact date for the observance of each of the designated holidays shall be set forth by administrative regulation. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.12.010 Title purpose.
    The purpose of this title is to provide for the orderly growth of the city government by establishing areas of responsibilities through the creation of certain offices, departments and divisions and by establishing lines of authority. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.14 CITY ATTORNEY
2.14.010 Office eliminated.
    The office of city attorney is hereby eliminated. The city will contract for legal services. Any reference in this code to city attorney shall refer to the city’s contract legal services firm. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.14.020 Powers and duties.
    (a)    The city attorney shall advise city officials in all legal matters pertaining to city business. The city attorney shall be responsible for the framing of all ordinances and resolutions required by the city council.

    (b)    As the city’s legal advisor, the city attorney shall:

    (1)    Attend all city council meetings unless excused;

    (2)    Attend the meetings of the other city boards and commissions as requested;

    (3)    Provide advice to the city manager and staff and coordinate with the city council and city manager when providing legal advice to other subordinate officers and employees;

    (4)    Be responsible for the form of all city contracts and other legal documents;

    (5)    Initiate and defend all legal actions in which the city or any officer or employee is a party unless other arrangements for special counsel have been made;

    (6)    File and prosecute all actions alleging a criminal violation of the municipal code unless other arrangements are made with the district attorney or other special prosecutor. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.16 CITY MANAGER
2.16.010 Office created—Appointment.
    There is created the office of city manager. The city manager shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.16.020 Duties.
    Subject to policy prescribed by the city council, the city manager shall have the power and it shall be his or her duty:

    (a)    To supervise the administrative affairs of the city except as otherwise specifically directed by the city council;

    (b)    To make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as may be deemed desirable, including the proposal of ordinances and resolutions necessary for effective management or in the public interest;

    (c)    To keep the city council advised of the financial conditions and future needs of the city by preparing short-range and long-range financial plans;

    (d)    To see that the ordinances of the city and the applicable laws of the state are enforced;

    (e)    To appoint all officers, heads of departments and employees of the city, provided, however, the appointment of all officers and heads of departments shall be subject to the approval by the city council;

    (f)    To act as personnel officer for the city and all of its agencies;

    (g)    To investigate the operation of departments and other agencies of the city, and of all contracts to which the city is a party, and to assure proper performance;

    (h)    To investigate complaints concerning utility operations and to see that all permits, privileges and franchises granted by the city are faithfully performed;

    (i)     To submit an annual budget estimate to the city council for its approval;

    (j)     When directed by the city council, to represent the city in its inter-government relations, and to negotiate contracts for joint governmental actions subject to city council approval;

    (k)    To exercise general supervision over all public property under control of the city;

    (l)     To attend all meetings of the city council unless excused, and such meetings of boards and commissions as he or she chooses, or which he or she is directed to attend by the city council, and participate in discussions at such meetings;

    (m)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city council;

    (n)    To prescribe such general rules and regulations necessary in the general conduct of the administrative departments under his or her jurisdiction;

    (o)    To devote full time to the duties of the office and to the interests of the city;

    (p)    To have jurisdiction of all departments, divisions and agencies of the city including the city attorney while interfacing with staff, but excluding advisory commissions or boards, provided that where any such officer performs functions other than those assigned to the office by law, such additional functions shall be under the administrative direction of the city manager. The heads of the administrative departments and divisions under the city manager shall be directly responsible to him or her for the efficient administration of their respective departments and divisions, and the city manager may designate department heads, when necessary, to assure the continuity of the city’s business. The city manager shall have the authority for the appointment and removal of department directors. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.18 ADMINISTRATION
2.18.010 Created—Direction.
    There is created a functional unit of city government known as the administration department under the general administration and direction of the city manager. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.18.020 Divisions within the administration department.
    The city manager shall directly coordinate and supervise the following divisions and personnel for the city at a level as the city manager shall direct:

    (a)    The city clerk’s office;

    (b)    Administrative services division;

    (c)    Recreation and community services division.

    (d)    Information systems services division. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.18.030 Department functions.
    Administration shall be responsible for providing the following functions:

    (a)    Legislative analysis and intergovernmental relations;

    (b)    Public information, insurance, and risk management;

    (c)    The City Clerk’s Office.

    (1)    The city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager, with the approval of the city council, and will serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city clerk shall administer a functional division of city government within the administration department,

    (2)    In addition to other duties as may be assigned by law or by the city manager, the city clerk shall:

    (A)   Attend all meetings of the city council and agency for community development and shall prepare the minutes of such proceedings,

    (B)   Have custody of and be responsible for the city seal and all books, official files, papers, correspondence and archives belonging to the city committed to the clerk’s custody,

    (C)   Prepare and maintain an index of all records in the clerk’s custody,

    (D)   Administer and supervise the city’s and agency’s records management program,

    (E)   Administer and supervise all municipal elections,

    (F)    Administer all oaths and take affidavits in matters relating to city business,

    (G)   Administer and supervise the publication of legal notices and ordinances and, if appropriate, prepare fair and adequate summaries of such ordinances for publication, which shall be reviewed by the city attorney and city manager before being published,

    (H)   Attest the signatures of city officers and documents that have been executed as authorized by resolution, ordinance or statute,

    (I)    Perform such other duties relating to the office as shall be required of him or her by law, ordinance or the city council/agency,

    (J)    Provide administrative supportive services to city officers and employees for required conflict of interest filings,

    (K)   Provide information from the Secretary of State and/or Fair Political Practices Commission to candidates in municipal elections and administer candidate filings,

    (L)   Keep a register of claims and indexing system for litigation involving the city as directed by the city manager,

    (M)  Accept and process subpoenas and summons and other legal process unless an administrative regulation designates acceptance and process by another department or officer of the city,

    (N)   With the approval of the city manager, the city clerk may deputize subordinates who shall perform such duties required by law to be performed by the city clerk as the city clerk may delegate and direct,

    (O)   The city clerk shall execute a bond in the amount set by the city council by resolution, upon recommendation of the city attorney in accordance with Government Code Section 36518,

    (P)    With approval of the city manager, the city clerk may deputize subordinates who shall perform such duties required by law to be performed by the city clerk as the city clerk may delegate and direct;

    (d)    Recreation and Community Services Division. Within the administration department there shall be a recreation and community services division, the manager of which shall be responsible for all community service functions, recreational, educational and cultural services for the city and its residents and other functions as may be assigned by the city manager and shall:

    (1)    Provide recreational cultural programs in the areas of aquatics, athletics, contract classes, playgrounds, special events, volunteers, and other areas deemed appropriate by the city council,

    (2)    Provide input, direction and promotion to community agencies, groups and organizations dealing with their recreation, cultural and social service, opportunities and programs,

    (3)    Cooperate with governmental and voluntary organizations and agencies in furtherance of recreation, cultural and social service, opportunities and programs,

    (4)    Administer, operate and maintain existing cultural and recreation areas and other facilities under control and ownership of the city,

    (5)    Provide administrative and clerical support to the human services committees, commissions or boards as appointed by the city council from time to time;

    (e)    Information Systems Division. Within the administration department there shall be an information systems services division that shall maintain the information technology services of the city. An information systems manager may be appointed to advise and assist the city manager, as information systems manager officer, in administering the information systems rules and regulations, and shall:

    (1)    Provide oversight of all technology-related products and services for all departments within the city to maintain consistency with the city technology plan,

    (2)    Establish and maintain procedures for use and control of the city’s technology systems,

    (3)    Be responsible for the network administration and integration; software development and installation; maintenance of hardware and software, troubleshooting problems, and modifications,

    (4)    Prepare and administer the division and information services capital budget replacement, including upgrades and replacements,

    (5)    Providing for training of city employees on information systems,

    (6)    Perform such other regulated duties as shall be required by law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the city manager;

    (f)    Economic development including business attraction and retention programs. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.20 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
2.20.010 Created—Director.
    There is created a department of public works to be headed by the director of public works. The appointment of the director shall be by the city manager, subject to approval of the city council. The director shall be a registered civil engineer under the laws of the state of California with experience in the construction, design and maintenance of public works systems. Public works should include sewers, storm drains, water supply systems, streets, and the engineering phases of the subdivision of land and all appurtenances thereto. The department shall be responsible for all services and functions related to engineering, planning, design, maintenance, construction and inspection of all public works projects. Public works as defined in this section shall include all city-owned utilities. The director shall perform the duties and exercise the authority provided by law for a city engineer and street superintendent unless such additional positions are authorized by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.20.020 Other duties.
    The director of public works is hereby given the authority over parks, recreational fields and the city’s water department. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.20.030 Design approval.
    The director of public works and city engineer, are authorized to approve designs as to reasonableness on public improvements and other public works projects for which city council approval is not required. Such discretionary authority is hereby delegated to the director of public works and city engineer for the purpose of the design immunity defense provided in Government Code Section 830.6 or successor statute. The approval of design extends to “as built” that are accepted. This delegation is meant to ratify past delegation of such authority. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.22 POLICE DEPARTMENT
2.22.010 Established.
    A police department for the city of Fountain Valley is established. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.020 Personnel.
    The police department shall consist of a chief of police and such subordinate officers and personnel as are necessary to enforce the laws and keep the peace within the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.040 Responsibility of the chief of police to the city manager.
    The chief of police shall report to the city manager, in writing without delay, any dereliction of duty or misbehavior of any police officer and shall attend upon any and all investigations that may be held by the city manager relating to the conduct of any police officer. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.045 Authority to adopt orders, rules and policies.
    The chief of police shall have the authority to issue and promulgate written orders, policies, rules and regulations governing the operation of the department and the conduct of its personnel. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.050 Police officers subject to orders of the chief of police.
    All police officers shall, at all times, be subject to the orders of the chief of police and shall be subject to call by the chief of police at any time during the day or night. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.060 Advancements.
    All advancements to the next higher classification and salary increase shall be made according to the ordinances, resolutions and memorandum of understanding of the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.070 Appointment of chief.
    The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager with approval by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.080 Statutes or laws to be enforced.
    It shall be the duty of each and every member of the police department to enforce impartially all the laws and statutes of the United States and of the state of California, all ordinances of the county of Orange and the city of Fountain Valley within the limits of this city, and to perform such other and further duties as statute and ordinance now existing or hereafter enacted that may be imposed upon them in their capacity as peace officers. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.090 Arrest authorization.
    Sworn members of the police department are authorized to make arrests and detain prisoners in all cases where a peace officer is so authorized under the laws of the state of California. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.100 False report.
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully make to the police department, or any police officer in the police department, any false, misleading or unfounded report for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the police department or police officer, or for the purpose of inducing or causing to be issued a complaint or indictment against any person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.110 Powers of the chief of police and deputy officers.
    The chief of police and officers shall have the same powers that are now or may hereafter be conferred by the laws of the state of California, and shall be entitled to the same protection as set forth by state laws. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.120 Assistance in prosecution and investigation.
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all officers to help or assist in the prosecution and investigation of all violations of any ordinance or laws that come to the attention of the police department. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.22.130 Recruitment and training.
    Pursuant to Penal Code Sections 13510(c) and 13522 the city of Fountain Valley, while receiving aid from the state of California pursuant to said law, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training and will adhere to the training and recruitment standards established for public safety dispatchers. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.23 FIRE DEPARTMENT
2.23.010 Department created.
    There is created the fire department, the head of which shall be the fire chief who shall be appointed by the city manager subject to approval of the city council and in accordance with the city’s rules and ordinances as they may pertain. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.23.020 Fire chief.
    The fire chief shall have knowledge and be qualified by training in administering all phases of fire prevention and suppression. He or she shall be familiar with the laws and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and suppression or obtain advice from those who are qualified in rendering decisions pertaining such laws and regulations. He or she shall be trained in emergency medical services and disaster preparedness. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.23.030 Fire chief—Authority.
    The fire chief shall have all authority vested by law and as directed by the city council and city manager. All fire personnel shall be subject to the orders of the fire chief and all firefighters shall be subject to call by the fire chief at any time during the day or night. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.23.040 Fire chief—Assistants—Powers during fire.
    The fire chief, the fire chief’s deputies and the fire chief’s assistants shall, during the existence of fires within the city, have all powers of law enforcement officers and any person disobeying any of the lawful orders of the fire chief or of the chief’s deputies and assistants, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.23.050 Fire chief—Technical advisor to city council.
    The fire chief shall be the technical advisor to the city council and all city departments on subjects related to fire protection and prevention. The fire chief shall coordinate between all departments in duties related to fire protection, prevention and suppression. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.23.070 Fire chief—Additional duties—Responsibility.
    The fire chief shall perform such other duties as assigned by the city manager and shall be responsible for the preparing and submitting the annual and long-term fire department budget in accordance with city procedures. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.23.080 Protection and prevention programs.
    The fire chief shall develop, support and deliver programs to educate, protect, prevent and eliminate the dangerous conditions that threaten our community from unfriendly fire, sudden medical emergencies, natural disasters, and exposure to hazardous materials. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.23.090 Building fire regulations.
    The fire chief shall be responsible for the administration of the California Code of Standards and Regulations, California Building Codes, California Fire Code, and Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.25 HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
2.25.010 Created.
    There is hereby created the human resources department that shall be administered by the human resources director. The human resources department shall be responsible for those services and duties previously performed by the personnel division which was part of the administration department. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.25.020 Duties and responsibilities.
    The human resources director shall employ such assistances as authorized and shall:

    (a)    Administer the personnel system of the city and specifically Chapter 2.52 of this code. The human resources director shall advise the city manager who serves as the city’s personnel/human resources officer.

    (b)    Administer the personnel ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations.

    (c)    Provide responsive personnel management assistance to city departments and divisions and assist in attracting, developing and retaining quality employees.

    (d)    Be generally responsible for the following functions:

    (1)    Labor relations.

    (2)    Employee relations.

    (3)    Recruitment and selection.

    (4)    Benefits administration.

    (5)    Workers compensation administration.

    (6)    Classification and compensation.

    (7)    Performance evaluation management.

    (8)    Employee development.

    (9)    Employee service and recognition programs.

    (10)  Such other duties pertaining to the above as may be required or as directed by the city manager. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.30 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
2.30.010 Created—Director.
    There is created a finance department the head of which shall be the director of finance. The director of finance shall:

    (a)    Establish and administer a centralized system of financial administration for the city, including activities relating to accounting, payroll, billing, budgeting and auditing as required by the city manager and subject to the regulations of general law;

    (b)    Issue business licenses and permits and administer related matters;

    (c)    Administer the treasury of the city in accordance with the Government Code. The duties imposed upon the city clerk by Government Code Sections 40802 through 40805 are transferred to the director of finance pursuant to Government Code Section 37209 and who for purposes of Government Code Section 40805.5, is the city’s director of finance. The director of finance shall execute a bond in a form and amount as shall be approved by the city council on recommendation of the city attorney;

    (d)    Cause a summary of the city’s financial condition to be published in an adjudicated newspaper at the close of the fiscal year as required by law;

    (e)    Invest funds according to city council policy and state law;

    (f)    Make monthly reports on the status of investments as required by state law;

    (g)    Certify and determine that all demands presented to the city council are in accordance with the city’s ordinances and state law;

    (h)    Issue and collect invoices and bills for water and refuse collection, utilities, and for such other city services as required. The department shall be the central cashier of the city and shall collect all revenues payable to the city and deposit those in accordance with city regulations;

    (i)     Administer and supervise the issuance of bonds, certificates of participation, and other financial instruments of the city, successor agency to the Fountain Valley agency for community development, and various authorities established by the city;

    (j)     Administer the city’s deferred compensation plan and perform such other related duties as shall be required by law, ordinance, or the city manager;

    (k)    Administer the city’s wage and benefits liability;

    (l)     Administer the development and preparation, execution and control of the city budget;

    (m)   Coordinate with all departments on financial matters; all departments shall in turn be required to cooperate with the director of finance in matters pertaining to the city’s finances;

    (n)    Maintain a current record of inventory of the city’s assets including a current estimated value and cost of the same;

    (o)    Furnish the city manager with information and work with the city manager in advising the city council on the financial condition and future requirements of the city regarding short and long range financial planning;

    (p)    Administer the purchasing functions; 

    (q)    Perform such other duties as the city manager or city council shall require. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.30.020 Centralized purchasing division.
    There is created a centralized purchasing division of the finance department in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.30.030 Establishment of the function and authority of the purchasing officer.
    The director of finance or designee is the purchasing officer. The purchasing officer shall be the city’s principle purchasing official and shall exercise all powers incidental and necessary to the conduct of the purchasing division. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.30.050 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
    The purchasing officer, with the approval of the city manager, may authorize any city department to purchase specified services, materials, supplies and/or equipment, provided that such purchases shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter, and the purchasing manual. Such authorization by the purchasing officer shall be in writing. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.30.060 Encumbrance of funds.
    The purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund against which the purchase is charged. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.30.070 Disposition of surplus property.
    All using departments shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing officer shall have authority to dispose of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department, or which have become unsuitable for city use, by auction, sale, trade, donation or whatever means that best serves the public good. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

Chapter 2.31 PLANNING/BUILDING DEPARTMENT
2.31.010 Created—Director.
    There is created a planning/building department the head of which is the planning/building director. The planning/building director shall:

    (a)    Administer the zoning and land use laws of the city;

    (b)    Advise and coordinate with the planning commission;

    (c)    Administer the city’s housing projects and grant programs designed to maintain the community;

    (d)    Supervise the code enforcement staff;

    (e)    Coordinate with city personnel that administer the Uniform Construction Codes and Fire Code;

    (f)    Administer the city’s redevelopment activities as directed by the city manager;

    (g)    Administer the Uniform Construction Codes and other building regulations;

    (h)    Manage building contract services. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.31.020 Building official.
    (a)    The building official shall be hired by the city manager, or by the city council if by contract, and shall perform his or her duties under Title 18 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code. The building officials and authorized representatives that interpret the technical codes set forth in Title 18 may be city employees or independent contractors. These duties and responsibilities shall be performed under the supervision of the planning/building director.

    (b)    He or she shall be the building official for the purposes of making interpretations and carrying out the responsibilities designated by the building standards adopted by the state and this city.

    (c)    He or she shall be responsible for providing technical advice to the city council and planning commission upon subjects regarding building and shall coordinate with the planning department on subjects regarding zoning and land use. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.31.030 References.
    Whenever this code makes reference to the “planning manager” or the “planning division,” these terms shall hereafter refer to the planning/building director and planning/building department, respectively, and consistent with Section 2.20.020 of this code. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.36 CONTRACTING PROCEDURES
2.36.010 Applicability.
    This chapter shall apply to all city purchases, procurements, and contracts including those for supplies, services, equipment, public works, and professional services. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.020 Purchases generally.
    This section applies to all city purchases except public works contracts over five thousand dollars, professional services contracts, and fixed charges. Purchases shall be made to the responsible vendor offering the lowest acceptable bid or through best value procedures that provide adequate and reasonable competition at the sole discretion of the city. Quotations and bids shall be obtained using the following methods.

    (a)    Micro-Purchases. Purchases aggregating three thousand five hundred dollars or less may be awarded without soliciting competitive quotations.

    (b)    Small Purchases. Purchases aggregating over three thousand five hundred dollars to fifty thousand dollars shall be obtained using informal quotations from at least two qualified vendors.

    (c)    Procurements (Over Fifty Thousand Dollars).

    (1)    Service contracts aggregating over fifty thousand dollars shall be selected using a request for proposal or a request for bid process, as determined by the purchasing officer to serve the city’s greater benefit, based on each contract or procurement.

    (2)    Other purchases aggregating over fifty thousand dollars shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder through competitive bid procedures unless the purchasing officer determines that the public interest would be served by using a modified procedure.

    (3)    The city reserves the right in its sole discretion to reject any and all bids presented and to re-advertise for bids. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.030 Public works contracts over five thousand dollars.
    Unless the provisions of Chapter 2.38 apply, any award of a public works contract over five thousand dollars shall be made in accordance with this section. The procedures used shall ensure that the city obtains adequate and reasonable competition.

    (a)    Formal Bidding. Public works contracts require formal, competitive sealed bidding pursuant to state law.

    (1)    Public Notice. Public notice of the request for bids shall be published.

    (2)    Bid Opening. Sealed bids shall be opened by the city clerk or designee publicly in the presence of at least one witness at the time and place designated in the request for bids.

    (3)    Bid Acceptance and Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction. The city retains the right to waive minor irregularities in the bid, but will reject nonresponsive bids in accordance with law.

    (4)    Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, if the public interest will not be served by re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders.

    (5)    Rejection of Bids. In its sole discretion the city may reject any and all bids presented and re-advertise for bids.

    (6)    Award. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.

    (7)    Storage of Sealed Bids. All opened bid materials, after the award, are to be retained for the time prescribed by the records management program.

    (b)    Emergency Exception to Competitive Bidding. In an emergency, the procedures of Public Contract Code Sections 20168 and 22050, or any successor statute, shall apply. The city manager is authorized to order emergency work pursuant to Public Contract Code Section 22050 and if such action is ordered, the city manager shall report to the council at successive regular meetings stating the justification for continuing with the emergency work. In the absence or inability of the city manager to so act, the director of public works shall be authorized to exercise these powers. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.040 Professional services contracts.
    This section applies to the procurement of professional services. Professional services includes any type of special service or advice in financial, economic, accounting, engineering, legal or administrative matters by persons specially trained and experienced and competent to perform the special services required (Government Code Section 53060). Such services include, but are not limited to, architectural; engineering; environmental; financial; land surveying; construction management; audits; training services; legal services; preparation of planning or studies; technology application development; and personnel, job classification and benefit studies.

    (a)    Contracts aggregating fifty thousand dollars or less can be obtained by negotiated contract and/or by purchase order.

    (b)    Contracts aggregating greater than fifty thousand dollars shall be obtained by request for proposal (RFP) or request for qualification (RFQ).

    (c)    Professional services contracts shall be awarded only to responsible contractors possessing the ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of a proposed procurement. Consideration will be given to such matters as contractor integrity, compliance with public policy, record of past performance, and financial and technical resources. Professional services are generally retained considering technical factors (such as qualifications and experience), price and other factors such as the ability to meet the city’s time schedule(s) for the project. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.045 Fixed charges.
    Fixed charges are goods or services that can be acquired from only one source for which a fixed charge has been determined. Fixed charge contracts can be obtained without bid, request for proposal, or request for qualifications. A purchase order is not required for these types of purchases. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.050 Bidder’s security.
    When deemed necessary by the city manager or the city manager’s designated representative, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the notice inviting bids. All public works bids shall be accompanied by security. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible, responsive bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.060 Performance bonds.
    The city shall have authority to require a performance bond of the successful bidder before entering into a contract pursuant to an award in such an amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city requires a performance bond, the form shall be approved by the city attorney. The amount and form, whenever possible, shall be set forth in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.070 Bid exceptions.
    (a)    Bidding may be dispensed with when one or more of the following apply:

    (1)    An emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest source of supply;

    (2)    When the commodity or service can be obtained from only one vendor;

    (3)    When used equipment can be acquired which meets the needs of the city and costs less;

    (4)    When participating in cooperative contracts with another government agency;

    (5)    When “piggybacking” off the pricing that was previously established by another government agency; provided the original solicitation was made in a competitive manner and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder;

    (6)    When the public interest otherwise requires that bidding be dispensed with provided the city council approves the purchase by majority vote and, as part of its approval, indicates the reasons bidding was dispensed with; or the city manager, director of finance, or purchasing officer makes similar findings for contracts with a value of fifty thousand dollars or less;

    (7)    Where two bids cannot be obtained.

    (b)    In no event shall bidding be dispensed with when required by federal or state law. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.080 Purchase orders.
    All purchases over three thousand five hundred dollars shall be made by purchase order or written contract except for purchases involving “fixed charges.” (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.090 Splitting purchases.
    Purchases shall not be divided so as to avoid compliance with any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.100 Review of city contracts as to form.
    All city contracts shall be reviewed as to form by the city attorney or city’s special legal counsel. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.110 Award and execution of contracts.
    (a)    The city manager is authorized to award and sign contracts on behalf of the city when the total amount of the city’s expenditure on the contract is fifty thousand dollars or less. The director of finance is authorized to award and sign contracts on behalf of the city when the total amount of the city’s expenditure on the contract is twenty-five thousand dollars or less. Contracts greater than fifty-thousand dollars require city council approval.

    (b)    The city council is authorized to award any city contract. Any contract awarded by the city council shall be attested to by the city clerk and signed by the mayor. In the absence or unavailability of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore may sign contracts awarded by the city council.

    (c)    The city council may authorize by minute order, resolution, or ordinance, any person to award, sign, or both, any contract on behalf of the city.

    (d)    Any contract that is not awarded and signed in compliance with this section is void. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.120 Grants.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, federal or state law and any special conditions pertaining to grants shall also be met when purchasing or contracting pursuant to such grants. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.130 Environmentally conscious purchases.
    The city shall endeavor to create specifications and make purchases that are environmentally friendly to the extent practicable and consistent with the common good, taking into account the city’s budget and other factors. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.140 Local preference.
    (a)    There is hereby established a local preference for purchases of goods and services of five percent. Such preference shall be applied to a bid or proposal for such goods and services as follows:

    (1)    The bidder asserting the local preference produces proof of a Fountain Valley business license that has been in existence for at least six months;

    (2)    The bidder who is selling goods produces a resale license listing a Fountain Valley address;

    (3)    The bidder shall have a physical address and place of business in the city of Fountain Valley.

    (b)    The local preference shall not apply to the following:

    (1)    Contracts funded in whole or in part from donations and gifts to the city to the extent the provisions would conflict with any special conditions attached to the gifts or donations, provided the gift and the special conditions have been approved and accepted pursuant to the donations policy of the city.

    (2)    Contracts resulting from emergency conditions where any delay in completion or performance of the contract would jeopardize public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city, or where in the judgment of the city manager or designee the operational effectiveness or a significant city function would be seriously threatened if the contract were not entered into expeditiously.

    (3)    Contracts with any single or sole source supplier for supplies, material, equipment or other personal property.

    (4)    Contracts funded by the federal government. Local preferences shall not be used in the evaluation of bids or proposals unless state/federal statutes expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference.

    (5)    Public works contracts. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

Chapter 2.38 PUBLIC PROJECTS—UNIFORM COST ACCOUNTING AND ALTERNATE PROCEDURES ADOPTED
2.38.010 Public projects—Uniform Cost Accounting adopted.
    State law governs public works bidding for construction projects. Public Contract Code Section 20160 et seq., generally provide for the procedure for competitive bids. Pursuant to Public Contract Code Section 22000 et seq., the city has adopted the uniform cost accounting procedure and the alternate procedure for bidding public works projects. Pursuant to those procedures, the following may apply:

    (a)    Public projects of forty-five thousand dollars or less may be performed by the employees of the city by force account, negotiated contract or purchase order.

    (b)    Public projects of one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars or less may be let by contract by informal procedures as set forth in state law.

    (c)    Public projects of more than one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars shall be let by contract using formal bidding procedures as provided in Section 2.36.030 of this code.

    (d)    The city council does hereby delegate the authority to award and execute contracts to the city manager for public projects of fifty thousand dollars or less. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.38.020 Informal procedures.
    The following procedures shall govern informal bidding as described in subsection (b) of Section 2.38.010 of this chapter:

    (a)    The city shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work. Minimum criteria for development and maintenance of the contractors list shall be determined by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission, hereinafter referred to as “Commission.”

    (b)    All contractors on the list for the category of work being bid or all construction trade journals specified in Section 22036 or both; all contractors on the list for the category of work being bid and all construction trade journals specified by the Commission in accordance with the Public Contract Code Section 22036 shall be mailed a notice inviting informal bids unless the product or service is proprietary.

    (c)    If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.

    (d)    If the product or service can be obtained only from a certain contractor, the notice inviting bids can be sent exclusively to that contractor.

    (e)    All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to subsection (b) shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due.

    (f)    The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

    (g)    If all bids received are in excess of one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars, the city council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract at one hundred seventy-five thousand five hundred dollars or less to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the public agency was reasonable. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.38.030 Emergencies.
    In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, or working details or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work shall be done by day labor under the direction of the city council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.38.040 Notices for formal bidding.
    The noticing for formal bidding shall be in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22037 and Section 2.36.030 of this code. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.38.050 Rejection of bids.
    The procedure for rejecting bids shall be as described in Public Contract Code Section 22038. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

 

2.38.060 Adoption of plans, specifications and working details.
    The city council shall adopt plans, specifications and working details for all projects exceeding the amounts provided in Section 2.38.010(c) and any persons shall have the right to inspect the same. The approval of the contract by the city council shall constitute approval of the plans, specifications and working details incorporated in that contract. (Ord. 1537 § 2, 2018)

Chapter 2.52 HUMAN RESOURCES
2.52.010 Human resources system adoption.
    In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal services the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the human resources system in this chapter is adopted. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.020 Human resources officer.
    The city manager shall be the human resources officer. The city manager shall be assisted by the director of human resources. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as human resources officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city, or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.52.190. The human resources officer shall:

    (a)    Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the human resources rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

    (b)    Prepare and recommend to the city council, personnel or human resources rules and revisions and amendments to such rules. The city attorney shall approve the legality of such rules and amendments prior to their submission to the city council. The rules and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval by the city council;

    (c)    Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council;

    (d)    Prepare or cause to be prepared a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the competitive service. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council;

    (e)    Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and scoring of examinations; the certification to the appointing authority a list of all persons eligible for appointment in the appropriate class in the competitive service. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.030 Competitive service—Exempt positions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city except:

    (a)    Elective officers;

    (b)    Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

    (c)    Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services for a definite period of time;

    (d)    Volunteer personnel such as volunteer firefighters and reserve police officers who receive no regular compensation from the city;

    (e)    City manager;

    (f)    City attorney;

    (g)    City clerk;

    (h)    Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake that threatens life or property;

    (i)     Limited service personnel (including intermittently employed employees, per diem, hourly and seasonal employees). (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.040 Adoption of rules.
    Human resources rules shall be adopted and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. The rules shall establish specific procedures and regulations governing the:

    (a)    Preparation, installment, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

    (b)    Preparation, revision, administration and annual review of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

    (c)    Preparation of public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of applications for employment;

    (d)    Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

    (e)    Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and making of temporary and emergency appointments;

    (f)    Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;

    (g)    Transfer, promotion, demotion, and reinstatement of employees in the competitive service;

    (h)    Separation of employees from city service through layoff, suspension and dismissal;

    (i)     Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and training;

    (j)     Grievance and appeal procedures;

    (k)    Establishment of adequate human resources records. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.050 Appointments—General regulations.
    Appointments to vacated positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the human resources rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examinations. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees, and shall consist of such recognized selection techniques as achievement and aptitude tests, and other written tests, personal interview, performance tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combination of these which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates. Physical performance and medical tests may be given as a part of any examination. All appointments are subject to a medical examination prior to employment. In any examination the human resources officer may include in addition to competitive tests a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor. Appointments shall be made in accordance with the following provisions:

    (a)    Appointments of all officers, heads of departments and divisions and the employees of the city, and the general control over the same is vested exclusively in the city manager who is the appointing authority, subject to the approval by the city council. The city manager may delegate to department directors or division managers the authority to appoint and supervise persons to the competitive service.

    (b)    When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service, the human resources officer shall transmit to the appointing authority the names of candidates who qualified in the examination.

    (c)    In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a provisional appointment may be made by the appointing authority of a person meeting the minimum training and experience qualifications for the position not to exceed six months. A provisional employee may be removed at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. During the period of suspension of an employee or discharge of an employee such vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority subject to the provisions of this chapter and the human resources rules. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.060 State and federal summary criminal history information—Access authorized.
    The city is hereby authorized to access federal and state summary criminal history information for employment (including volunteers), licensing, or certification purposes, pursuant to the authority provided in Penal Code Sections 11105 and 13300, and may not disseminate said information to any private person or entity. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.070 Fingerprinting/investigation required.
    All appointees, applicants, and prospective employees shall submit to fingerprinting or similar identification at the police department. The police department shall submit the fingerprint identifying information to the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.075 Prima facie disqualification for felony conviction.
    An applicant shall be prima facie disqualified for employment, licensing, or certification if the investigation reveals that he or she was convicted of a felony. As used herein, conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere. The city manager, as human resources officer, is specifically authorized to receive such information and shall ensure that it is not disseminated to persons unauthorized to review such information. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.076 Appeal.
    An applicant who is thus prima facie disqualified for employment may make an appeal in writing to the city manager. The city manager shall consider the mitigating factors such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of the person at the time of the conviction, contributing social or environmental conditions, the nature and seriousness of the conduct, the circumstances surrounding the conduct, or the position for which the person is applying and whether the conviction is unrelated to that position. The city manager shall render a decision based on the above factors that shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.077 Peace officers.
    Notwithstanding the general appeal rights given applicants in this chapter, applicants for a position as peace officer shall be conclusively disqualified for conviction of a felony and have no rights of appeal. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.080 Appointee—Suitability.
    The city manager shall report to each appointee the fact of the appointee’s suitability for city service. In the event the city manager determines that the character and background of an appointee makes the appointee unsuitable for city service, the city manager shall take appropriate action. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.090 Employment without report not considered permanent.
    No person shall be considered to have permanent employment, tenure or service with the city until a report has been received from both the local law enforcement agency, and the State Attorney General’s office, and the Federal Department of Justice, and the city manager has acted pursuant to those reports. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.100 Appointee—Dismissal.
    Any appointee who refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be dismissed from any position he or she may then have without further consideration or action on the part of the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.110 Probationary period.
    All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.

    An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which the employee has been promoted shall be reinstated to the position from which the employee was promoted, unless the employee is dismissed from city service as provided in this chapter and the human resources rules. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.120 Abolishment of positions.
    Whenever, in the judgment of the city manager, it becomes necessary, the city manager may, with the approval of the city council, abolish any position or combine a position with another position in the competitive service. Employees transferred, demoted or laid off because of the abolishment of positions shall not be subject to written charges nor shall they have the right of appeal in such cases.

    Competency and seniority shall be observed in effecting such reduction in personnel pursuant to state law and the human resources rules. Lay-offs shall be made within classes of positions and all provisional employees in the affected class or classes shall be laid off prior to the lay-off of any probationary or permanent employee. Probationary employees shall be laid off prior to permanent employees.

    For the purpose of determining order of lay-off, total cumulative time shall include time served on military leave of absence.

    The human resources rules shall make adequate provisions for the reemployment of qualified employees, in accordance with the following provisions:

    (a)    The names of probationary and permanent employees laid off shall be placed upon re-employment lists for classes that, in the opinion of the human resources officer, require basically the same qualifications, duties and responsibilities of those of the class of positions from which lay-off was made.

    (b)    Names of persons laid off shall be placed upon re-employment lists in order of their competency and seniority and shall remain on such lists for a period of one year unless re-employed sooner. For re-employment purposes, competency of a person laid off shall be determined by the department director in which such person worked. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.130 Status of present employees.
    Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position or in some other position in the competitive service for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his or her class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the human resources rules.

    Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.140 Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions.
    The provisions of the human resources rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time positions. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.150 Demotion, suspension, reduction in pay, dismissal.
    (a)    Department directors and division managers shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, suspend without pay, reduce in pay or dismiss any permanent employee below the rank of department director. Notice of such action must be in writing and served personally on such employee. Where an emergency situation exists, the notice shall be served within three working days after the action is taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reason or reasons therefor.

    (b)    Department directors shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city manager may, after consultation with the members of the city council, demote, suspend, reduce in pay or dismiss any department directors of the city with or without cause and said department director shall neither be entitled to a hearing nor a statement of the charges.

    (c)    The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay that are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.160 Right of appeal.
    Any employee below department director level shall have the right of appeal to the city manager from any disciplinary action taken by the employee’s department director or division manager. Such appeal must be filed with the city manager within ten working days after receipt of written notice of such disciplinary action; failure to file an appeal within such period constitutes a waiver of right of appeal. The appeal must be in writing, must be verified before a notary public, or made under penalty of perjury, and must state specifically the facts upon which it is based.

    The city manager shall cause such appeal to be investigated and shall conduct a hearing as provided in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in the human resources rules adopted pursuant to this chapter. The decision of the city manager shall be final except as provided in Section 2.52.200. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.170 Improper political activity.
    The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.180 Discrimination.
    No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against in violation of state law. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.190 Right to contract for special service.
    The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the need and extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical service necessary in connection with the establishment and revision of the operation of the human resources system. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.52.200 Final authority by the city council.
    The city council specifically reserves the right, in cases it deems exceptional, to act as the final authority. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.57 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
2.57.010 Purpose.
    The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property for the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the terms set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

    (a)    Emergency. As used in this chapter, the term “emergency” shall mean actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, pollution, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or similar public calamity. Included within the term “emergency” are the various degrees of emergency enumerated in the California Emergency Services Act, Section 8558 of the Government Code, including “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency” and “local emergency.”

    “State of war emergency” or “state of emergency” are of such magnitude as to appear likely to require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat. A “local emergency” consists of an emergency within the territorial limits of this county, or in the territorial limits of this city, which is, or is likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city and requires the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. A state of local emergency may be proclaimed locally, as provided under Section 2.57.050.

    (b)    Emergency Services. As used in this chapter, the term “emergency services” shall mean preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from an emergency. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to any condition relating to a labor controversy. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.030 Emergency services council—Membership.
    The Fountain Valley emergency services council, which is the local disaster council, is created and shall consist of the following:

    (a)    The director of emergency services, who shall be chairperson. The director of emergency services is also the city manager of the city;

    (b)    The assistant director of emergency services, as appointed by the director of emergency services, as events warrant, who shall be vice-chairperson;

    (c)    The emergency preparedness coordinator, who under the supervision of the director, shall develop emergency operations plans and organize the emergency services program of this city, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the director;

    (d)    Such deputy directors and chiefs of emergency services departments, services or divisions as are provided for by resolution pursuant to this chapter;

    (e)    Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be needed and appointed by the director, with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.040 Emergency services council—Powers and duties.
    It shall be the duty of the city emergency services council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency operations and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The emergency services council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such a meeting upon the call of the vice-chairperson. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.050 Director of emergency services—Powers and duties.
    There is created the office of director of emergency services who shall be the city manager of the city.

    The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Said order shall be approved by the city council.

    The director is empowered to:

    (a)    Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency and the termination thereof, if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation, or termination thereof, if the city council is not in session.

    Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days. Review of a proclamation of a local emergency will be made by the city council at its regularly scheduled meetings, but in no event later than twenty-one days after the previous review, until a local emergency is terminated;

    (b)    Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when in the opinion of the director, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the emergency situation;

    (c)    Control and direct the effort of the emergency services organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purpose of this chapter;

    (d)    Direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services, and staff of the emergency services organization of this city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

    (e)    Represent the emergency services organization of the city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergency services and operations. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.060 Emergency powers.
    In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of emergency or a state of war emergency by the Governor or the director of the California Office of Emergency Service, the director is empowered to:

    (a)    Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency, provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;

    (b)    Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and, if required, immediately to commandeer the same for public use;

    (c)    Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency or a state of war emergency by the Governor in the region in which this city is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she thinks necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service volunteers (Government Code of State of California, Title I, Division 4, Chapter 8);

    (d)    Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency;

    (e)    Execute all of his or her ordinary power, as well as all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter, or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority, and in conformity with Section 38791 of the Government Code, to exercise all police power vested in the city by the Constitution and general laws. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.070 Emergency plan.
    The Fountain Valley emergency services council shall be responsible for the development of the city’s emergency plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any conditions constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.080 Emergency services organization.
    All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.57.060(c) of this chapter, are charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency services organization of the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.57.090 Punishment of violations.
    It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment of not to exceed six months, or both, for any person during an emergency to:

    (a)    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency services organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

    (b)    Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

    (c)    Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency services agency of the state. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.58 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
2.58.010 Statutory authority.
    The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claims procedures applicable to local public agencies, including this city, are governed by the provision of Chapter 1 of Division 3.6 of the Government Code of the state, commencing with Section 900 et seq. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.58.020 Special claims procedure for contracts and other claims.
    (a)    Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the state, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the city for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws.

    (b)    Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the state, all claims against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the state. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the state relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.58.030 Filing.
    All claims or demands against the city shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council for approval or rejection, whether in whole or in part, if such presentation is required by law. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.59 RECORDS, INFORMATION, AND MANAGEMENT
2.59.010 Purpose.
    The city council does hereby desire to establish certain procedures for the production, destruction and retention of city records. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.020 Public records.
    Public records shall be retained, destroyed and produced in accordance with Government Code Section 34090 et seq., and Government Code Section 64501 et seq., or any successor statute and in accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated therefor. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.030 Public records and information retention.
    The city manager shall establish a schedule of public records and information retention by administrative regulation. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.040 City council and commission records.
    The official minutes of the city council or city commission (“authority”) received and filed by the authority are to include each action taken by the authority with votes individually recorded and published for public review. Audio or video tapes shall be kept for at least one hundred eighty days, notwithstanding Government Code Section 34090.7. Video or audio tapes and recordings shall be preserved whenever the city clerk is aware that litigation is pending. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.050 Security tapes and telephone/radio communications.
    In accordance with Government Code Section 34090.6, security tapes, or recordings and other routine video monitoring, including those for car video systems, jail observation, and monitoring and building security systems, shall be kept for one year. Telephone and radio communications tapes may be destroyed after one hundred days. Such recordings shall be preserved if there is pending litigation and those recordings may be evidence in that litigation. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.060 Legislative approval of destruction required unless excepted.
    The destruction of city records shall be done pursuant to an authorized resolution. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.065 City attorney consent for destruction.
    The city attorney’s written consent to the destruction of city records must be obtained before destruction occurs. Such consent shall be indicated on the resolution authorizing the destruction. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.070 Public records coordination.
    The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping track of all requests for public records that are not responded to contemporaneously. Procedures for coordination may be set forth by administrative regulation. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.59.080 Charges.
    Charges for public records shall be established in the city’s fee resolution but shall comply with the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.60 DEMANDS
2.60.010 State Code provisions.
    This chapter provides for the city’s presentation and audit procedures as required by Government Code Section 37201 et seq., and for the city’s procedures for the payment of warrants as required by Government Code Section 53910. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.60.020 Demands.
    Demands against the city for money or damages are governed by Government Code Section 900 et seq., except as provided herein. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.60.030 Audit procedure.
    The city council shall approve or reject demands after they have been audited as provided herein. Such audited demands may thereafter be submitted separately or on a register of audited demands that shall be certified by declaration under penalty of perjury by the director of finance certifying the accuracy of the demands and the availability of funds for payment thereof. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.60.040 Payments conforming to budget.
    Notwithstanding any other provision herein, warrants drawn for payment of demands certified or approved by the director of finance as conforming to a budget approved by resolution need not be audited by the city council prior to payment. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.60.050 Payroll warrants.
    Department directors or other authorized persons shall certify attendance records and payrolls. Payroll warrants need not be audited by the city council but may be approved by the finance director or city manager. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.60.060 Additional authority.
    The city council may, by resolution, authorize such practices with respect to the form, issuance, delivery, endorsement and payment of warrants as it deems convenient, efficient and in the public interest that conform substantially to those practices specified in Government Code Section 53910 et seq. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.64 TAX COLLECTION
2.64.010 Authority—State Code provisions.
    All duties of assessing property and collecting taxes thereon provided by state law to be performed by the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector of the county of Orange, state of California, in accordance with provisions of Sections 51500 through 51519, inclusive, of the Government Code of the state of California as the same now exists or may be amended, added to or reenacted. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.64.020 Compensation to county.
    The compensation to be paid to the county for assessing and collecting taxes for the city as aforesaid shall be fixed by agreement between the county board of supervisors and the city council of the city of Fountain Valley. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.68 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
2.68.010 Disposal—State Code provisions.
    It shall be the duty of the law enforcement agency of the city to dispose of all unclaimed property in its possession. Said property shall be handled and disposed of after complying with the provisions of Section 2068 of the Civil Code of the state of California as said code may be amended from time to time, exempting therefrom the property that would fall under Section 1411 of the Penal Code of the state of California, and as said code may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.68.020 Duration of time held.
    All of such property falling under Section 2068 of the Civil Code of the state of California shall be held by said law enforcement agency for a period of at least three months. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.68.030 Sale at public auction.
    All unclaimed property subject to this chapter after being held in custody by the law enforcement agency for a period of three months and that remains unclaimed shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.68.040 Donated to organization—Destruction.
    In the event said unclaimed property cannot be sold at public auction, it may be given away to any fraternal, benevolent, patriotic, charitable or religious organization, not organized for profit, as directed by the city council. If any such property is of no value and cannot otherwise be disposed of by gift or sale, it may be destroyed as junk. No property shall be disposed of as junk or given away as a gift until due notice has been given as set forth in this chapter dealing with the sale of such property at a public auction. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.68.050 Notice of auction sale.
    Notice of such sale at public auction shall be given by the police department at least five days before the time fixed therefor, by appropriate publication in a newspaper at least once. Said newspaper shall be of general circulation published within the county. Said notice shall specify the time and place where such public sale will be held, and generally describe the property to be sold at said public auction. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.68.060 Restoration to owner.
    In the event the owner of any such property appears on or before the date fixed for the sale thereof at public auction and reclaims said property and reimburses the city for all expenses incurred in the care and preservation of the property, then said property shall be restored to the owner. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.68.070 Frequency of sale.
    The public sale shall be held at least once a year by the police department of the city and may be held at more frequent intervals as determined by the police department. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.68.080 Revenue from sale.
    All revenue derived from the sale of said property shall be turned over to the general fund of city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.72 POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION AT SPECIAL EVENTS
2.72.010 Use regulations.
    In any instance in which a special event or occurrence such as, but not limited to, the premiere of a motion picture, the opening of a new store, a new building, a bazaar, a wedding, a sports or athletic event, a carnival, a circus, political rally, or any gathering that may attract a large number of people or for other reasons may be, or may become a hazard to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, unless attended or supervised by the chief of police or the fire chief, as the case may be, or personnel under their respective commands, or in any instance where a person, firm or corporation desires special services over and above the normal services provided by the police department or the fire department of the city, such services, if approved by the chief of police and/or the fire chief, as the case may be, may be provided at the expense of the applicant or person in charge of such event under the conditions listed in this chapter. Such a special event may also require a special event permit in accordance with Chapter 8.50 of this code. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.72.020 Written request for services.
    The person, firm, organization or corporation in charge of such event desiring to employ the services of the city’s police or fire personnel to be in attendance thereat, shall file a written request for such services with the chief of police and/or the fire chief, as the case may be. This request shall state the nature of the event, the approximate number of police officers and/or firefighters to be in attendance, the approximate length of time, and a statement agreeing to pay the city for such special services. The applicant shall also deposit, by cash or check, the estimated fee. When the total expense is known, the city will refund any over deposit or bill balance to the person requesting such service. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.72.030 Approval or denial of request.
    The chief of police and/or the fire chief, as may be appropriate, may approve or deny any request. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.72.040 Payment.
    When assigned for duty on such special assignment, police officers or firefighters, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be on regular duty under the general supervision of the chief of police or the fire chief, or any officer in charge under their respective commands, and shall be entitled to any and all benefits provided by law for such personnel as members of the police department or the fire department of the city. The pay for each person thus employed during such assignment shall be at a police officer’s or fire officer’s regular hourly or overtime pay rate, as applicable. The chief of police or fire chief shall list on the payroll to the fiscal services manager the name of the person, firm, organization or corporation requesting such service, the names of the employees so employed, and the numbers of hours of employment of each. The fiscal services manager shall thereupon compute the charge for the services rendered to the person, firm or corporation employing such personnel at the outside labor rates which are computed and updated semiannually based on existing adjusted labor rates of the position plus benefits. The difference between such amount and that previously deposited by the person requesting such service will be either billed or refunded by the fiscal services manager. A governmental agency is not required to pay an advance deposit. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.72.050 Failure to pay.
    Any failure of said person, firm or corporation billed for services of such personnel to make payment within ten days shall constitute a breach of contract and said person, firm or corporation shall be subject to suit for the debt and shall pay, in addition to said debt, the city’s attorney fees and other collection costs. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.76 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2.76.010 General.
    There shall be the following named boards and commissions that shall have the powers and duties herein stated. In addition, the city council may create by ordinance such additional advisory boards or commissions as in its judgment are required, and may grant to them such powers and duties as are consistent with the provisions of law. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

2.76.030 Appointment—Terms.
    (a)    The members of each of such boards or commissions shall be appointed by the city council from the residents of the city, none of whom shall hold any paid office or employment in the city government. They shall be subject to removal by motion of the city council adopted by at least three affirmative votes. The members thereof shall serve for a term of a duration prescribed in this chapter for each commission, and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

    (b)    Any vacancies in any board or commission, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the city council. Upon a vacancy occurring leaving an unexpired portion of a term, any appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of such term. If a member of a board or commission absents him or herself from three consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission, unless by permission of such board or commission expressed in its official minutes, or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or ceases to be a resident of the city, his or her office shall become vacant and shall be so declared by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.040 Meetings.
    Each board or commission shall hold meetings regularly and such special meetings as such board or commission, or its committees, may require. All proceedings shall be open to the public. The city council shall establish rules and regulations for its boards and commissions. Each board or commission shall have the same power as the city council to compel the attendance of witnesses, to examine them under oath, to compel the production of evidence before it and to administer oaths and affirmations. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.050 Chairperson of boards and commissions—Selection.
    As soon as practicable following the annual appointment of board and commission members, each of such boards and commissions shall organize by electing one of its members to serve as chairperson and one of its members to serve as vice-chairperson. No member elected to serve as chairperson or vice-chairperson shall serve more than two consecutive one-year terms. Any member serving less than six months of an unexpired term of a previously elected chairperson may be selected to serve two full terms as set forth above, in addition to the balance of the unexpired term. Selection shall be by open ballot and a minimum of three votes shall be required for election. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.060 City council and commission membership restricted.
    No person shall serve as a councilmember and a member of an appointive commission at the same time. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.070 Compensation.
    The voting members of boards and commissions shall serve without salary for their services as such, but may receive reimbursement for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received authorization by the city council. Such expenses may be set at a fixed amount per meeting by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.080 Planning commission—Created.
    There shall be a city planning commission that shall consist of five regular members appointed by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city council may appoint one alternate member who shall attend all meetings of the commission and who is authorized to serve and vote in place of any regular member of the commission who is absent or who disqualifies him or herself from participating on any matter before the commission. The secretary to the planning commission shall be the planning/building director. The planning/building director, the city engineer and the city attorney or their assistants, may meet with and participate in the discussions of the planning commission, but shall not have a vote. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

2.76.090 Planning commission members—Terms.
    The three regular members appointed in odd-numbered years shall be appointed at a city council meeting in March of odd-numbered years or as soon thereafter as convenient, and shall serve until their successor is selected in the next odd-numbered year. The two regular members appointed in even-numbered years shall be appointed by the city council in March of even-numbered years, or as soon thereafter as is convenient, and shall serve until their successor is selected in the next even-numbered year. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.100 Statute compliance.
    The planning commission shall act in accordance with all the ordinances of the city, and all amendments thereto, and any and all applicable state laws. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.110 Planning commission—Powers and duties.
    The planning commission shall have the power and be required to:

    (a)    After a public hearing thereon, recommend to the city council for adoption, amendment or repeal of a master plan, general plan, specific plan, zoning district, or redevelopment plan, survey area or preliminary plan or any part thereof, for the physical development of the city;

    (b)    Exercise such control over land subdivisions as is granted to it by ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter;

    (c)    Make recommendations to the city council concerning proposed public works capital improvement program as it relates to consistency with the city’s general plan and for the clearance and rebuilding of blighted or substandard areas within the city;

    (d)    Exercise such functions with respect to zoning and land use as may be prescribed by ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law;

    (e)    Conduct environmental analyses of such decisions;

    (f)    Provide advice regarding parks and recreation to the city council as requested. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.120 Advisory committee for persons with disabilities created.
    There shall be an advisory committee for persons with disabilities that shall consist of a number of members at the discretion of the city council, appointed by the city council. Meetings shall be bimonthly on the first Thursday of the odd month at seven p.m. in the City Hall conference room No. 1. (Ord. 1545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.130 Advisory committee for persons with disabilities—Terms.
    Members of the advisory committee for persons with disabilities are appointed in March of each year or as soon thereafter as possible and shall serve two-year terms, which may be staggered. (Ord. 1545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.140 Advisory committee for persons with disabilities—Powers and duties.
    The advisory committee for persons with disabilities shall review, recommend and develop facilities, plans, policies, programs and informational and educational literature and presentations pertaining to issues regarding persons with disabilities and the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and related state laws. (Ord. 1545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.150 Housing and community development advisory board created.
    There shall be a housing and community development advisory board that shall consist of seven members. Appointments shall be made by the city council in March of each year or as soon thereafter as possible. (Ord. 1520 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.160 Housing and community development advisory board terms.
    Members of the housing and community development advisory board shall serve two-year terms and the terms shall be staggered. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.76.170 Housing and community development advisory board terms—Powers and duties.
    The housing and community development advisory board shall review and be knowledgeable about federal and state laws regarding various housing and related programs including the federally funded community development block grant program and shall make recommendations to the city council regarding housing assistance, public service agency funding, the elimination of slum and blighted conditions, and providing assistance on low/moderate income housing for the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.78 PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURES FOR BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
2.78.010 Purpose.
    These parliamentary procedures are adopted for the boards, commissions and committees (hereinafter referred to as “advisory bodies”) of the city council and are meant to establish minimum parliamentary procedures for those advisory bodies. Nothing is meant herein to limit the authority of those advisory bodies to adopt implementing rules that are consistent with these rules. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.020 Advisory body.
    An advisory body is a body that is required by the Ralph M. Brown Act, Government Code Section 54950 et seq. (“Brown Act”), to conduct its meetings in public and in accordance with that law. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.030 Time for regular meetings.
    The advisory body shall establish a time and place for regular meetings by formal action that shall be kept on file with the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.040 Agenda.
    The staff shall prepare an agenda for all public meetings pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.070 Quorum.
    A majority of the advisory body shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A majority vote of the quorum shall be necessary to approve action. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.080 Minutes.
    The secretary or other staff person assigned the task shall take minutes of the meeting. Minutes are not verbatim transcripts but action minutes that shall show votes taken. The minutes should be approved and filed at the next regular meeting. Advisory body members that were absent from the meeting shall abstain from approving the minutes unless a tape or other verbatim recording of the meeting was reviewed beforehand. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.090 Rules of debate for the advisory body.
    (a)    Presiding Officer may Debate. The presiding officer may move, second and debate, and shall not be deprived of any rights of an advisory body member by virtue of serving as presiding officer.

    (b)    Getting the Floor. Each advisory body member desiring to speak shall first obtain the presiding officer’s permission to speak by being recognized.

    (c)    Interruptions. No advisory body member shall interrupt another person while speaking unless calling for a point of order, and then only when recognized by the chair.

    (d)    Rules of Order. Robert’s Rules of Order may be used as a guide to conducting meetings but are not binding. All questions of order are to be decided by the chair unless overruled by a majority of the advisory body. If an advisory body must act in an adjudicatory capacity, Robert’s Rules of Order shall not control, but an informal hearing procedure shall be employed to provide whatever due process may be required for the matter being considered. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.100 Addressing the advisory body, staff and the public.
    All persons shall address the advisory body by speaking at the podium, unless other arrangements are authorized. Each person shall be asked to fill out a speaker’s card and to state his or her name and address for the record. No person shall be compelled to provide his or her address and speakers may simply provide what city they reside in lieu of a street address. All persons shall address the advisory board by speaking through the chair. Direct questioning or statements to individuals, advisory body or staff are not permitted. There shall be no cross-examination allowed of staff or advisory body members. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.110 Time limits.
    The advisory body shall determine if time limits are to be established for addressing the advisory body, unless an exception is allowed. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.120 Spokespersons for a group.
    Whenever a person is speaking as a recognized spokesperson for a group, that person may be allowed additional time to speak, by the presiding officer, in lieu of others present who have authorized that spokesperson by a show of hands. If persons all support a position for the same reasons as another speaker, they may show that they have similar viewpoints by a show of hands in lieu of each person coming to the podium to make the same statement. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.140 Approaching the advisory body table or dais.
    No person shall approach the advisory body table or dais, and any documents that need to be presented shall be given to the advisory body secretary for distribution. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.78.150 Alternates.
    Alternates may ask questions of the public, staff or other advisory body members, and may participate in the discussion regarding any matter prior to a motion being made. Once a motion is made and seconded, the question belongs to the advisory body then qualified to vote and alternates shall not participate in the discussion or vote unless serving in lieu of a regular member who is absent or abstaining. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.82 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES
2.82.010 Application.
    This chapter applies to all officers and employees of the city. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in Chapter 9.5 (Section 3201 et seq.) of Division 4, Title 1, of the Government Code, or by federal law, no restriction shall be placed on the political activities of any officer of the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.82.020 Misuse of office.
    No one who holds, or who is seeking election or appointment to, any office or employment in the city shall, directly or indirectly, use, promise, threaten or attempt to use, any office, authority or influence, whether then possessed or merely anticipated, to confer upon or secure for any individual person, or to aid or obstruct any individual person in securing, or to prevent any individual person from securing, any position, nomination, confirmation, promotion, or change in compensation or position, within the city, upon consideration or condition that the vote or political influence or action of such person or another shall be given or used in behalf of, or withheld from, any candidate, officer or party, or upon any other corrupt condition or consideration. This prohibition shall apply to urging or discouraging the individual employee’s action. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.82.030 Solicitation of political funds.
    An officer or employee of the city shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit political funds or contributions, knowingly, from other officers or employees of the city or from persons on the employment lists of the city. Nothing in this section prohibits an officer or employee of the city from communicating through the mail or by other means requests for political funds or contributions to a significant segment of the public that may include officers or employees of the city. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.82.040 Activity prohibited while in uniform.
    No officer or employee of the city shall participate in political activities of any kind while in uniform. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.82.050 Activity during working hours prohibited.
    No officer or employee of the city shall engage in political activity during working hours. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.82.060 Activity on city premises prohibited.
    No officer or employee of the city shall engage in political activity on city premises. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

 

2.82.070 Activities relating to working conditions.
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an officer or employee of the city from soliciting or receiving political funds or contributions to promote the passage or defeat of a ballot measure that would affect the rate of pay, hours of work, retirement, civil service, or other working conditions of officers or employees of the city; provided that city employees shall not partake in such activities during their working hours, and other persons shall not be permitted access to city governmental offices for such purposes during working hours. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.86 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
2.86.010 Conflict of Interest Code adopted.
    The Conflict of Interest Code promulgated by the Fair Political Practices Commission as the model provisions, as the same may be adopted from time to time, is adopted as the conflict of interest code for the city and its designated employees. The Conflict of Interest Code shall be kept on file with the city clerk and the designated employees and categories of disclosure shall be set forth by resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting or limiting the authority of the city to adopt stricter requirements when determined to be necessary for the public interest. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 2.90 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITS
2.90.020 Campaign contribution limitation.
    (a)    No person shall solicit or accept any contribution, gift, payment, subscription, loan, forgiveness of loans, advance, deposit, pledge or promise of payment of money, or anything of material value other than personal professional or nonprofessional services rendered, performed or offered by an individual on a purely voluntary basis, in aid of the nomination or election of a candidate that will cause the total amount contributed by the contributing person with respect to a single election in support of such candidate to exceed five hundred dollars. “Person,” for the purposes of this section, includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, foundations, political, religious or social organizations, committees, or associations.

    (b)    For the purposes of this section a husband or wife shall each be allowed the right to contribute up to five hundred dollars regardless of the separate or community property nature of the source of the contribution. Each validly formed legal entity shall also have the right to contribute up to five hundred dollars, notwithstanding the fact that any individual partner, member, or shareholder may have also contributed in an individual capacity. (Ord. 1506 § 2, 2015)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.05 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.08 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.12 DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
Chapter 3.16 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS
Chapter 3.20 GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.22 VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEE/AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION
Chapter 3.24 CHARGES FOR LEGAL SERVICES

Chapter 3.04 SALES AND USE TAX
3.04.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the city of Fountain Valley.” (Ord. 9 § 1, 1957)

 

3.04.020 Purpose.
    The city council hereby declares that the ordinance codified herein is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    (1)    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California;

    (2)    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as these provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code;

    (3)    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a one percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes;

    (4)    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 67 § 2, 1961; Ord. 9 § 2, 1957)

 

3.04.030 Operative date—Contract with state.
    The ordinance codified herein shall become operative on July 1, 1957, and prior thereto this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to July 1, 1957, the ordinance codified herein shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the State Board of Equalization, provided further that the ordinance codified herein shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the county of Orange. (Ord. 9 § 3, 1957)

 

3.04.040 Sales tax—Imposition.
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 9 § 4(a)(1), 1957)

 

3.04.050 Sales tax—Place of sale consummation.
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the board of equalization. (Ord. 67 § 2, 1961: prior Ord. 9 § 4(a)(2), 1957)

 

3.04.060 Sales tax—Code adoption.
    Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said code, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1957, applicable to sales taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 9 § 4(6)(1), 1957)

 

3.04.070 Sales tax—Substitution of city for state in code.
    Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city of Fountain Valley shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city of Fountain Valley for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the state of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6797 and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted. (Ord. 9 § 4(b)(2), 1957)

 

3.04.080 Sales tax—Seller’s permit.
    If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section. (Ord. 707 § 1, 1973; Ord. 9 § 4(b)(3), 1957)

 

3.04.090 Sales tax—Exclusions from gross receipts.
    There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

    (1)    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

 

    (2)    The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 981 § 2, 1983)

 

3.04.100 Use tax—Excise tax imposition.
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified herein, for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 9 § 5(a), 1957)

 

3.04.110 Use tax—Code adoption.
    Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said code, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1957, applicable to use taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 9 § 5(b)(1), 1957)

 

3.04.120 Use tax—Substitution of city for state in code.
    Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this city for the word “state” when the word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the state of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance codified herein; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 67 § 5, 1961; Ord. 9 § 5(b)(2), 1957)

 

3.04.130 Exclusions from tax—Use tax portion.
    There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

    (1)    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

    (2)    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, or city in this state;

    (3)    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 981 § 3, 1983)

 

3.04.140 Amendments.
    All amendments of the said Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 9 § 6, 1957)

 

3.04.150 Enjoining collection forbidden.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 9 § 7, 1957)

 

3.04.160 Sales and use tax credit to industrial area redevelopment project area.
    Any person or persons subject to the sales and use tax under this chapter shall be entitled to a credit against the payment of such taxes due in the amount of any sales and use taxes due from that person or persons to the Fountain Valley agency for community development (“agency”) pursuant to ordinance No. 001, adopted by the agency on October 25, 1988, which affects businesses located within the industrial area redevelopment project area, the boundaries of which are specifically described in that certain redevelopment plan approved and adopted by the city council of the city on November 16, 1986, by ordinance No. 809, as amended on November 1, 1983 by ordinance No. 978, or, alternatively (following a validation action), in that portion of the industrial area redevelopment project area more particularly described in Exhibit “A” to the aforementioned agency ordinance No. 001. (Ord. 1115 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 3.05 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
3.05.010 Purpose.
    The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted by the city of Fountain Valley (hereafter “city”) to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    (a)    To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

    (b)    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    (c)    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

    (d)    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.020 Contract with state.
    Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.030 Transactions tax rate.
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.040 Place of sale.
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.050 Use tax rate.
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.060 Adoption of provisions of state law.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.070 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

    (a)    Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

    (1)    The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, Victims Compensation and Government Claims Board, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

    (2)    The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

    (3)    In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

    (A)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or;

    (B)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

    (4)    In Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    (b)    The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.080 Permit not required.
    If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.090 Exemptions and exclusions.
    (a)    There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

    (b)    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

    (1)    Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

    (2)    Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

    (A)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

    (B)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

    (3)    The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

    (4)    A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

    (5)    For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

    (c)    There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

    (1)    The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

    (2)    Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

    (3)    If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

    (4)    If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

    (5)    For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

    (6)    Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

    (7)    “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

    (d)    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.100 Amendments.
    All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.110 Enjoining collection forbidden.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.115 Severability.
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.120 Effective date.
    This chapter relates to the levying and collecting of the city transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

 

3.05.125 Termination date.
    The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall expire twenty years from the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 1519 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 3.08 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.08.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the city of Fountain Valley.” (Ord. 427 § 1, 1966)

 

3.08.020 Definitions.
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

    (1)    “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

    (2)    “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

    (3)    “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

    (4)    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

    (5)    “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

    (6)    “Tax administrator” means the director of finance.

    (7)    “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein may be considered. (Ord. 427 § 2, 1966)

 

3.08.030 Imposition.
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax which shall be set by resolution. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only be payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 1161 § 1, 1991; Ord. 959 § 1, 1983; Ord. 595 § 1, 1983; Ord. 512 § 21, 1968; Ord. 427 § 3, 1966)

 

3.08.040 Exemptions.
    No tax shall be imposed upon:

    (1)    Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

    (2)    Any federal or state of California officer or employee when on official business;

    (3)    Any officer employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

    No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 427 § 4, 1966)

 

3.08.050 Operator’s duties.
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 427 § 5, 1966)

 

3.08.060 Registration.
    Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

    (1)    The name of the operator;

    (2)    The address of the hotel;

    (3)    The date upon which the certificate was issued;

    (4)    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 427 § 6, 1966)

 

3.08.070 Reporting and remitting.
    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 427 § 7, 1966)

 

3.08.080 Penalties and interest.
    (a)    ORIGINAL DELINQUENCY. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

    (b)    CONTINUED DELINQUENCY. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

    (c)    FRAUD. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b).

    (d)    INTEREST. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

    (e)    PENALTIES MERGED WITH TAX. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 427 § 8, 1966)

 

3.08.090 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of amount.
    If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.08.100. (Ord. 427 § 9, 1966)

 

3.08.100 Appeal.
    Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 427 § 10, 1966)

 

3.08.110 Records.
    It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 427 § 11, 1966)

 

3.08.120 Refunds.
    (a)    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

    (b)    An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

    (c)    A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a), but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

    (d)    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 427 § 12, 1966)

 

3.08.130 Actions to collect.
    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city of Fountain Valley for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 427 § 13, 1966)

 

3.08.140 Violations—Penalty.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city/county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 427 § 14, 1966)

Chapter 3.12 DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
3.12.010 Imposed.
    There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest of property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 464 § 1, 1967)

 

3.12.020 Authority.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the city of Fountain Valley.” The tax imposed by this chapter is imposed pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901), entitled Documentary Stamp Act, of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of California and subject to, and applicable only in accordance with, all of the provisions of said act, and no levy prohibited by said act is hereby imposed and no tax is hereby imposed which is not in conformity with said act, including the following provisions thereof:

    (1)    “11912. Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 11911 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.

    (2)    “11921. Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

    (3)    “Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this Article when the exempt agency is acquiring title.

    (4)    “11923. Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment -

    (a)    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

    (b)    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

    (c)    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

    (d)    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

    Subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.

    (5)    “11924. Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if-

    (a)    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

    (b)    Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

    (c)    Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

    (6)    “11925. (a) In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this part by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if-

    (1)    Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

    (2)    Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

    (b)    If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this part, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

    (c)    Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this part by a county, city and county or city by reason of a termination described in subdivision (b), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

    (7)    “11932. ... The county shall collect all taxes imposed pursuant to this part and the county auditor shall allocate the proceeds as follows:...

    (2)    All money which relates to transfers of real property located in a city which imposes a tax on transfers of real property pursuant to this part shall be allocated one-half to such city and one-half to the county.

    (8)    “11935. Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to this part shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of this code.” (Ord. 554 § 1, 1969; Ord. 464 § 3, 1967)

 

3.12.030 Operative date.
    The provisions of this chapter shall be operative on and after 12.01 a.m. on January 1, 1968, in the event the said Documentary Stamp Act of the state authorizing such tax and an ordinance of the county imposing a documentary stamp tax pursuant to such authority, is then operative and in the event that the Congress of the United States has not provided on or before January 1, 1968, for a tax on transfers of real property. The provisions of this chapter shall be operative at all times and only during such time as the said Documentary Stamp Act of the state and any ordinance of the county passed pursuant thereto, are operative. If the Congress of the United States imposes a tax on transfers of real property after January 1, 1968, this ordinance shall have no operative effect on and after the first day of the fiscal year which follows the date such federal tax is imposed. (Ord. 464 § 4, 1967)

 

3.12.040 Copies to county officials.
    The city clerk shall mail two copies of the ordinance codified herein to the Orange County board of supervisors, recorder, tax collector and auditor. (Ord. 464 § 5, 1967)

Chapter 3.16 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS
3.16.010 Surplus.
    In the discretion of the city manager and/or the director of finance, any surplus funds that are not needed for the immediate operation of the city shall be invested to bring the maximum return possible to the city. (Ord. 512 § 13, 1968; Ord. 170 § 1, 1963)

 

3.16.020 State compliance.
    All investments shall be made in accordance with the provision of the laws of the state of California, and no other investments, except those so authorized shall be utilized. (Ord. 170 § 2, 1963)

 

3.16.030 Report to council.
    A periodic report shall be made to the council as to the nature of the investments and the returns thereon, or whenever the council shall ask for such report. (Ord. 170 § 3, 1963)

Chapter 3.20 GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.20.010 Creation—Title.
    To comply with the provisions of Article V of Chapter I of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code, there is hereby created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Ord. 20 § 1, 1958)

 

3.20.020 Moneys received.
    All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein for, and/or the construction, maintenance, improvements of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into said fund. (Ord. 20 § 2, 1958)

 

3.20.030 Expenditures.
    All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all the provisions of Article V, Chapter I, Division I of the Street and Highways Code. (Ord. 20 § 3, 1958)

Chapter 3.22 VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEE/AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION
3.22.010 Intent.
    This chapter is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality Management District’s imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1991)

 

3.22.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the definition of the following terms shall apply:

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley.

    “Fee administrator” means the fiscal services manager of the city or his or her designee.

    “Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1991)

 

3.22.030 Administration of vehicle registration fee.
    (a)    Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city pursuant to this chapter shall be accepted by the fee administrator.

    (b)    Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate trust fund to receive deposits of these funds.

    (c)    Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into a separate fund established pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund shall be credited only to that fund.

    (d)    Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 3.22.020. Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs.

    (e)    Audits. The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Sections 44244 and 44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 3.24 CHARGES FOR LEGAL SERVICES
3.24.010 Purpose.
    The city council finds that at times requests have been made by both residents of this city and by nonresidents to have the city attorney prepare legal documents to bring a property or use thereof in compliance with this code or with other applicable laws or to perform other legal services at the behest of a private person, but which relates to city matters. The city council declares that the legal fees and costs paid to the city attorney for such services shall be recouped from the person, firm, corporation or organization at whose behest such services were rendered. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1982)

 

3.24.020 Charges imposed.
    Whenever legal services are requested of the city attorney by a person, firm, corporation or other organization or entity to bring a property or use in compliance with this code or with other applicable laws or for any other reason related to city business, the amount paid to the city attorney pursuant to the terms of his then current contract shall be billed and charged to such person, firm, corporation or other organization or entity. Notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be given to the party requesting the legal services before the services are rendered. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1982)

Title 4 BUSINESS PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 4.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 4.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 4.08 MERCHANT PATROL
Chapter 4.15 DANCES
Chapter 4.20 SOLICITORS
Chapter 4.30 POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD HALLS
Chapter 4.32 TAXI REGULATIONS
Chapter 4.37 SEXUALLY ORIENTED/ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 4.40 MASSAGE
Chapter 4.45 COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Chapter 4.46 STATE FRANCHISED VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
Chapter 4.50 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 4.55 BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 4.60 OFF-SITE SALE OF SINGLE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
Chapter 4.65 ESCORTS, ESCORT BUREAUS AND INTRODUCTORY SERVICES
Chapter 4.70 AMBULANCE SERVICES
Chapter 4.75 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OPERATIONS
Chapter 4.80 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 4.85 OFFICIAL POLICE TOWING
Chapter 4.90 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS

Chapter 4.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.02.010 Short title.
    This title may be cited as the “business permit law” of the city. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.02.020 Purpose.
    The purpose of this title is to provide a procedure by which specific businesses or activities may be approved which also may require special investigations or require that certain conditions be attached in order to preserve the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the residents of the city. (Ord. 1376 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.02.030 Permit required.
    No person shall commence, transact or carry on any business or covered activity listed below without first having procured a permit from the city:

    (1)    Merchant patrol;

    (2)    Dances, dancing club entertainment;

    (3)    Solicitors;

    (4)    Charitable and religious solicitors;

    (5)    Poolrooms and billiard halls;

    (6)    Massage establishments;

    (7)    Massage technicians;

    (8)    Massage technician’s aid, apprentice or trainee;

    (9)    Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers;

    (10)  Burglary and robbery alarm systems;

    (11)  Escorts;

    (12)  Escort bureaus and introductory services;

    (13)  Bingo games;

    (14)  Off-site sale of single agricultural product; and

    (15)  Sidewalk vendors.

    This title shall not be construed to require any person or company to obtain a permit if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes or constitutional provisions of the United States or of the state of California. (Ord. 1547 § 4, 2019; Ord. 1406 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1376 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.02.040 Permit fees.
    Unless otherwise specifically stated in this title, a fee for filing an application for a permit shall be set forth by city council resolution and payable in advance. This annual fee shall be nonrefundable and shall be used to cover the administrative costs incurred in investigating and/or processing the application for permit. This fee shall not include the fee charged by the police department to process and create fingerprint records that are required as part of the permit application process for the following business permits:

    (1)    Merchant patrol;

    (2)    Solicitors;

    (3)    Poolrooms and billiard halls;

    (4)    Massage establishments;

    (5)    Massage establishment off-premises permit;

    (6)    Massage technician’s aide, apprentice or trainee;

    (7)    Pawnbroker and secondhand dealers;

    (8)    Escorts; and

    (9)    Escort bureaus and introductory services. (Ord. 1547 § 5, 2019; Ord. 1376 § 3, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.02.050 Compliance with Title 5.
    All businesses and covered activities requiring a permit pursuant to the terms of this title, unless specifically exempted herein, shall obtain and pay the fees applicable for a permit and/or license pursuant to the terms and provisions of Title 5 of this code. (Ord. 1376 § 4, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS
4.04.010 Scope.
    The rules and regulations provided in this chapter shall be applicable to all businesses or persons requiring a permit pursuant to this title except insofar as they may be inconsistent with the specific provisions and requirements for those certain enumerated businesses or activities listed separately in the succeeding chapters to this title. (Ord. 1376 § 5, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Words and phrases used in this title not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved use of the language:

    “Activity” or “covered activity” means and includes activities that are not businesses but which are otherwise regulated by this title, including but not limited to, religious and charitable solicitations to the extent not regulated specifically, dance clubs, and with respect to robbery and burglary alarm systems: any residence, church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other place of worship, nonprofit entities, and any other place that is not a business, but which maintains an alarm system.

    “Business,” as used in this title, means and includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for the purpose of earning a profit or livelihood whether or not a profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby. Business shall include, but is not limited to, trades and occupations of all and every kind of calling carried on within the city, salesmen, professions, the renting or supplying of living quarters, or rooms, or board, tenants or occupiers in any other type of endeavor entered into within the city for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit whether paid for in money, goods, labor, or otherwise and whether or not the business, profession or trade has a fixed location in the city.

    “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the police department of the city.

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley.

    “City council” means the city council of the city.

    “City manager” means the city manager, or in his or her absence, his or her designee, of the city.

    “Employee” means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as an owner, any member of the owner’s family, agent, partner, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in such business within the city.

    “Law enforcement agency” means the police department of the city.

    “License collector” means the finance director of the city or his or her designee.

    “Permit” means the document issued by the city, which allows a person or business to conduct business or activities pursuant to the terms, conditions and regulations described in this title.

    “Person,” as used in this title, means and includes the individual natural person, partnerships, joint ventures, societies, associations, trustees, trusts, or any corporations, or any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal representative thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself/herself, or for any person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. (Ord. 1376 § 6, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.030 Compliance with governmental regulations.
    Businesses, persons or activities requiring a permit pursuant to the terms of this title which additionally require any federal, state or local regulatory license or permit, shall present evidence to the license collector of satisfactory compliance with such regulations prior to the issuance of any permit under this title. Additionally, no permit shall be issued by the license collector to any business or person that fails to present any land use permit or approval required by the Fountain Valley zoning ordinance or that has failed to comply with the provisions of any other regulation of this code having to do with such business or activity. (Ord. 1376 § 7, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.040 Applicability of new regulations to existing businesses or activities—Compliance timeframe and effect on past obligations and actions.
    (a)    When any change in any of the chapters or sections of Title 4 or 5 occurs, persons or businesses affected by any such change must comply with such change within sixty days of the effective date of the change.

    (b)    Unless otherwise stated, any present or future modifications or amendment to Title 4 or 5 shall not be construed to affect the following:

    (1)    The prosecution for any violation committed prior to any present or future modification or amendments of Title 4 or 5;

    (2)    The validity of any bond or cash deposit required by an ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited and all rights and obligations pertaining to any such bond or cash receipt; and

    (3)    The payment of any license of penal provision applicable to any violation committed prior to any present or future amendments or modifications to this title. (Ord. 1376 § 8, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.060 Certain application information confidential.
    Certain information on applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of obtaining a permit shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection. It shall be the duty of the license collector to preserve and keep the statements so that confidential information may not be known except to persons required by law. (Ord. 1376 § 9, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.070 Application.
    Unless otherwise specified, all applications for permits pursuant to this title shall be in writing and upon a form issued by the license collector. Each form shall ask for general information for each business or activity; specific information for each type of business or activity may be required to be submitted to the city to conduct its investigation or to maintain its records concerning the business or activity. General information on the application shall include:

    (1)    The name, including any aliases, the date of birth, driver’s license number, social security number and physical description of a natural person that is the applicant or is a partner, officer or director if the applicant is not a natural person;

    (2)    Information as to whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation or joint venture;

    (3)    The full legal name of the business as well as the precise name under which the business will be conducted;

    (4)    The signature of the owner of the business if it is run by an individual, the signatures of the partners if the business is a partnership, or the signatures of the president and secretary if the business is a corporation;

    (5)    The home and business addresses and telephone numbers of the owner if the business is run by an individual, the home and business addresses and telephone numbers of the partners if the business is a partnership, or if the business is a corporation, the home and business addresses and telephone numbers of all corporate officers of the business and all stockholders of the business holding greater than five percent of the stock in the business unless the stock of the corporation is registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission;

    (6)    If the business is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the application along with a copy of its most recent statement of domestic stock corporation;

    (7)    A statement on the application as to whether the applicant has been convicted, pled guilty or pled nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, municipal ordinance, traffic violation or other crime, the nature of the offense and the penalty or punishment assessed therefor;

    (8)    A statement as to whether the applicant holds or has held a permit from any other state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority; a list of such permits and a statement of the time, place and by whom issued; a statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever revoked a permit held by the applicant and if so, a full and accurate statement describing the reasons for any such revocation;

    (9)    A statement on the application acknowledging that any false information stated on the application is subject to prosecution under penalty of perjury.

    Neither the filing of an application for a permit or renewal thereof nor the payment of an application or renewal fee shall authorize a person to conduct business until such permit has been granted or renewed. (Ord. 1376 § 10, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.080 Investigation.
    The license collector shall, upon receipt of the application, forward copies of the application and any attachments to the chief of police and to any department affected by such business. The chief of police and each such department shall investigate and respond in writing to the license collector with recommendations on the application.

    If, as the result of such investigations, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, all affected city departments shall endorse on the application its approval and forward the application to the license collector of the city. Such approval by city departments shall contain the signature of the approving officer and shall show the name, address and, when required, photograph of the permittee, the kind of business to be conducted by the permittee, the date of approval and, if necessary, a description of any vehicle used in such business. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.090 Permit approval, conditional approval and denial.
    (a)    The license collector, after review and investigation, may grant or deny a permit application. Within sixty days after the receipt of the application, the license collector shall mail to the applicant a postage-prepaid notice as to whether the permit has been granted or denied. If the license collector should deny the application, the notice shall also inform the applicant as to the reasons why the permit was denied and inform the applicant of their right to an administrative hearing before the city manager as provided in this chapter.

    (b)    Any permit described in this title may be denied for the following reasons:

    (1)    If the license collector finds that the granting of such a permit will be a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the public;

    (2)    If the applicant provides fraudulent or false information on the permit application;

    (3)    If the application can be denied based upon specific application denial conditions for that permit as stated in the various sections and chapters of this title;

    (4)    If all required fees have not been paid; or

    (5)    If the applicant does not fully cooperate in the investigation of the permit application.

    (c)    The license collector may, if such permit is granted, impose such terms, conditions, and restrictions upon the operations and conduct of the person or business as may be deemed necessary or expedient to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the citizens of the city.

    (d)    The license collector also may, in those cases where it is deemed that the public interest will be best served, refer the granting of the permit directly to the city manager for hearing thereon without taking further action. The decisions of the license collector with respect to the application shall be final unless appealed as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 11, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.095 Reapplication after denial.
    Whenever a permit has been denied, the applicant shall be barred from reapplying for one year from the final date of denial. (Ord. 1214 § 1, 1994)

 

4.04.100 Revocation.
    (a)    Any permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of the title may be revoked after an administrative hearing before the city manager. The permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:

    (1)    Where the license collector finds and determines that the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare demand revocation of the permit;

    (2)    When the permittee has violated any provisions of Title 4 or any other general provisions of this title and/or any of the specific provisions defined in the various chapters of this title;

    (3)    Where the permit has been granted pursuant to fraudulent or false information contained in the application; and

    (4)    Where the permittee has violated any terms or conditions of the permit.

    (b)    Notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee, postage prepaid, stating grounds of the revocation. Upon receipt of the notice of revocation, the permittee may file an appeal with the city clerk as described in Section 4.04.120. Whenever a permit is revoked, no other application for a permit to carry on a similar business by such a person shall be considered for a period of one year, though the period of time may be longer if the different chapters of this title make specific references to such a period of time. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.110 Suspension.
    Pending a revocation hearing pursuant to the terms of this chapter, a permit may be subject to immediate suspension if it is found necessary for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare. Such suspension shall only be instituted upon the recommendation of the local law, health, fire and code enforcement agencies or upon the recommendation of the city manager.

    In the event of such a suspension, the city manager shall within forty-eight hours after the suspension, cause to be served upon the permit holder a written statement containing the grounds for suspension and a notice of hearing to show cause before the city manager as to why the license should not be suspended pending revocation hearings. Such hearing before the city manager shall be held not later than ten days following the service of the notice. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.115 Administrative hearing before the city manager.
    In the event that a permit application is denied, the revocation of a permit is proposed, or a person is otherwise aggrieved by a decision made by the license collector or any other official of the city pursuant to this title or Title 5 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code, an administrative hearing shall be held before the city manager to determine the legitimacy of such permit application denial, proposed permit revocation or other such grievance related to the license collector or other city official’s decision pursuant to the provisions of this title.

    A request for an administrative hearing must be received in writing by the city manager within ten days of the time that the license collector or other official mails their decision to the applicant or permittee. The request must be received on normal working days during normal business hours. If the request is received after ten days from the time the city official’s decision was originally sent, the city official’s original decision shall be considered final and the request nullified.

    The city manager shall respond to the applicant’s or permittee’s request for an administrative hearing within ten days if the request is received within the ten days of the time the original decision was sent. The city manager shall schedule an administrative hearing with the applicant or permittee within twenty days of the receipt of the request. The notice of hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, postage paid, no later than ten days before scheduled date of the hearing unless waived by the applicant.

    At the hearing, the applicant or permittee and the license collector shall present any and all evidence that they believe shall be relevant to their positions concerning the original decision. Due process shall be afforded commensurate with the rights at issue.

    After completion of the hearing, the city manager shall state in writing his or her decision and shall mail his or her decision to the applicant or permittee within ten days of the date of the hearing. Upon receipt of the city manager’s decision, the applicant or permittee may appeal the decision as described in Section 4.04.120. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.120 Appeal.
    (a)    Right to Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city manager made pursuant to the provisions of this title or Title 5 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code, may appeal the decision to the city council. An appeal shall be filed by the aggrieved party with the city clerk no later than fourteen days after the notice of the city manager’s decision is mailed. The application for appeal shall state the following: (1) The name and address of the applicant; (2) the date of the decision in question; (3) the date the decision is mailed; (4) the reasons for the hearing; and (5) the grounds relied upon for relief. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be set forth by city council resolution.

    (b)    Failure to Request Appeal. If an application for appeal is not received by the city clerk within fourteen days of the time the city manager’s decision was mailed to the aggrieved party, the decision of the city manager shall become final and conclusive.

    (c)    Notification and Hearing Schedule Procedures. Once the application for appeal has been received in a timely manner, the city clerk shall set the matter for a city council hearing no later than sixty days following the date of the application. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, postage prepaid, no later than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice may also designate certain records of the applicant to be produced at the time of the hearing.

    (d)    Hearing—Decision. At the hearing prescribed by this section, the applicant and the city may submit any and all evidence as they believe to be relevant to their respective positions. The city council may require the presentation of additional evidence from either the applicant or the city, or from both, and may continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. The city manager’s original decision shall remain in effect from the time the original decision was mailed to the aggrieved party, through the appeal process and until a decision is rendered on the appeal. However, upon the completion of the hearing, the city council may take action with respect to the decision of the city manager as the evidence may require. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. Written notice of the decision of the city council shall be mailed to the applicant within twenty days of the conclusion of the hearing.

    (e)    Alternatively, the city council may refer the matter to a hearing officer who shall hear the evidence and submit findings and recommendations to the city council for its consideration. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.130 Permit validity period and renewal.
    (a)    Unless otherwise stated, a permit granted to any business or covered activity mentioned in this title shall be valid for a period of one year. Barring suspension or revocation of a permit, the expiration date of any permit shall be the first of that month in the following year.

    (b)    The renewal of a permit shall require updated business permit information provided by the permittee on or before the expiration date of the permit.

    (c)    The annual permit fee, as set forth by city council resolution, shall be due and payable, unless otherwise stated in this title, on the expiration date of the permit. If the permit fee is paid on or before the tenth day after the permit expiration date, the permit shall be renewed. If the permit fee is not paid on or before the tenth day after the permit expiration date, the permit fee shall be considered late and shall be subject to late payment penalties as set forth by city council resolution. (Ord. 1376 § 12, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.140 Modification of permits.
    Any permit may be modified or the terms and provisions of any permit modified, amended or changed upon application to the license collector. Such application for a modification shall be processed in the same manner as the original application and shall be subject to the payment of fees and all the terms and provisions herein imposed in this chapter in respect to the processing of the original application. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.150 Permit not transferable.
    No permit issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.160 Branch establishments.
    A separate permit shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business or covered activity regulated pursuant to the terms of this title. (Ord. 1376 § 13, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.170 Violations.
    Any person violating any of the provisions, or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person and each separate offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Any permit which may have been granted to any person who is convicted of any such offense shall be revoked and shall be rendered void. Mandatory requirements may vary from business to business and from chapter to chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.04.180 Enforcement.
    An action at law or in equity may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction against a permit holder to insure compliance with the terms and provisions of this title. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.08 MERCHANT PATROL
4.08.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Words and phrases used in this title not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved use of the language.

    “Patrolman” means an individual engaged in the act of guarding property as the owner, member, or employee of a patrol system.

    “Patrol system” means any private service or private system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, to members or subscribers any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any part of the city, or to guard or watch any property, including guarding against theft, fire, or both, or to perform any service usually and customarily performed by the law enforcement agency of the city as a peace officer. “Patrol system” does not include the guarding of property of a single owner which such property is not open to the public by one or more individuals whose entire salary or wages is paid by such owner, irrespective of whether such salary or wage is paid direct to the individuals performing such guard duty or to another, or service of any nature performed by an employee whose main or principal duty is not that of guarding or protecting property. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.020 Patrol system permit—Specific application information and fee.
    In addition to general application information described in Section 4.04.070 and the permit application fee that must be paid as required by Section 4.02.040, for a patrol system permit other specific application information is required. The specific application information for a patrol system shall be as follows:

    (1)    The district or territory proposed to be serviced by the patrol system;

    (2)    A description of the methods of operation;

    (3)    The names and addresses of all patrolmen who are or will be owners, officers, or employees of the applicant;

    (4)    Such other information as either the city of the law enforcement agency may require.

    (5)    With every application for a permit to conduct a patrol system, the application shall produce evidence that he has a license issued pursuant to Section 7520 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.030 Patrol system permit—Contents required and changes in system.
    (a)    Every permit to conduct a patrol system shall contain, among other things, an accurate description of the area in which operations are permitted and the names of all patrolmen permitted by such permit.

    (b)    The permittee of a patrol system shall so inform the city manager and the law enforcement agency within five days after any patrolman no longer is an owner, member of employee of such permittee and return the permit and such other identification of such patrolman to the law enforcement agency. The name of the patrolman shall then be removed from the permit of such patrol system.

    (c)    Should the permittee employ additional patrolmen not listed on the original permit, the new patrolmen shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.040 Patrolman’s permit—Specific application information.
    (a)    In addition to the general application information described in Section 4.04.070 and the permit application fee that must be paid as required by Section 4.02.040, specific application information for a patrolman’s permit is required. The specific application information for a patrolman’s permit shall be as follows:

    (1)    A statement of all businesses and occupations engaged in for the last five years and the names and addresses of not less than three persons able to verify such statement;

    (2)    A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant taken by the law enforcement agency of the city;

    (3)    The name and permit number of the patrol system by whom he will be employed, or of which he is to be an owner or officer. If no such permit has been granted, the applicant shall state when an application for such permit has been filed;

    (4)    Such other information as may be required by either the city or the law enforcement agency;

    (5)    The name, photograph, and right index fingerprint of such patrolman.

    (b)    A patrolman’s permit shall allow the permittee to act as a patrolman only for the system designated on the permit. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.050 Patrolman’s permit—Required contents.
    With every application for a patrolman’s permit the applicant shall also file a letter from the licensee of a patrol system certifying that such permittee desires to employ such patrolman or that such patrolman is, or will be an owner or member of such patrol system. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.060 Permit processing.
    The application shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 4.04. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.070 Services of nonpermitted patrolman prohibited.
    The operator of a patrol system shall neither employ nor utilize the services in any way of a patrolman whose name is not on the permit of such operator, or who does not possess a valid, subsisting permit. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.080 Transfer of system operations prohibited.
    The holder of a patrol system permit shall not sell or offer to sell any transfer or relinquishment of the privilege to operate a patrol system in territory assigned to him or for any consideration whatever agree to advocate or not to oppose the granting of any other patrol system permit. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.090 Badges—Selling and giving, purchasing and receiving restricted.
    (a)    A person shall not give, deliver to or sell any patrolman’s badge or any badge of a design the same as, or similar to, the patrolman’s badge as to be mistaken therefor, to any private person.

    (b)    A person shall not purchase or receive as a gift, pawn, or pledge any patrolman’s badge. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.100 Uniforms, use of rank, actions and equipment restricted.
    (a)    Uniforms. A patrolman shall not wear, or a patrol system shall not permit its patrolman to wear, any uniform which is an imitation of, or can be mistaken for an official sheriff’s uniform or an official police uniform of the city police force.

    (b)    Use of Rank. A patrol system shall not use, grant or bestow, or permit any patrolman to assume or use any rank or title the same as or similar to any rank or title used by the law enforcement agency or by any police department within the county of Orange.

    (c)    Actions. Patrol systems and patrolman shall not perform official police or investigation activities, but shall immediately report any violation of law and every unusual occurrence to the law enforcement agency. A patrolman or patrol system shall make a full report of any such violation or other occurrence without necessary delay to the law enforcement agency.

    (d)    Equipment. The law enforcement agency shall specify the police equipment, including weapons, which a permittee may wear while on duty. A permittee may not wear any equipment or carry any weapons which have not been approved by the law enforcement agency. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.08.110 City may grant more than one permit for same area.
    Nothing in this chapter limits the power of the city to grant a permit to more than one patrol system to operate in the same area. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.15 DANCES
4.15.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:

    “Dancing club” means any club or association or persons, or corporation, which conducts dances, other than public dances, for its members or bona fide guests more than once per month, and a “club dance” means any dance held by a dancing club.

    “Entertainment” means that which engages the attention agreeably, amuses, or diverts, whether in private, as by conversation, music, or other manner, or in public, by performances, conversation, music, or other manner.

    “Floor show” means any form of entertainment given or designed to amuse the public or guest admitted to such dance or dancing club.

    “Public dance” means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in, either as the main purpose for such gathering or as an incidental to some other purpose, and to which premises the public is admitted, either with or without charge. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.15.020 Permit—Specific application information and fee.
    A written application to conduct public dances or to operate dancing clubs in the city must be completed by following the procedures and providing the general information described in Section 4.04.070. The permit application fee required by Section 4.02.040 must be paid when submitting the application. Specific application information pertaining to public dances or dancing clubs is also required. This information shall contain the following:

    (1)    If any applicant be an association or other entity which conducts a dancing club, the names and residences of the officers thereof;

    (2)    The place for which the permit is desired or in which any dance is to be or dances are to be held;

    (3)    The number of dates of the dances to be held under the permit. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.15.030 Hour restrictions.
    It is unlawful for any person, association or corporation to conduct, encourage, participate or assist in conducting any such public dance or dancing club between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.15.040 Intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly person prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person in charge of or assisting in the conducting of any public dance or dancing club to permit any intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly person to enter, be or remain in or to assist in any public dance or dancing club and it is unlawful for any person in an intoxicated condition to enter or remain in any public dance or dancing club or for any reason to conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner in such public dance or dancing club. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.15.050 Floor show and entertainment hours restricted.
    It is unlawful for any person, association or corporation to conduct, participate in, or assist in conducting any floor show or entertainment at any public dance or dancing club between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.15.060 Inspection.
    It shall be the duty of any agency of the city which is responsible for the enforcement of any fire or building codes or for the enforcement of any federal, state or local laws to inspect any and all such dances and dancing clubs in the city. Any person conducting such inspection for any such agency shall be permitted to enter any such dance or dancing club free of charge. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.20 SOLICITORS
4.20.020 Solicitor or canvasser defined.
    “Solicitor” or “canvasser” means any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking, or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale or sample of the subject of such sale, of whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.025 Hours.
    The hours of such solicitation shall be from nine a.m. to one hour before sunset. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.030 Transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor defined—Chapter compliance.
    “Transient merchant,” “itinerant merchant,” or “itinerant vendor” means any person, firm or corporation whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling, delivering goods, wares and merchandise, within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases or uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, public room in hotels, loading houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. Any firm, person or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of association temporarily with any local dealer, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trade, merchant or auctioneer. This section also includes, as a definition, all vendors and caterers. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.040 Telephone solicitor.
    “Telephone solicitor” as used in this chapter means any person who, from a location within the city, solicits the sale of any object or service whatsoever over the telephone as his or her primary method of doing business. “Telephone solicitor” shall also include the owner or operator of any such business. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.050 Permit—Specific application information and fee.
    A written application to peddle, deliver or sell any goods or services or to solicit or canvass for goods and services as defined in this chapter must be completed by any person who wishes to peddle or sell, or solicit or canvass for goods and services by following the procedures and providing the general information described in Section 4.04.070. The permit application fee as required by Section 4.02.040 must be paid when submitting the application. Specific application information pertaining to peddling, delivering or selling goods and services or canvassing and soliciting for goods and services is required. This information shall contain the following:

    (1)    If employee, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;

    (2)    The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;

    (3)    The place where the goods are proposed to be sold, where the orders are proposed to be taken, manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;

    (4)    The exact identity of the supplier of the goods or objects, and a copy of the appropriate business documents establishing the supplier’s existence as an entity. If the supplier is not the source of the goods, articles, or services being sold, information may be required to establish the exact identity of any and all suppliers in the chain of delivery to the customer;

    (5)    Two photographs of the applicant, showing a good likeness, which photographs shall each be approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in clear and distinguishing manner, shall be furnished to the law enforcement agency by each applicant;

    (6)    The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two property owners of the county of Orange, state of California, who will certify as to the applicant’s good character and business respectability, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant, as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility;

    (7)    With respect to persons who solicit in person, a statement by the applicant that the applicant is free of contagious, infectious or communicable diseases. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.055 Inspection of books for permit application investigation purposes.
    The law enforcement agency shall have the right to inspect any books and records of the applicant or any supplier or parent organization to determine if the applicant may be proposing to solicit through misrepresentation. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.060 Applicant’s conviction of a felony.
    A person shall be prima facie disqualified for a permit by an employee or representative of a licensee under this chapter if he or she has been convicted of a felony. As used herein, the term conviction includes pleas of guilty and nolo contendere. The chief of police, as the head of the issuing agency, is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.070 Chapter enforcement.
    It shall be the right of any police officer of the city to require any person required to be licensed under this chapter, or any other ordinance of the city, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his or her license. The law enforcement agency of the city shall have the duty to enforce this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.080 Change in service or goods.
    Any person, firm or corporation, as defined in this chapter, who changes the type of service or the general types of goods offered from that which applicant’s original application was made for shall reapply for a license, and shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.20.090 Permit—Exhibition.
    Any solicitor, peddler or merchant who sells his or her goods or services within the city limits shall exhibit his or her permit at the request of any citizen. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.30 POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD HALLS
4.30.010 Permit—Specific application information and fee.
    In addition to the general application information described in Section 4.04.070, specific application information for a poolroom/billiard hall permit is required. The applicant shall also pay a permit application fee as required by Section 4.02.040 when submitting the application. The specific information required is a photograph and fingerprints of the individual or owner if the business is a sole proprietorship, photographs and fingerprints of the partners if the business is a partnership and photographs and fingerprints of the president and secretary if the business is a corporation. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.30.020 Permit—Specific application denial considerations.
    A person shall be prima facie disqualified for a permit to carry on the business of billiards, pool or bagatelle if he or she has been convicted of a felony. As used herein, the term conviction includes pleas of guilty and nolo contendere. The chief of police, as the issuing officer, is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.30.030 Building regulations.
    The games of billiards, pool or bagatelle conducted for profit shall be carried on in a single room without partitions, anterooms, or closet rooms, other than water closets or lavatories, and entirely inaccessible from any other room, cellar or attic. The main entrance or vestibule from the public street shall have glass panel doors to be clean, unglazed and unobstructed at all times so that all parts of said room will be open to view.

    An exception to the above may be made, subject to the approval of the chief of police. Before any building permit is issued, the floor plans for the proposed establishment shall be submitted to the chief of police for approval, and one copy of said plans shall be provided for police department files. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.30.040 Hours of business.
    No owner, manager, person in charge of, or any other person shall allow to be played or play the games of billiards, pool or bagatelle between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.30.050 Entrance kept open.
    The entrance to and into said room, at all times during business hours, shall be open and unobstructed to all peace officers and to all members of the public, other than minor under the conditions as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.30.060 Certain games prohibited.
    No games of cards, dice or other games of chance shall be carried on in any room in which any of the above businesses shall be conducted or in any room accessible therefrom. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.32 TAXI REGULATIONS
4.32.019 Purpose.
    The city has the authority to regulate taxicabs and other vehicles for hire pursuant to the authority provided by the police power and by Vehicle Code Section 21112. The city does intend to authorize the Orange County Transportation Authority to administer this chapter and any implementing resolutions setting forth standards pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases herein defined shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions.

    “City authorization” means city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city.

    “Driver” means a person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab.

    “Driver’s permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab.

    “OCTAP” means the Orange County taxi administration program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority.

    “Operate a taxicab” means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the city.

    “Owner” means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab.

    “Person” includes natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.

    “Taxicab” means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the city, capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission.

    “Taxicab business permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to operate a taxicab business.

    “Taxicab vehicle permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.030 City authorization required.
    (a)    A person shall only operate a taxicab if the owner of that taxicab is authorized by the city to operate a taxicab business in the city.

    (b)    An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated if the owner is authorized by the city to operate a taxicab business in the city.

    (c)    The procedures for city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city shall be established by separate resolution or ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.040 Driver’s permit required.
    A person shall only operate a taxicab if that person possesses a driver’s permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by the owner if that driver possesses a driver’s permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.050 Taxicab vehicle permit required.
    A person shall only operate a taxicab if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated in the city if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.060 Taxicab business permit required.
    A person shall only operate a taxicab business in the city if that person possesses a taxicab business permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.070 Application for permits.
    Application for a driver’s permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab business permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing said application as established by OCTAP. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.080 Testing for controlled substances and alcohol.
    A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable state statutes. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.090 Insurance required.
    A driver operating a taxicab in the city shall carry with him or her at all times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. Said proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.100 Nontransferability.
    No permit issued under this chapter shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.110 Equipment.
    A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.120 Mechanical condition.
    A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.130 Operational requirements.
    (a)    A driver shall only carry a passenger to his/her destination by the most direct and accessible route.

    (b)    A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council.

    (c)    A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger’s compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council:

    (1)    A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said taxicab;

    (2)    The driver’s name and address;

    (3)    The owner’s name, address and telephone number;

    (4)    The taxicab identification number;

    (5)    The driver’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter;

    (6)    The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this chapter; and

    (7)    Any other information required by the city.

    (d)    A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare.

    (e)    A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

    (f)    A driver shall not leave his taxicab to solicit passengers.

    (g)    The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.140 Rates and charges.
    No driver shall charge rates and charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council or by the OCTAP. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.150 Separate from business licensing.
    The requirements of this chapter are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under Title 5 of this code. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.160 Hearings and appeals.
    All hearings and appeals shall be processed with the OCTAP. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

 

4.32.170 Violations.
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in Chapter 1.16 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code. (Ord. 1272 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 4.37 SEXUALLY ORIENTED/ADULT BUSINESSES
4.37.010 Intent.
    The intent of this chapter is to regulate businesses which, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious secondary effects on the community, which effects include, but are not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values and increase in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of sexually oriented/adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their property when such property is located in the vicinity of sexually oriented/adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise and vandalism; higher crime rates in the vicinity of sexually oriented/adult businesses; and blighting conditions such as low-level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the sexually oriented/adult businesses.

    It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented/adult materials or to deny access by the distributors of sexually oriented/adult businesses to their intended market.

    Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.020 Definitions.
    The following terms shall be defined as follows:

    “Employee” means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator or said business. For purposes of this chapter, “employee” includes independent contractors.

    “Nude or semi-nude model studio” means any place where a person, who appears nude or semi-nude or displays specified anatomical areas is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by others on a regular basis. Exempt from this definition are classes taught by instructors licensed by the state educational system.

    “Semi-nude” means a state of undress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

    “Sexual encounter establishment” means any business or commercial establishment, that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one or more of the persons is nude or semi-nude. The definition of sexually oriented/adult businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.

    “Sexually oriented/adult bookstore” means any establishment, which as a regular and substantial portion of its business, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented/adult merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, films, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts. Alternatively, if a substantial portion of the stock in trade, revenue obtained from such matter or advertising is characterized by an emphasis on such matter it shall be considered a sexually oriented/adult bookstore.

    “Sexually oriented/adult business” means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs or operates as a sexually oriented/adult bookstore, sexually oriented/adult theater, sexually oriented/adult motion picture arcade, sexually oriented/adult cabaret, sexually oriented/adult motel/hotel, sexually oriented/adult motion picture theater, nude or semi-nude model studio, sexual encounter establishment, or sells or distributes sexually oriented/adult merchandise, or any other business or concern which as a regular and substantial portion of its business offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. “Sexually oriented/adult business” shall also include any establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct allows performers, models or employees to appear in any public place in lingerie.

    “Sexually oriented/adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment or concern which regularly features any type of live entertainment characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

    “Sexually oriented/adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel, which (1) as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television, video recorders or players or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts; (2) rents, leases or lets any room for less than a ten-hour period, or rents, leases or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four-hour period.

    “Sexually oriented/adult merchandise” means sexually oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and/or battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

    “Sexually oriented/adult motion picture arcade” means any business establishment or concern containing any manually operated, coin or slug operated, or electrically or electronically operated or controlled, still or motion picture or video tape machines, projectors, players or other image producing devices that are maintained to display images to five or fewer persons per machine or per viewing room at any one time when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts on a regular basis.

    “Sexually oriented/adult motion picture theater” means a business establishment or concern which projects and presents on a regular basis motion pictures, video tape recordings, slide photographs, or other motion or still pictures which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

    “Sexually oriented/adult theater” means a theater, concert hall auditorium, or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical parts or by specified sexual activities.

    “Specified anatomical parts” mean:

    (1)    Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic hair; buttocks; natal cleft; perineum; anal region; pubic hair region; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

    (2)    Human male genitals in a noticeably turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

    “Specified sexual activities” means:

    (1)    Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, masturbation, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship; or any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct, whether actual or simulated: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, sapphism, urophilia, zooerastia, zoophilia; or

    (2)    Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

    (3)    Use of human or animal ejaculation; or

    (4)    Fondling or erotic or sexually oriented touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, natal cleft, anal region or female breast; or

    (5)    Masochism; erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or

    (6)    Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or

    (7)    Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; or

    (8)    Striptease, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models appearing in lingerie, to the point where specified anatomical parts are exposed. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.030 Statements and records.
    Person(s) who may be required to obtain a business license pursuant to the provisions of Title 5 of this code for any business establishment which provides products, merchandise, services or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts, as defined in this chapter, shall maintain complete records which can be segregated with regard to all transactions involving such products, merchandise, services or entertainment which are sufficient to establish the percentage of gross receipts of the business which is derived from such transactions. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. Such records need not be kept if the licensee agrees that the business is subject to the sexually oriented/adult business permit provisions.

    No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the police department or the code enforcement officer to examine said records at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.040 Permit required.
    It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any sexually oriented/adult business within the city unless the owner of said business first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, both a sexually oriented/adult business permit and a business license from the city for such business. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.050 Persons eligible.
    The owner of the proposed sexually oriented/adult business shall be the only person eligible to obtain a sexually oriented/adult business permit. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.060 Application requirements.
    The following information and items shall be submitted to the license collector by the owner at the time of applying for a sexually oriented/adult business permit:

    (a)    A completed sexually oriented/adult business permit application form signed by (1) the owner of the proposed sexually oriented/adult business, and (2) either the record owner of the property (or the authorized agent of the record owner) or, if the business premises are subleased to the applicant business, the sublessor of the premises, certifying under penalty of perjury that all of the information upon or submitted with the application is true and correct to the best of his or her information and belief;

    (b)    A nonrefundable deposit or processing fee and a permit administration fee in the amount set by resolution of the city council;

    (c)    A site plan designating the building and/or unit proposed for the sexually oriented/adult business and a dimensional interior floor plan depicting how the business will comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter;

    (d)    All other information required by the license collector pursuant to the sexually oriented/adult business permit information sheet. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.070 Approval or denial of permit.
    The license collector shall immediately submit the application to police, fire and planning for investigation and shall, within thirty city business days of the filing of a complete permit application, approve and issue the sexually oriented/adult business permit if the requirements of this chapter have been met; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the owner in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of the transmission with the United States Postal Service within three city business days of the date of such decision. The times set forth in this subsection shall not be extended except upon the written consent of the applicant. The decision of the license collector shall be final, except as provided in Chapter 4.04. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.080 Standards for approval of permit.
    The license collector shall approve and issue a sexually oriented/adult business permit if the application and evidence submitted shows that:

    (a)    The sexually oriented/adult business is proposed to be located in a zone or specific plan area permitting the proposed use and complies with other distancing restrictions, if any apply thereto.

    (b)    The sexually oriented/adult business will not be located, in whole or in part, within any portable structure.

    (c)    The sexually oriented/adult business will not conduct or sponsor any special events, promotions, festivals, concerts or similar activities which would increase the demand for parking spaces beyond the approved number of spaces for the business.

    (d)    The sexually oriented/adult business will not conduct any massage, acupuncture, tattooing, acupressure or escort services and will not allow such activities on the premises.

    (e)    Any sexually oriented/adult business which allows customers to remain on the premises while viewing any live, filmed or recorded entertainment, or while using or consuming the products or services supplied on the premises, shall conform to the following requirements:

    At least one security guard shall be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds and parking areas, at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than fifty persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty inside the premises. The security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter, and notifying the Fountain Valley police department and code enforcement officer of any violations of law observed. Any security guard required by this subparagraph shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of the state and Chapter 4.08 of this code. No security guard required pursuant to this subparagraph shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, or admittance person while security guard.

    (f)    Landscaping shall conform to the standards established for the specific plan or zone.

    (g)    The entire exterior grounds, including the parking lot, shall be lighted in accordance with city standards for such uses.

    (h)    The premises within which the sexually oriented/adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other separate unit within the same building.

    (i)     No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

    (j)     Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an entrance/exit to the business.

    (k)    Signage shall conform to the standards applicable to the specific plan or zone and (1) such signs shall be limited to the business name and the street address and (2) the notice required by this chapter shall be posted on the entrance door to the premises.

    (l)     All indoor areas of the sexually oriented/adult business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view at all times.

    (m)   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the sexually oriented/adult business shall comply with the specific plan, zoning, parking, development and design standards applicable to the zone in which the business is located.

    (n)    No sexually oriented/adult material or sexually oriented/adult merchandise will be displayed in such manner as to be visible from any location other than within the premises occupied by the sexually oriented/adult business.

    (o)    No person under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.

    (p)    The sexually oriented/adult business shall not operate or be open between the hours of nine p.m. and eleven a.m. The foregoing shall not apply to sexually oriented/adult hotels.

    (q)    The sexually oriented/adult business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities.

    The restrooms shall be free from all sexually oriented/adult materials and sexually oriented/adult merchandise. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not be applicable to a sexually oriented/adult business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of merchandise which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as a sexually oriented/adult bookstore, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

    (r)    Except as otherwise required by law for sexually oriented/adult motion picture theaters, and except as provided with regard to sexually oriented/adult motion picture arcades, and with regard to sexually oriented/adult businesses providing live entertainment, all areas of the sexually oriented/adult business accessible to patrons shall be illuminated at least to the extent of twenty footcandles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level.

    (s)    The following additional regulations shall pertain to sexually oriented/adult motion picture arcades which provide more than one viewing area:

    Upon application for a sexually oriented/adult business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the sexually oriented/adult business permit and city business license will be conspicuously posted. Each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimension of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The license collector shall waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the owner adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.

    No alteration in the physical layout depicted in the diagram may be made without the prior approval of the license collector. It is the duty of the owner(s) to insure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

    The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager’s station. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the premises to insure that the view area specified remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, persons, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application.

    No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

    “Individual viewing area” means a viewing area designed for occupancy by one person. Individual viewing areas of the sexually oriented/adult business shall be operated and maintained without any hole or other opening or means of direct communication or visual or physical access between the interior space of two or more individual viewing areas or between an individual viewing area and any restroom. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access with an illumination of not less than ten footcandles as measured at the floor level.

    It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the premises to insure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises.

    (t)     The following additional regulations shall pertain to sexually oriented/adult businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical parts or involving specified sexual activities:

    No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a sexually oriented/adult business except upon a stage at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within six feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer.

    The sexually oriented/adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainer’s use.

    The sexually oriented/adult business shall provide an entrance/exit to the premises for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

    The sexually oriented/adult business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the sexually oriented/adult business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with railing, fence, or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

    No entertainer shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer while on the premises.

    No waiter, waitress, entertainer or other person employed on the premises shall violate the provisions of Chapter 8.48 of this code while on the premises.

    Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this paragraph.

    The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access with an illumination of not less than twenty foot- candles as measured at the floor level.

    (u)    Licensee shall agree by signing the license that he/she/it will indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless from any and all claims or liability that may arise out of city’s granting of such license or arising out of the operation of the sexually oriented/adult business.

    (v)    The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the owner under penalty of perjury.

    (w)   The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of permit approval, and failure to comply with each and all of such requirements shall be grounds for revocation of the sexually oriented/adult business permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

    (x)    Submitting false or misleading information on the application shall constitute grounds for denial or revocation of the sexually oriented/adult business permit. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.090 Minors and intoxicated persons excluded.
    (a)    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person under the age of eighteen or any obviously intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented/adult business at any time. A sign giving notice of this provision shall be prominently posted at each entrance to the premises of the sexually oriented/adult business.

    (b)    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person having responsibility for the operation of a sexually oriented/adult business, to allow any person under the age of eighteen years to enter or remain on the premises of the business, whether or not such person having responsibility for the operation of a sexually oriented/adult business has knowledge that the person is under the age of eighteen years; or to allow any obviously intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of the business. For the purposes of this section, the holder of a sexually oriented/adult business permit, when present on the premises, and the manager or other person(s) in charge of the premises, are persons having responsibility for the operation of the business. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.100 Permit duration.
    A sexually oriented/adult business permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of permit approval. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.110 Permit renewal.
    A sexually oriented/adult business permit shall be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittee continues to meet the requirements that the sexually oriented/adult business is operated in compliance with all applicable provisions of the chapter. A request for permit renewal must be accompanied by a sexually oriented/adult business permit application, completed in full detail with current information, and payment of the renewal processing fee in the amount set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. If the application conforms to the previously approved application and the sexually oriented/adult business has not changed, the permit shall be renewed by the license collector for another year. Notice of such renewal, or denial, shall be given, in writing, to the permittee within thirty  city business days following the date of receipt of the completed renewal application. Any change or alteration in the location, nature or operation of the sexually oriented/adult business will require a new application to be processed in the same manner as the original application. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.120 Permits nontransferable.
    No sexually oriented/adult business permit shall be sold, transferred or assigned by any permit holder, or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation or any other entity, and any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall be thereafter null and void. A sexually oriented/adult business permit held by an individual in a corporation or partnership is subject to the same rules of transferability as contained above. Any change in the nature or composition of the sexually oriented/adult business from one type of sexually oriented/adult business use to another type of sexually oriented/adult business use shall also render the permit null and void. A sexually oriented/adult business permit shall be valid only for the exact location specified in the permit. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.130 Enforcement, modification and revocation.
    (a)    The permit holder shall allow officers of the city and their authorized representatives to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the sexually oriented/adult business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the sexually oriented/adult business is open for business or is occupied. The license collector shall revoke a sexually oriented/adult business permit when:

    (1)    Any of the applicable requirements contained in Section 4.37.080 ceases to be satisfied;

    (2)    The application is discovered to contain incorrect, false or misleading information;

    (3)    The permit holder is convicted of a felony or misdemeanor occurring upon, or relating to the premises or lot upon which the sexually oriented/adult business is located which offense is classified by the state as an offense involving a sexual crime against children, sexual abuse, rape, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290 or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261,261.5, 264.1,266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315, 316 or 647;

    (4)    If, on two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons has (have) been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor for an offense set forth above as a result of such person’s activity on the premises or property on which the sexually oriented/adult business is located, and the person or persons were employees, contractors or agents of the sexually oriented/adult business at the time the offenses were committed;

    (5)    If the permit holder or an employee has permitted or allowed prostitution or any criminal conduct on the premises; or

    (6)    The sexually oriented/adult business has been operated in significant violation of any of the requirements of this chapter or the permit issued.

    (b)    As an alternative to revocation, the permit holder may be required to install video cameras if it is determined by the chief of police that such requirement would eliminate the violations. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.140 Sexually oriented/adult business employee license.
    (a)    Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented/adult business, who engages in the services rendered by a nude model studio, sexual encounter establishment, or a live performer or entertainer shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee set by separate resolution. Said fee is to cover reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process. Masseuses are not required to have such a permit but are required to obtain a massage technician permit in accordance with Chapter 4.40 or superseding ordinance.

    (b)    Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the license collector or his or her designee, the following information:

    (1)    The applicant’ s name or any other names (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;

    (2)    Age, date, and place of birth;

    (3)    Height, weight, hair and eye color;

    (4)    Present residence address and telephone number;

    (5)    Present business address and telephone number;

    (6)    State driver’s license or identification number;

    (7)    Social Security number;

    (8)    Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen years of age;

    (9)    Attached to the application form as provided above, a color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;

    (10)  A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and the full reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension shall be stated. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application; and

    (11)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” as defined in Section 4.37.130 of this chapter. This information shall include the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and identifying the convicting jurisdiction.

    (c)    The license collector or designee shall refer the sexually oriented business employee license application to the police department for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the license collector or his or her designee shall issue a license unless the report from the police department finds that one or more of the following findings is true:

    (1)    That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the police department or other department of the city;

 

 

    (2)    That the applicant is under eighteen years of age;

    (3)    That the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” as defined in Section 4.37.130 of this chapter;

    (4)    That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter;

    (5)    That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within five years of the date of the current application;

    (6)    That the applicant has had a similar permit or license revoked by another jurisdiction within five years of the date of the application.

    (d)    Renewal of License.

    (1)    A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal by the license collector or designee upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city manager or designee and the police department that the applicant has not been convicted of any “specified criminal act” as defined in Section 4.37.130 of this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.

    (2)    The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee as set by a resolution of the city council.

    (e) For purposes of this section, each person meeting the definition of “employee” in Section 4.37.020 shall comply with the requirements of this section.

    (f)    A sexually oriented/adult business employee license may be revoked if the licensee significantly violates any provision of this chapter or the terms of the sexually oriented/adult business permit. The license may also be revoked for any conduct that would have caused a denial in the first instance. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.150 Hearings and appeals.
    Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered pursuant to this chapter may have a hearing and an appeal of said decision pursuant to the provisions of Sections 4.04.115 and 4.04.120 or successor ordinance, but shall be entitled to a prompt final determination and the availability of prompt judicial review unless waived by the appellant. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.160 Violations.
    No person shall operate a sexually oriented/adult business without a permit, operate such business in violation of the terms of the permit including any diagram or attachment made a part thereof, or operate such a business other than in a proper and approved location for such a business. No person shall perform any service or entertainment for which a sexually oriented/adult business employee permit is required without such a permit. No person shall violate any provision of this chapter. Violations shall be punished as provided in Section 4.04.170 of this code. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.170 Nuisance.
    The city council does determine that businesses and persons that operate in violation of this chapter or any permit or license issued hereunder are a public nuisance and authorize the filing of an injunctive action to abate the same. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

 

4.37.180 Remedies cumulative.
    The remedies set forth herein are cumulative and not mutually exclusive and all legal and equitable remedies, civil and criminal, shall be available to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1995)

Chapter 4.40 MASSAGE
4.40.010 Definitions.
    “CAMTC” means the California Massage Therapy Council created under the Massage Therapy Act (Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.).

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley.

    “Compensation” means a payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, gift of money, or anything of value.

    “Massage” means the scientific manipulation of soft tissues.

    “Massage establishment” means a fixed location where massage is performed for compensation.

    “Massage therapist” means a person who performs massage for compensation pursuant to a current, valid massage therapist or massage practitioner certificate issued by CAMTC.

    “Outcall massage service” means a business that provides massage at a location designated by the client or massage therapist, other than a massage establishment.

    “Person” means a natural person, firm, corporation, business, trust, partnership, unincorporated association, or other entity. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.020 CAMTC massage certification required.
    No person shall administer massage for compensation without having a current, valid massage therapist or massage practitioner certificate issued by CAMTC. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.030 Massage establishment permit required.
    No person may own or operate a massage establishment or outcall massage service in the city without having a current, valid city-issued massage establishment permit. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.040 Exemptions from massage establishment permit requirement.
    The following are exempt from the requirement of a massage establishment permit provided the conditions specified herein exist and remain existing for the entire time for which the exemption is claimed:

    (a)    Establishments in which persons providing massage services are licensed or otherwise regulated by the state to provide massage services including, but not limited to, doctors, osteopaths, podiatrists, chiropractors, physical therapists, registered nurses and acupuncturists provided that massage is being conducted in accordance with those state laws or regulations.

    (b)    Beauty shops and other places where licensed cosmetologists and estheticians perform the preponderance of the business activity, and provided that no more than one bed or similar device is employed for massage. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.050 Massage establishment permit application.
    Any person seeking to obtain a massage establishment permit must:

    (a)    Fully and truthfully complete the city-provided application form; and

    (b)    Undergo a background check by the police department; and

    (c)    Pay a non-refundable application fee.

    If, during the term of the background check or after a massage establishment permit is granted, the applicant has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the applicant shall notify the city’s business license division of such change in writing within ten business days. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.060 Massage establishment permit application review.
    An application for a massage establishment permit will be reviewed by the chief of police or designee who shall approve or deny the application in writing within sixty days of receipt of a complete application and non-refundable application fee. The application shall be denied in any of the following cases:

    (a)    The person seeking to obtain the massage establishment permit:

    (1)    Has been convicted of any felony, or conspiracy or attempt to commit any felony, or

    (2)    Has been convicted of any misdemeanor, or conspiracy or attempt to commit any misdemeanor, that is sexual in nature, or

    (3)    Has been convicted of any crime of moral turpitude, or conspiracy or attempt to commit any crime of moral turpitude, or

    (4)    Has been the subject of a public nuisance injunction for conduct that is sexual in nature within the past five years;

    (b)    The operation of the massage establishment would, if allowed, constitute a public nuisance, or would be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare;

    (c)    The person seeking to obtain the massage establishment permit made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the permit application process;

    (d)    The application is incomplete;

    (e)    The person seeking to obtain the massage establishment permit has not satisfied the requirements of this chapter;

    (f)    The person seeking to obtain the massage establishment permit has been denied, suspended, or had a certificate revoked by CAMTC.

    The decision of the chief of police may be appealed to the city manager. The city manager’s decision is final. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.070 Transfers.
    A massage establishment permit is not transferable. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.080 Duration.
    Massage establishment permits shall expire twelve months from issuance. Renewal applications must be filed with the business license division no later than thirty days prior to the expiration of the permit to prevent a lapse of the permit. Each applicant seeking a renewal shall provide such information as may be required by the business license division to update the information required for the original massage establishment permit application. The applicant shall accompany the application for renewal with the appropriate application fee. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.090 Revocation of massage establishment permit.
    In addition to civil, administrative, and criminal remedies, a massage establishment permit may be suspended or revoked upon any of the following grounds:

    (a)    The applicant made material misrepresentations on the massage establishment permit application or request for renewal.

    (b)    The holder of the massage establishment permit or any person working in the massage establishment has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.

    (c)    The conditions warranting approval of the massage establishment permit or renewal no longer exist. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.100 Operation of a massage establishment.
    (a)    Designation. No person who is granted a massage establishment permit shall operate the massage establishment or outcall service under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the permit.

    (b)    Certified Massage Therapists. No person may own, operate, or manage a massage establishment or outcall massage service unless each person performing massage for compensation at the massage establishment or pursuant to the outcall massage service has a current, valid massage therapist or massage practitioner certificate issued by CAMTC.

    (c)    On-Site Manager. The owner, operator, any other person in charge of a massage establishment shall ensure that a manager is on the premises at all times during which the massage establishment is open.

    (d)    Postings. The owner, manager and any person in charge of a massage establishment shall ensure that copies of the following documents are conspicuously posted in the public area of the premises:

    (1)    The CAMTC certification for each on-duty massage therapist; and

    (2)    The massage establishment permit; and

    (3)    A list of services available and the cost of such services. No owner, manager, or other person in charge of a massage establishment shall permit, and no massage therapist shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted on the list of services.

    (e)    Hours of Operation. No massage establishment or outcall service may be open or operate between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. of any day. All clients and visitors must be excluded from the massage establishment during those hours.

    (f)    Distance. No massage establishment may locate within one thousand feet of the nearest property line of another massage establishment.

    (g)    Clothing. All persons working in a massage establishment or performing outcall massage services must wear clothing that complies with California Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a)(10).

    (h)    Covering of Patrons. Each massage establishment shall provide to all patrons clean, sanitary, and opaque covering capable of covering the patrons’ genital area and female breast(s). Common use of such coverings and reuse are prohibited unless adequately cleaned. No person working at a massage establishment shall be present in any room with another person unless the person’s genitals and, in the case of a female, her breast(s) are fully covered.

    (i)     Massage Table. A massage table shall be provided in each massage room and the massage shall be performed on this massage table. The table should have a minimum height of eighteen inches. Two-inch thick foam pads with a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds, floor mattresses and waterbeds may not be used in the administration of massage.

    (j)     Linen. Common use of towels or linens is prohibited. Towels and linens must be laundered after each use. Separate enclosed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and shall be plainly marked “Clean Linen” and “Soiled Linen” and shall have doors or covers.

    (k)    Sterilization Equipment. The owner, operator and manager of a massage establishment shall provide and maintain adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in massage.

    (l)     Bath Facilities. A minimum of one toilet and washbasin shall be provided for patrons in every massage establishment. Separate bathing, massage rooms, dressing, toilet facilities, steam rooms and saunas shall be provided for male and female patrons. Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be provided to all washbasins, bathtubs, showers and similar equipment. In addition to the wash basin provided for patrons, a minimum of one separate wash basin shall be provided in each massage establishment for use of employees, which shall provide soap or detergent and hot running water at all times and shall be located within or as near as practical to the area devoted to the performance of massage services. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service towel dispenser shall be provided at the patron restroom hand wash sink, employee hand wash sink, and shower stalls. Bar soap shall not be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each restroom.

    (m)   Lighting. The owner, operator, and manager shall ensure that lighting in each massage room includes at least one forty watt white light bulb. No strobe flashing lights shall be used. No colored lights shall be used as a primary light source nor shall any coverings be used which change the color of the primary light source.

    (n)    Maintenance. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. All walls, floors and ceilings of each restroom and shower area shall be made smooth and easily cleanable. All floors shall have an approved floor covering. No carpeting shall be installed in any of these areas.

    (o)    Signs. Each massage establishment must maintain, after obtaining the necessary city permits, a sign posted adjacent to the main entrance identifying the premises as a massage establishment. The sign must comply with the city’s zoning laws.

    (p)    Alcoholic Beverages/Controlled Substances. No person shall enter or remain in a massage establishment while in possession of, consuming, or under the influence of a controlled substance without a prescription or alcohol. The owner, operator and manager of the massage establishment shall ensure that no such person enters or remains in the massage establishment. Service of alcoholic beverages in a massage establishment is prohibited.

    (q)    Food. No food of any kind shall be prepared for sale or sold in a massage establishment unless an appropriate permit is granted by the city.

    (r)    Living Inside Massage Establishment Prohibited. No person shall live inside a massage establishment. No owner, manager, or other person in charge of a massage establishment shall allow any person to live inside the massage establishment.

    (s)    Recordings. No building or part thereof used as a massage establishment shall be equipped with any electronic, mechanical or artificial device used or to be used for recording or monitoring the performance of the massage or the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms.

    (t)     Records. Every owner, manager, and other person in charge of a massage establishment shall keep a record of the dates and hours of each treatment or service, name and address of the patron, name of the technician administering such service and description of the treatment or service rendered. These records shall be retained for a period of twenty-four months after such treatment or service. A short medical history form shall be completed by the patron to determine if the patron has any communicable diseases, areas of pain, high blood pressure, or any physical condition which may be adversely affected by massage. Said records shall be open to inspection by health officials charged with preventing the spread of communicable and contagious diseases and to officials charged with administering this code. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such records should be used only to ensure and enforce compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws and shall otherwise remain confidential. Officials charged with enforcement of this chapter shall periodically inspect said records to ensure compliance with this section.

    (u)    Insurance. No person shall operate a massage establishment unless there is on file with the city clerk, in full force and effect at all times, a document issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the permittee is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of fifty thousand dollars for injury or death of one person arising out of the operation of the massage establishment and the administration of a massage.

    (v)    Inspections. City’s officials and personnel may, from time to time, make an inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of local, state and federal law are met. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.110 Number of establishments.
    There shall be no more than seven massage establishments in the city at any given time. (Ord. 1557 § 1, 2020; Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.120 Fees.
    The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time amend, fees for the administration of this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any fees required under any other chapter of this code. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

 

4.40.130 Violations.
    Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code. It is also unlawful and a public nuisance, punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to fail to truthfully answer any question on a massage permit application or renewal application. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 4.45 COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
4.45.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

    “Community antenna television system” or “CATV” system means a system of antennae, coaxial cables, wave guides, poles, wires, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing television, radio or other service by cable or through its facilities as herein contemplated. “CATV” shall not mean or include the transmission of any special program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly known and referred to as pay television.

    “Franchise” means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or a specified area in the city.

    “Franchise area” means the territory within the city throughout which grantee shall be authorized to construct, maintain and operate its system and includes any enlargements thereof and additions thereto.

    “Grantee” means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the council, and the lawful successor or assignee of said person, firm or corporation.

    “Gross annual receipts” means any and all compensation in the form of gross rental and/or service receipts, including initial installation charges, received directly or indirectly from subscribers or users in payment for CATV services received within the city.

    “Gross annual receipts” shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or used by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit.

    “Subscribers” means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a grantee. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.020 Franchise to operate.
    A franchise to construct, operate and maintain a community antenna television system within all or any portion of the incorporated area of the city may be granted by city council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, offering to furnish and provide such system pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. Such a franchise may be exclusive, but the city reserves the right to grant a nonexclusive franchise to any person at any time. No provision of this chapter may be construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more or to refrain from granting any franchise at that time. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.030 Effect of preemption.
    In the event the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California or any other federal or state body or agency now or hereafter exercises any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise hereunder, then to the extent such jurisdiction preempts or precludes the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city, the jurisdiction of the city shall, to the extent so preempted or precluded, cease and no longer exist; provided, however, that the preemption or preclusion of the exercise by the city of any of its police power shall not diminish, impair, alter, or affect any contractual benefit to the city nor any contractual obligation of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder; and in this respect, any and all minimum standards governing the operation of grantee and any and all maximum rates, ratios, and charges specified herein or in any franchise issued hereunder, existing now and at any time in the future, including such time as any paramount jurisdiction preempts or precludes that of the city, and any and all rights, powers, privileges, and authorities of the city, to determine, establish, or fix any of the same, are each and all declared by the city and by any grantee accepting any franchise hereunder to be contractual in nature and to be for the benefit of the city and all subscribers situated therein, and the agreement of the grantee to accept and conform to such standards, rates, ratios, and charges is hereby declared by the city and by any grantee accepting any franchise hereunder to be of the most material and essential consideration for the granting of such franchise, in the absence of which, in whole or in part, the city would not grant such franchise. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.040 Regulation of service.
    (a)    The city council shall at all times and from time to time during the term of any franchise granted hereunder have the power to and shall adopt and enforce, and grantee shall conform to, rules and regulations of the council governing and establishing reasonable rules, regulations, and standards of performance pertaining to the system of grantee.

    (b)    The city council may adopt rules or regulations or amend, modify, delete or otherwise change such rules and regulations previously adopted in the following manner:

    (1)    The city council shall pass a resolution of intention describing the rules or regulations to be adopted, amended, modified, deleted or otherwise changed and set a day, hour and place for public hearing. Such resolution shall direct the city clerk to publish the same at least once within fifteen days of the passage thereof.

    (2)    The city clerk shall cause such resolution to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall cause a copy of same to be mailed or delivered to any grantee not less than ten days prior to the time fixed for hearing thereon.

    (3)    At the time for public hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such evidence, comments and objections as may be presented. Thereafter, the city council, by its resolution, may adopt, amend, modify, delete, or otherwise change said rules and regulations. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.050 Application for franchise.
    Application for a franchise hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk in a form approved by the city and shall contain the following information:

    (1)    The name and address of applicant, and if the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies;

    (2)    A general description of the applicant’s proposed CATV operation, including a tentative map of areas to be served, the manner in which the applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system;

    (3)    A description of the public street, public places and proposed public streets, within which the applicant seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities; a description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof;

    (4)    A statement of the percent of gross revenue and the bonus amount, if any, the applicant offers for the franchise;

    (5)    A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application;

    (6)    A copy of any contract or permit, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines, or conduits;

    (7)    A statement of the organization of the applicant, including the names and addresses of its officers, directors and associates, and also including the names of subsidiary companies with a listing of other areas being served by CATV or similar systems. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm, group or corporation posing as a front or representative for another person, firm, group, or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise may be revoked by the city council;

    (8)    Applicant shall also furnish a financial statement as to the company’s or corporation’s financial ability to complete installation and operation of the CATV system;

    (9)    Upon consideration of any such application, the city council may grant a franchise for CATV to such applicant as may appear from said application to be in its opinion qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in the city. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form a part of the franchise as granted. The provisions of Government Code Section 53066 et seq., shall be followed;

    (10)  Prior to the granting of a franchise pursuant to this chapter, the council shall pass a resolution declaring its intention to grant the same, stating the name of the proposed grantee, the character of the franchise and the terms and conditions upon which it is proposed to be granted. Such resolution shall fix and set forth the day, hour and place when and where any persons having any interest therein or any objection to the granting thereof may appear before the council and be heard thereon. It shall direct the city clerk to publish said resolution at least once within fifteen days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Said notice shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. At the time set for the hearing the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. Thereafter it may by ordinance grant the franchise on the terms and conditions specified in the resolution of intention to grant same, subject to the right of referendum of the people, or it may deny the same. If the council determines that changes should be made in the terms and conditions upon which the franchise is proposed to be granted, a new resolution of intention shall be adopted and like proceedings had thereon.

    (11)  Any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall include the following conditions:

    (A)   The CATV system franchise herein, shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by ordinance of the city and no other purpose whatsoever.

    (B)   The inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.060 Application fee.
    Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth by city council resolution, which shall be used by the city to cover the costs of studying, investigating and processing such application, no part of which is refundable. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.070 Surety bonds.
    (a)    Bond for Protection of City. The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of the franchise granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or renewal thereof, at grantee’s sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company approved by, and in a form to be approved by the city attorney, in the amount as set forth by city council resolution, renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the grantee, and upon the further condition that in the event the grantee fails to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter or of the franchise issued to the grantee hereunder, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney’s fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond, said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise or any renewal thereof, and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the acceptance of said franchise by the grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that thirty days’ prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation or material change, be given to the city.

    Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant thereto, nor any damage recovered by the city thereunder, shall be constructed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.

    (b)    Bond for Protection of Subscribers. The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of a franchise granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect a corporate surety bond or other adequate surety agreement in a form approved by the city attorney in the amount as set forth by city council resolution, conditioned that in the event such grantee fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, term or condition of its franchise, or any provision of any agreement or undertaking made between grantee and any subscriber, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety any damages or costs suffered or incurred by any subscriber as a result thereof, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of any action or proceeding; and said condition shall be a continuing obligation during the entire term of such franchise and thereafter until grantee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to any subscriber which arise out of or pertain to any such agreement or undertaking. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.080 Protection of city against liability.
    (a)    Indemnification. The grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities, and judgments of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of the same, arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of any CATV franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments based upon any infringement or violation or alleged violation of any copyright; and the grantee shall reimburse the city for any costs and expenses incurred by the city in defending against any such claim or demand or action, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per them expense, travel and living expense; and the grantee shall upon demand of the city appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings whether judicial, quasijudicial, administrative or otherwise, brought by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees and arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the city; the foregoing obligation shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other security required hereunder; provided that neither the grantee nor the city shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, action or suit without first giving the other ten days’ prior written notice of its intentions to do so.

    (b)    Comprehensive Liability Insurance. Upon acceptance of such franchise the grantee shall file with the city clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect, at its own expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy or policies which shall insure the grantee and provide primary coverage for the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, against liability for loss or liability for personal injury, death, property damage, and copyright infringement occasioned by any activity or operation of the grantee under such franchise. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a company approved by the city manager and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, with minimum liability coverage in the amount as set forth by city council resolution for any one occurrence. The policy or policies shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the city clerk thirty days in advance of the effective date thereof. No franchise granted under this chapter shall be effective unless and until each of the foregoing policies of insurance as required in this subsection has been delivered to the city clerk. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.090 Franchise payment.
    (a)    Acceptance Fee. The grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall pay to the city upon acceptance of such franchise a fee certain in an amount to be determined or approved by the city council.

    (b)    Annual Franchise Fee. The grantee of any franchise under this chapter shall pay annually to the city during the life of such franchise a fixed percentage of the gross receipts of the grantee derived from subscribers within the city. Such percentage shall be at least three percent and shall be established by the city council for the life of the franchise by specifying such percentage in the ordinance granting the franchise.

    The grantee shall file with the city, within ninety days after the expiration of any fiscal year during which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined herein, of the grantee, its successors and assigns, during the preceding fiscal year. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city, within ten days after the time for filing such statement, any unpaid balance for the fiscal year covered by such statement.

    In the event that the above payment is not received by the city within the specified time, the grantee shall pay to the city a penalty as set forth by city council resolution on the unpaid balance in addition thereto.

    In any year of portion thereof commencing at the conclusion of the first year that service is provided, during which payments to the grantee for installation and services amount to less than fifteen hundred dollars per month, the grantee shall pay to the city a fee set forth by city council resolution.

    The city reserves the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this chapter, and no acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any obligation thereunder.

    In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of said franchise, without the consent of the city, the grantee shall pay to the city damages of not less than twenty percent of its gross profits during said period relating to the CATV system serving the area covered by the franchise. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.100 Permits, installation and service.
    (a)    Within thirty days after acceptance of any franchise the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities.

    (b)    Within ninety days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, the grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system.

    (c)    Within one hundred eighty days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence to the end that service shall be made available to all potential subscribers throughout the entire franchise area within such time and upon such conditions as shall be determined by the city council.

    (d)    Failure to do any of the foregoing shall be grounds for termination of the franchise.

    (e)    The city manager may extend the time for obtaining necessary permits and authorizations and for beginning construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.110 Franchise renewal.
    Any franchise granted under this chapter is renewable at the application of the grantee, its lawful successors or assignee for such period of time as the council and the applicant may agree upon by negotiation. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.120 Duration of franchise—Expiration, revocation and franchise acquisition.
    No franchise, granted by the city council pursuant to this chapter, shall be for a term of more than twenty years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or renewal thereof. Any such franchise may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the city council in the event that said council has found, after thirty days’ notice of proposed termination and public hearing, that (a) the grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition of its franchise or permit issued under this chapter; and the grantee has failed to cure or correct such noncompliance or violation within thirty days following its receipt of notice thereof from the city; or (b) any provision of this chapter has become invalid or unenforceable, and the council further finds that such provision constitutes a consideration material to the grant of said franchise; (c) the city acquires the CATV property of grantee; or (d) in the event any such noncompliance or violation by grantee may not be reasonably corrected within the foregoing thirty day period, the council shall not terminate any such franchise if the grantee commences the correction of such noncompliance or violation within said thirty day period and diligently prosecutes such correction to completion. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.130 Limitation of franchise.
    (a)    No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter except those specifically prescribed herein.

    (b)    The grantee is subject to all requirements of the ordinances, rules, regulations, fees and specifications of the city heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, including, but not limited to, those concerning street work, street excavation, use, removal, and relocation of property within a street, and other street work.

    (c)    All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment of the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.

    (d)    In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the public works department of the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced and shall maintain the restoration in an approved condition for the duration of the franchise.

    (e)    The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from any public street, alley or other public way, any property of the grantee when required by the director of public works of the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or any other structures or public improvements; provided, however, the grantee shall in all cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 4.45.180 hereof.

    (f)    Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments, alterations or installations, the grantee shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers, and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall give reasonable notice thereof to its customers.

    (g)    Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may be therein prescribed. The grantee shall file with the council within thirty days after any sale, transfer, assignment, or lease of the franchise or any part thereof, or any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the transaction certified to by the grantee or its duly authorized officers. The proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter. No such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness, except that when such hypothecation shall exceed fifty percent of the market value of the property used by the franchisee in conducting the business franchise, the prior consent of the council shall be required for such a transfer. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably.

    (h)    Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter by failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.

    (i)     Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon any officer, employee, department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city.

    (j)     The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provisions or requirements of this chapter or its enforcement.

    (k)    Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets.

    (l)     Any franchise in the city granted and accepted under the rules and regulations described herein shall be governed solely by the rules and regulations described herein and any grantee of any said franchise shall be governed solely by the rules and regulations described herein; all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, exercised by or ascribed to the grantee or by any successor to any interest of the grantee or any rights, powers, privileges or authorities pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any CATV system in the city owned, controlled, possessed or exercisable by the grantee or by any successor to any interest of the grantee shall be superseded by the rules and regulations described herein. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.140 Rights reserved to the city.
    (a)    No franchise granted under this chapter in any way impairs or affects the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee by purchase or condemnation.

    (b)    No franchise granted under this chapter shall ever be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character in excess of the cost to the grantee of the necessary publication and any other sum paid by it to the city therefor at the time of acquisition.

    (c)    There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance or resolution of the city, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

    (d)    The city council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter.

    (e)    There is reserved to the city the power to amend any section of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise on the part of the grantee.

    (f)    Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city.

    (g)    The city manager is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. The council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager, and the council may adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.150 Inspection of property and records.
    (a)    At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect thereto. If any of such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the city manager determines that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.

    (b)    The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city manager and/or the director of finance at the times and in the form prescribed by either of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise.

    (c)    The grantee shall, at all times, make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets, alleys and public places in the city. The grantee shall file with the director of public works, on or before the last day in March of each year, a current set of maps drawn to scale showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets, alleys and other public places of the city during the previous year. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.160 Uses permitted.
    Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, operate, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public highway, street, alley, public way or public place, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities on properties rented or leased from other persons, including, but not limited to, a public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city.

    The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to install an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or of the laws of the city of Fountain Valley, the state of California of the United States of America.

    No franchise granted hereunder shall be construed as a franchise, permit or license to transmit any special program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly known and referred to as “pay television,” and no grantee shall directly or indirectly install, maintain or operate any other device or means for collection of money for individual programs.

    The grantee shall have authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of grantee, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of grantee.

    When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder uses in his CATV system, distribution channels furnished to the grantee by a telephone company pursuant to tariff or a contract on file with a regulatory body having jurisdiction and the grantee company furnished facilities, the grantee shall be required to comply with all the provisions hereof as a “licensee,” and in such event whenever the term “grantee” is used herein, it means and includes “licensee.” When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of facilities shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.170 Location of grantee’s properties.
    (a)    Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits, or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets, alleys or other public places shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the director of public works of the city acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion.

    (b)    The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus on public property or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street, but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without written approval of the director of public works of the city.

    (c)    In those areas and portions of the city where both the transmission and distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. Amplifiers in grantee’s transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the director of public works of the city.

    (d)    Grantee shall cause a key map and detailed plat maps of the entire system showing material of construction and horizontal and vertical locations with respect to property lines and grade lines to be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor and filed in the office of the public works director prior to the issuance of a permit for construction, or within ninety days after granting of a franchise to operate and maintain facilities existing prior to the adoption of this section. Prior to requesting the issuance of a permit for installation of any facility or apparatus in accordance with the provisions of this section, the grantee shall file said key map and detailed plat maps with all utility companies and public agencies whose facilities are effected by said installation and obtain a statement signed by a responsible official thereof, that such utility or public agency has no objection to the proposed location of such facility. Such utility companies and public agencies shall act upon a request made to them by a grantee in accordance with the foregoing provisions within thirty days after such request has been made to such utility or public agency.

    (e)    Grantee, upon request of any person or agency who has contracted to perform work on a public right-of-way, shall provide accurate detailed information to such person or agency regarding location of any of the grantee’s facilities in said right-of-way. Such information, if requested, shall include sending a representative familiar with the installation of CATV facilities to the site of the work to mark or designate the location of the facilities of the grantee.

    (f)    The grantee shall install with underground equipment and apparatus simultaneously with telephone and electrical conduit whenever the same are installed within grantee’s area.

    (g)    In order that the provisions of subsections (c) and (f) of this section may be reasonably applied in instances where extreme or unnecessary hardship would result from carrying out the provisions of those subsections, the council shall have the power to vary the mandatory provisions of those subsections in any specific case in such a manner that substantial justice is done upon a showing by applicant of good cause therefor. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.180 Removal or abandonment of property by grantee.
    (a)    In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street, alley or public place without complying with the requirements of its franchise or ordinance, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given thirty days’ notice, remove from the streets, alleys or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the director of public works may permit to be abandoned in such place. In the event of any such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street, alley or other area from which such property has been removed, to a condition satisfactory to the director of public works.

    (b)    Any property of the grantee remaining in place ninety days after the termination of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The city manager may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty days.

    (c)    Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the director of public works shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and the grantee shall submit to the city council an instrument, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.190 Failure to perform street work.
    Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street, alley or other public places within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, the city manager may at his option cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city manager to the grantee within ten days after receipt of such itemized report. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.200 Operational standards.
    The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest possible service. The following minimum standards shall be required:

    (1)    The system shall be installed using all bank equipment capable of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum, and it shall have the further capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers on the VHF band;

    (2)    The system, as installed, shall be capable of passing standard color TV signals without the introduction of material degradation on color fidelity and intelligence;

    (3)    The system and all equipment shall be designed and rated for twenty-four hour per day continuous operation;

    (4)    The system shall provide a signal level of two thousand microvolts at the input terminals of each TV receiver;

    (5)    The signal to noise ratio shall be not less than forty-six decibels;

    (6)    Hum modulation of the picture signal shall be less than five percent;

    (7)    The system shall use components having a VSWR of 1.4 or less. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.210 Undergrounding specifications.
    All CATV systems installed in the city shall be done in accordance with the following specifications and requirements:

    (1)    All underground cabling will be run in conduit. The preferred conduit size* will be two and one-half inch for trunk, two inch for sub-trunk and one and one-half inch for distribution cabling. There shall be a spare duct of the largest size used in each trench location for each two ducts or less required. Preferable duct is scheduled 4-0 PVC, ABS or Polyethylene Rome Spec. B22 1 X-G or equal.

    (2)    Where individual ducts are laid, colored plastic will be used to form a color oriented duct system to facilitate identification of the cables they contain, or other method of identification using continuous marking of duct.

    (3)    The minimum specification for ducting will be as follows. Equivalent or better standards may be substituted:

    (A)   Each cable will be installed in a separate conduit except as a final drop to the individual subscriber’s building.

    (B)   Outdoor conduit shall be placed underground with a minimum depth of eighteen inches.

    (C)   Each run of cable is to be placed in a separate run of conduit.

    (D)   All conduits are to be located behind the curb, within the parkway area of the street, unless other locations are preferred by the planning commission.

    (E)   All service laterals front street to home shall be:

    (i)     Where it passes under the street, a minimum one and one-half inch with a pull box in the parkway, or at any other agreed location;

    (ii)    Direct to subscriber, a minimum of one inch PVC, ABS, Polyethylene schedule 40 or equivalent standard.

    (F)    Conduit will be laid, connected and sealed in continuous runs. “Bells” or overlapping ends two inches to three deep will be used, or alternatively the use of sealed slip couplers may be used.

    (G)   All conduit locations shall be accurately plotted from the curb face.

    (H)   Underground vaults and boxes for electronic components of the installed system will be used:

    (i)     The covers fitted securely and flush to the ground;

    (ii)    The covers will be colored to match the surrounding area;

    (iii)   The covers to be used must receive prior approval of the city’s planning commission.

    (I)    Where conduit is laid in advance of the cable to be housed in it, polypropylene, polyethylene, nylon rope or other nondeteriorating type of pull line will be inserted at the time of laying to facilitate the later laying of messenger wire; to pull the actual cable.

    (J)    In undeveloped areas, or areas where changes of land marks are expected to occur, 16 to 19GA copper wire will be buried with the conduit with the ends exposed at each vault or pedestal location in order to facilitate the exact location of the buried conduit run. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

*NOTE:   Preferred conduit size depending on size, type and number of cables to be used.

 

4.45.220 Miscellaneous provisions.
    (a)    All matters herein provided to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk.

    (b)    The rate schedule for any connection fee or monthly service charge, or charge thereto, to subscribers must have written approval of the city council.

    (c)    The grantee must pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for expenses incurred by it in publishing legal notice and ordinances in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; such payment to be made within thirty days after the city shall furnish such grantee with a written statement of such expense.

    (d)    The grantee shall maintain a toll free telephone number within the city so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers.

    (e)    No person in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or the applicable monthly service charge.

    (f)    The city council may, upon finding that extraordinary circumstances applying to the land, buildings or CATV system do exist, waive any or all of the requirements of this chapter.

    (g)    The grantee shall, without charge, provide all subscriber services of its system to all public school buildings, city police and fire stations, city recreation centers and such other buildings owned or controlled by the city as the city manager shall designate. Such service shall consist of a drop connection to the exterior of the building or property involved and a connection to the interior of the building or property to a television set if desired. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.45.230 Violations.
    (a)    It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection in physical contact with any part of a franchised CATV system within the city for the purpose of taking or receiving or enabling himself or others to receive any television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound.

    (b)    It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound.

 

    (c)    From and after the effective date of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city or within any other public property of the city or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

    (d)    Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine as set forth by city council resolution or by imprisonment in the county jail of Orange County for a term not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person, firm or corporation is deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.46 STATE FRANCHISED VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
4.46.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to recognize state franchises established pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., referred to herein in this chapter as the “Act.” (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

 

4.46.020 State franchise fee.
    State franchisee(s) holders that offer video service within the jurisdictional boundary of the city will calculate and remit a state franchise fee (“franchise fee”) equal to five percent of gross revenues as provided in Sections 5860 and 5840(q)(1) of the Act. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

 

4.46.030 PEG support fee.
    State franchisee(s) holders that offer service within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city will calculate and remit an additional public, educational and government access (“PEG”) facilities support fee (“PEG support fee”) equal to one percent of gross revenues to be used in a manner consistent with law as provided in Section 5800(n) of the Act. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

 

4.46.040 Fee remittance.
    The franchise fee and PEG support fee shall be remitted to the public cable television authority (“PCTA”) on a quarterly basis within forty-five days after the end of each quarter for that calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a detailed summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the franchise fee and PEG support fee. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

 

4.46.050 Gross revenues.
    “Gross revenues” shall be defined consistent with Section 5860 of the Act. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

 

4.46.060 Late payment charges.
    A late payment charge equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency plus one percent will be applied to any payment made by a state video franchise holder for franchise fees and PEG support fees not received when due under Section 4.46.040, as provided in Section 5860 of the Act. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

 

4.46.070 Audit of business records.
    Not more than once annually, the city and/or the PCTA may examine the business records of a state franchisee(s) to the extent reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the Act and this chapter. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

 

4.46.080 PCTA credit.
    Any franchise fee and PEG support fee levied and collected by the PCTA pursuant to this Act shall constitute a credit against any franchise fee or PEG support fee imposed herein. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 4.50 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
4.50.010 Pawnbroker defined.
    The term “pawnbroker” shall mean a person, firm or corporation engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money, for himself or for any other person, upon personal property, personal security, pawns or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or their assignees, at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.020 Pawnshop defined.
    The term “pawnshop” shall mean any room, store or place in which business or activity described under Section 4.50.010 is engaged in, carried on or conducted. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.030 Secondhand dealer defined.
    (a)    The term “secondhand dealer” shall mean a person, firm or corporation engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares or merchandise.

    (b)    Exemptions.

    (1)    Any person, firm or corporation who or which engages in the business of selling genuine antique articles which are purchased by such person, firm or corporation directly from a wholesale dealer in such articles, or which are imported into the United States of America by such person, firm or corporation, shall not be deemed to be a “secondhand dealer” by reason of engaging in such business.

    (2)    Any person, firm or corporation who or which acquires in good faith, identifiable secondhand property as part or complete payment for other personal property in the ordinary course of conducting a business of selling new personal property directly to the consumer, shall not be deemed to be a “secondhand dealer” by reason of engaging in such business.

    (3)    Any person, firm or corporation who or which engages in the business of selling used motor vehicles or used watercraft vessels shall not be deemed to be a “secondhand dealer” by reason of engaging in such business.

    (4)    Any person, firm, group, association or corporation who or which acquires in good faith, identifiable secondhand property for the sole purpose of distribution of such property by sale, gift or otherwise in furtherance of its stated objectives of promoting religious, charitable or educational purposes shall not be deemed to be a “secondhand dealer” by reason of engaging in such activities. Any such person, firm, group, association or corporation must file a request for exemption as a secondhand dealer with the city manager on a form provided by the city. A minimum of seventy-five percent of the gross proceeds, compensation and earnings obtained from such activities must be devoted to its stated religious, charitable or educational purposes in order to qualify for exemption.

    (5)    The exemptions set forth in subsection (b)(1) through (4) of this section do not apply to transactions involving (A) marine hardware, automotive, and motorcycle parts, and related equipment, with a retail value of over fifty dollars; or (B) bicycles and/or their parts, surfboards, firearms capable of being concealed, cameras and photographic equipment, typewriters, all business machines, sewing machines, all musical instruments, snow skis, tape recorders, record players and television sets. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.040 Permits—Specific application information and fee.
    In addition to the general application information required by Section 4.04.070 and the payment of the permit application fee required by Section 4.02.040, specific application information for a pawnbroker’s permit is required. The specific information that shall be provided is as follows:

    (1)    A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner, except that this requirement is waived with respect to an application for renewal of a permit by an applicant holding an unexpired permit issued under this chapter who has in a previous application under this chapter complied with this requirement.

    (2)    Applicant shall submit to being fingerprinted and shall submit the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county of Orange, state of California, who will certify as the applicant’s good moral character and business responsibility or, in lieu of the names of reference, any other available evidence as to the good moral character and business responsibility of the applicant that will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such moral character and business responsibility, except that this requirement is waived with respect to an application for renewal of a permit where a person has made a pervious application under this chapter and has complied with this requirement. A fee for this investigation shall be paid to the city as set forth by city council resolution. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.050 Applicant’s conviction of a felony.
    A person shall be prima facie disqualified for a pawnshop or secondhand dealer permit if he has been convicted of a felony. As used herein the term “conviction” includes pleas of guilty and nolo contendere. The chief of police, as the investigating officer, is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.060 Reports to police.
    (a)    Time of Making. Every pawnshop and secondhand dealer shall on each Monday and Thursday before the hour of ten a.m. of said day, make out and deliver to the police department, on a blank form to be obtained from the police department by such pawnshop or secondhand dealer for such purpose, a full, true and complete report of all goods, or things received on deposit, pledged or purchased during the period preceding the filing of such report.

    (b)    Contents. Such report shall be in English and shall contain the name and place of business of the person making the same and the date and hour of the day when prepared. Such report shall show the hour of the day when each article was received on deposit, pledged or purchased, and the true name and address, as nearly as the same is known or can be ascertained by such pawnshop or secondhand dealer, of the person who left such article on deposit, or pledged or sold the same, together with a description of such person and a statement as to the fact that such person is over the age of eighteen years. Such report shall also show the number of the receipt of pawn ticket, the amount loaned, the amount purchased, and a complete description of each article left on deposit, pledged or purchased. If any article so left on deposit, pledged or purchased has engraved thereon any number, word or initial, or contains any setting of any kind, such report shall contain such number, word or initial, and shall show the kind of settings and the number of each kind.

    (c)    Confidential. The chief of police shall cause all reports received pursuant to the terms of this section to be filed in a secure place, and the same shall be open to inspection only by members of the police department, or upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.070 Records required to be kept.
    Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall keep, for a period of three years, a complete record in the English language of all goods, wares, merchandise or things pledged to or purchased or received by him, which record shall contain all of the matters required to be shown in the reports referred to and described in Section 4.50.060 of this chapter. Every such record and all goods, wares, merchandise and things pledged to or purchased or received by any such secondhand dealer shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of the chief of police or any police officer of the city. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.080 Failure to comply unlawful.
    No person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, nor any agent or employee of any such person, shall fail, refuse or neglect to file any report of keep any record in the form, in any manner, at the time and in all respects in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, or fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to the chief of police or any police officer of the city, immediately upon demand for the privilege of such inspection, any such record or any goods, wares or merchandise or things pledged to or purchased or received by such person. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.090 Disposition of articles.
    No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall sell or otherwise dispose of any article, merchandise or thing within thirty days after the same has been received or purchased, nor fail to keep such article, merchandise or thing unaltered, as pledged or purchased, in lots separate and apart from other articles, merchandise or things in the place of business of such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for a period of thirty days from the date of the pledge or purchase thereof. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.100 Hours of operation.
    No person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, or any agent or employee of any such person shall accept any pledge of or loan any money upon personal property, or purchase or receive any goods, wares or merchandise, or any article or thing, or in any manner whatsoever engage in or conduct any such business between the hours of twelve midnight on Saturday and the hour of seven a.m. of the following Monday, or between the hours of ten p.m. of any day, other than Saturday or Sunday, and the hour of seven a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.110 Property received from outside state.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, every auction house manager, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and any merchant dealing in or offering for sale any item or items of secondhand jewelry or object of art or similar merchandise which is identifiable by number, letter, phrase, mark or other means of identification commonly recognized in trade, shall file with the police department the report required concerning any such item received from outside the state of California or received from any person, who within thirty days prior thereto, received it from outside the state of California or brought it into the state of California. Records of such articles shall be kept as required by Section 4.50.060. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.120 Application of reports and records provisions to other merchants selling secondhand articles.
    Whenever any section of this chapter shall require a report to the police department, or shall require a record of any secondhand article, or shall require the holding of such article for any stated period of time by any secondhand dealer or anyone engaging in any business in this chapter specifically referred to, shall also include any merchant who receives for sale, attempts to sell, or displays for sale any such secondhand article for another person in expectation of receiving a commission or fee or gratuity, or reward therefor, or as an agent or broker, and each and every provision of this chapter shall thereupon be applicable to such person as though he were in the specific business mentioned herein. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.50.130 Multiple businesses.
    If any person, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on, at the same time, more than one of the businesses defined and referred to in this chapter, such person shall be deemed to be engaged in conducting, managing and carrying on such businesses and such person, firm or corporation shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to each such business, and no person shall fail, refuse or neglect to do so. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.55 BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS
4.55.005 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system of regulation for burglary or robbery alarms that will minimize false alarms so that public safety officers are not placed in jeopardy unnecessarily. False alarms cause a drain on police manpower and the public safety budget and lull those responding to repeated false alarms to believe that each alarm is false. These regulations are, therefore, imposed on all businesses and other places that have alarms, including residences. This section is declaratory of existing law. (Ord. 1376 § 14, 2005)

 

4.55.010 Definitions.
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context indicates a different meaning is intended, the following words and terms shall for the purposes of this chapter have the meanings indicated in this section:

    “Alarm agent” means any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing on or in any building, structure or facility, any alarm system; responding to alarms; investigating causes of alarms; notifying the police or fire department of alarms; or providing any similarly related service; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not include any person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who neither visits the locations where the alarm system is to be installed, nor designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.

    “Alarm business” means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of: Selling, leasing maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system; or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility; or providing a personal service of responding to the location of the alarm, investigating the cause of the alarm, notifying the police or fire department of such alarm and providing any similarly related service.

    “Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the possible commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when actuated. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, indirect dial telephone devices, audible alarms and direct alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside the protected building, structure or facility are not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system.

    “Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on the premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated.

    “Automatic communication device” means any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the police or fire department.

    “Direct alarm” means any alarm system connecting an authorized source to the Fountain Valley police department by a leased telephone line or any other direct line that has no intermediate station and terminates at an independent monitor module at the police or fire department.

    “False alarm” means the activation of any direct or indirect alarm system because of malfunction, including but not limited to mechanical or electrical defects, or because of the improper installation, operation or adjustment of such system. Whenever an officer responds to the location of a false alarm and finds that there is no evidence of unlawful activity or of external causes that may have caused the alarm, the activation shall be presumed to be a false alarm. Not included as a false alarm will be those activations caused by earthquakes, violent winds or other such natural phenomena beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm system, provided that the owner or lessee has appealed the assessment of the fine pursuant to Section 4.55.110.

    “Indirect alarm” means any mechanical electrically operated or electronically constructed device which, when activated, is designed to transmit any signal, audible or otherwise, whose purpose is to summon the police or an alarm business to any location in response to such signal or other transmission generated or produced by such device, and means and includes any answering service, commercial telephone line, automatic communication device or any communication or signal other than a direct alarm. If police are, in fact, summoned as a result of the alarm activation, it shall be presumed that the purpose for the alarm was to summon police, notwithstanding the fact that a neighbor or other person actually called the police.

    “Primary trunk line” means that telephone line installed for the city, including its police or fire departments, to which is assigned a telephone number that is published in the directory of the public utility making the installation, and which is designated for general public use. The term “telephone number” includes any additional numbers assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing communication service and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect with any primary trunk line assigned to the city, its police or fire departments when such primary trunk line is in use.

    “Terminal monitor module” means a device installed at the police facility to which direct alarms are connected by means of a telephone line and which is maintained by the city or its licensee. (Ord. 1376 § 15, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.020 Direct alarms—Permit required.
    No person shall install any direct line alarm equipment in the police facilities without first having obtained a permit to do so as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.030 Direct alarms—Specific application information.
    In addition to the general application information required by Section 4.04.070 and the payment of the permit application fee as required by Section 4.02.040, specific application information for a direct alarm permit is required. The specific information that shall be provided is as follows:

    (1)    A statement providing the name, address and telephone number of the person and premises to be served by the alarm system;

    (2)    Satisfactory evidence that shows that all necessary arrangements have been made by the applicant for the providing of a lease line, which is to be provided at his/her expense and is to be his/her sole responsibility, for the transmitting of the alarm signal impulses from the applicant’s premises to the terminal monitor module located at the police facilities. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.040 Direct alarms—Terms and conditions.
    The following terms and conditions shall be agreed to by any person desiring to install such terminal direct alarm facilities in the police department and shall be incorporated into the application and permit:

    (1)    All materials and labor necessary to make the installation at the permittee’s premises shall be furnished by permittee at his/her sole expense. All materials and labor necessary to make the connection between the private system and the terminal monitor module at the police facility shall be furnished by the city or its licensee.

    (2)    The permittee shall furnish the police chief or the licensee of city with a complete set of written specifications adequately describing the equipment and placement of such alarm systems. After installation, no change, modification or alteration of the equipment shall be made unless and until the applicant furnishes additional written specifications showing such changes.

    (3)    If malfunctions should develop in the direct alarm system connected to the police facility terminal that could jeopardize the proper operation of any other terminal facilities or communications systems in the police facility, or if excessive or chronic false alarms be transmitted by any such system terminating in the police facility, service shall be disconnected and shall not be reactivated until and unless such malfunction or the cause of the false alarms is corrected by the permittee at his/her expense. The city, its elected and appointed officers and each and every employee shall be held harmless from any loss or damage resulting from a malfunction of such alarms or for failure to respond to the alarms for whatever reason.

    (4)    The permittee shall keep on file in the police facility the names, addresses and phone numbers of at least two persons to call in event of an emergency, and such information shall be current at all times. Permittee shall keep his/her alarm equipment in good order at all times.

    (5)    All alarm equipment, installations and repairs shall comply with rules and regulations promulgated by the police chief regulating the times and conditions under which such installations and repairs may be made. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.050 Indirect alarms—Permit required.
    No person shall install or maintain any indirect alarm system on his/her premises without first having obtained a permit to do so as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.060 Indirect alarms—Specific application information and fee.
    In addition to the general application information set forth by Section 4.04.070 and the payment of the permit application fee as required by Section 4.02.040, specific application information for an indirect alarm permit is required. The specific information that shall be provided is as follows:

    (1)    The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the premises or customers or persons to be served by the indirect alarm system;

    (2)    The make, manufacturer and model number of the device being used, the place of purchase and the person, firm or corporation who will service the system;

    (3)    The name, address and telephone number of the person to contact in the event that the device is activated. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.070 Indirect alarms—Terms and conditions.
    No permit shall be granted except upon the following conditions:

    (1)    The permittee shall furnish complete information and specifications, when required, relating to the system to be provided. The information shall include specific data relating to the prevention of false alarms and testing procedures.

    (2)    The licensee shall maintain his/her equipment in good condition and repair.

    (3)    The licensee shall prevent excessive or chronic false alarms caused by faulty equipment, installation or human error. A permit may be denied if the make or model of the device listed in the application has, in the experience of the police, proved to be deficient by reason of malfunction, false alarm or failure to activate on a significant number of occasions.

    (4)    The city, its employees and elected or appointed officers shall be held harmless from any malfunction of such alarms. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.080 Automatic communication devices—Prohibitions.
    (a)    No person shall attach any automatic communication device to a telephone line or use, permit or cause to be used any telephone attachment which is designed to automatically transmit any signal, audible or otherwise, the purpose of which is designed to automatically transmit any signal, audible or otherwise, the purpose of which, when activated, is to summon the police or fire department personnel to any location in response to such signal or other transmission generated or produced by such device except upon securing a permit for an indirect alarm system as hereinabove provided.

    (b)    No person shall use, permit or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public primary trunk line of the city, its police or fire departments and then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any burglary, robbery or other emergency except upon securing a permit for an indirect alarm system as hereinabove provided.

    (c)    No person shall provide, install or maintain any automatic communication device system which through human agency or mechanical device or a combination thereof is designed to systematically report a burglary, robbery or other emergency via the police or fire department switchboard without having first obtained a permit for an indirect alarm system as hereinabove provided.

    (d)    This section shall not apply to a commercial telephone or telegraph utility doing business and regulated by the Public Utilities Commission.

    (e)    This section shall operate retroactively and shall require the deactivation of all indirect alarm systems which, upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are connected and directly dial any emergency number in any office of the police or fire departments, unless a permit for an indirect alarm system is obtained as provided in this chapter. This removal shall be accomplished within thirty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.090 Alarm agent—Permit required.
    No person shall engage, conduct or operate as an alarm agent without first applying for and receiving an alarm agent permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.095 Specific application information required for non-businesses.
    For end users of alarm systems that are not businesses, it shall be sufficient if the applicant identifies their full name, address, telephone numbers and other options for making contact, along with a description of the alarm system. Such applications shall be exempt from background checks, as provided in Section 4.08.080 of this title, provided that the license collector shall be entitled to request such information as may be necessary to ascertain the true identity of the applicant. (Ord. 1376 § 16, 2005)

 

4.55.100 False alarms—Prevention—Payment of costs.
    (a)    When emergency messages are received by the police or fire departments that evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or a permit issued under this chapter, the police chief is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating such messages, or his/her representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with the requirements.

    (b)    The owner or lessee of an alarm system shall be assessed a fee in an amount as prescribed in a resolution adopted by action of the city council for every false alarm in excess of three in a one-year period or for any alarm that activates without having a permit therefor. (Ord. 1376 § 17, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.110 False alarms fines and appeals.
    The owner or lessee of any alarm system shall be assessed a fee for each false alarm transmitted to the police department as prescribed by resolution adopted by action of the city council. Such fee shall be paid to the license collector for deposit in the general fund.

    If the owner or lessee believes that he or she should be excused from being assessed a fine for any false alarm, he or she may appeal such assessment to the chief of police within ten days of having received the invoice for such false alarm. The chief of police shall excuse the assessment of the fine if he or she finds that the alleged false alarm did not come within the definition of “false alarm” as specified in Section 4.55.010 of this chapter. The decision of the chief of police, with respect to whether a false alarm occurred, shall be final, notwithstanding any other provision of this code providing to the contrary. (Ord. 1376 § 18, 2005; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.55.120 Penalty.
    No person, firm or corporation shall fail to pay such an assessment within thirty days of assessment. Violations shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code. It shall be a defense to this violation if any person has appealed such an assessment within the time limits provided by this chapter until those administrative processes have been exhausted, including any court action that may be filed thereafter. (Ord. 1376 § 19, 2005; Ord. 1273 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 4.60 OFF-SITE SALE OF SINGLE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
4.60.010 Definition of “single agricultural product.”
    “Single agricultural product” means any lone product traditionally considered a type of produce, including but not limited to strawberries, pumpkins, and Christmas trees, provided that the product is the only produce item offered for sale and is grown off-site. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.60.020 Permitted sales areas.
    A temporary stand for the sale of a single agricultural product, not grown on-site, shall be permitted in any agricultural, commercial or industrial zoned lot, unless otherwise prohibited, and on all church and school sites and on vacant residential property abutting arterial highways. No sales shall be permitted on a service station lot nor inside a building. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.60.030 Planning department to issue single agricultural product permit.
    A permit shall be obtained from the planning/ building director. The permit shall be good for a period of time not to exceed ninety days from the date of issuance. A site development plan, certificate of liability insurance and the written permission of the legal property owner shall be presented prior to issuance of a permit. In addition, a fee as set forth by separate resolution of the city council shall be collected. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.60.040 Permit—Specific application information.
    In addition to the general application information required by Section 4.04.070 and the payment of the permit application fee as required by Section 4.02.040, specific application information for off-site sale of single agricultural products is required. The specific information required is as follows:

    (1)    The application must be submitted to the planning director not less than thirty days prior to the first day of sales.

    (2)    The size and dimensions of the stand shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-four feet long by eight feet wide by eight feet in height, constructed of CDX plywood using pressure treated supporting members or superior materials, approved by the building official or designee. The stand shall provide frontal openings to facilitate sales. Customer traffic shall not be permitted within the actual stand. A State Fire Marshal-approved fire extinguisher will be present at all times during sales or occupancy of the stand. The applicant shall show the location of the stand in relation to property lines and abutting streets on a site plan as described in Section 4.60.030.

    (3)    If the stand is to be energized, an electrical permit will be obtained from the department of building and safety. Only UL listed lighting shall be used. No heating, cooking or open flame devices of any type are permitted.

    (4)    Advertising signage shall consist of either; (i) banner measuring three feet wide by fifteen feet long maximum, one per each arterial frontage, mounted on the face of the stand. The banner(s) shall contain no glitter, movement nor any electrical components, or (ii) a temporary painted sign is allowed provided it is applied directly to the stand and is not a separate, removable sign. Painted signage is limited to one location per frontage in the upper two thirds area of the surface to which it is applied. These are the only advertising methods approved for use with this permit.

    (5)    The stand shall not be located closer than twenty feet to any ultimate public highway right-of-way. A minimum of three off-street parking spaces shall be provided.

    (6)    All applicants shall obtain a city business license prior to commencing operations.

    (7)    The facility shall be removed and the premises cleared of all debris and restored to the condition prior to establishment of the facility within seven days of the expiration of the permit or termination of operations. A deposit to insure restoration of the property shall be collected at the time of permit issuance and refunded after satisfactory inspection by the director of planning and building. This sum shall be forfeited to the city in the event of permittee’s failure to remove all trash and debris within the allotted time.

    (8)    Upon expiration of this permit, or cessation of operations, a minimum period of sixty days shall precede the next permitted use on the same parcel or lot. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.60.050 Revocation.
    Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of any permit granted under this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.60.060 Insurance.
    Prior to issuance of a permit, the permittee shall procure public liability and property insurance covering its operation in and about said lot and premises in an amount to be set forth by separate resolution. The permittee shall file a certificate of such insurance with the city clerk and name the city as an additional insured. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.65 ESCORTS, ESCORT BUREAUS AND INTRODUCTORY SERVICES
4.65.010 Definitions.
    “Business” means that term as defined in Section 4.04.020.

    “Escort” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation: (1) escorts, accompanies, or consorts with other persons to, from, or about social affairs, entertainments, places of public assembly, or places of amusement located or situated within the city; or (2) escorts, accompanies, or consorts with other persons in or about any place of public or private resort or within any private quarters located or situated within the city; or (3) escorts, accompanies, or consorts with other persons in or about any business or commercial establishment, or part or portion thereof, located or situated within the city.

    “Escort bureau” means any business, agency, or self-employed or independent escort who, for pecuniary compensation, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.

    “Introductory service” means a service offered or performed by any person for pecuniary compensation, the principal purpose of which is to aid persons to become socially acquainted or to otherwise assist persons to meet for social purposes, or which service is generally known or should be known by the offering or performing party to be used by the recipients thereof for the purpose of obtaining information about other persons to be used for social purposes.

    “Pecuniary compensation” means any commission, fee, gratuity, hire, profit, reward, or any other form of consideration.

    “Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or association.

    “Profit interest” means any interest or share in the present or prospective profit of an escort bureau or introductory service. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.020 Exception.
    The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to a person in a lawful business of an employment agency licensed under the laws of the state. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.030 Escort bureau and introductory service—Separate permits and activities defined.
    Activities of an escort bureau or introductory service regulated hereunder include the receipt or dissemination of information via telephone, mail, or other communication system or device solely or in conjunction with other activities in the furtherance of the conduct or carrying on of an escort bureau, introductory service, or activities of an escort. A separate permit shall be required for each location within the city at which the activities of an escort bureau or introductory service are to be conducted or carried on. Such permit shall be prominently displayed in the reception area, lobby, foyer, or entryway of each such business location within the city. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.040 Escort bureau or introductory service permit—Specific application information and fee.
    In addition to the general application information required by Section 4.04.070 and the payment of the required application fee as required by Section 4.02.040, specific application information for an escort, escort bureau or introductory service permit is required. The specific application information is as follows:

    (1)    Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five-year period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application and the inclusive dates of each such address;

    (2)    Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

    (3)    Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application;

    (4)    The business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;

    (5)    In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the escort bureau or introductory service is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the owner of record of the property acknowledging that an escort bureau or introductory service is or will be located on the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name and address of the owner of record of the property, as well as a copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the escort bureau or introductory service is or will be located;

    (6)    A definition of the service to be provided;

    (7)    The true names and residential addresses of all persons employed or intended to be employed or contracted with as escorts;

    (8)    Such other identification and/or information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application;

    (9)    The applicant, if a natural person, or a designated responsible managing officer if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the police department of the city and produce proof that the required application or renewal fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by this section;

    (10)  The chief of police may require the applicant, if a natural person, or the designated responsible managing officer if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, to appear in person at the police department in order to be photographed and fingerprinted;

    (11)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by this section to be included in the application, the applicant or permit holder, as the case may be, shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within twenty-four hours after such change;

    (12)  The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes, color of hair, and date of birth. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.050 Escort bureau or introductory service permit—Specific application denial conditions.
    The license collector, after review and investigation, may grant or deny a permit application. Within sixty days after the receipt of the application, the license collector shall mail to the applicant, postage prepaid, notice as to whether the permit has been granted or denied. If the license collector should deny the application, the notice shall also inform the applicant as to the reasons why the permit was denied and inform the applicant of their right to an administrative hearing before the city manager as provided in this chapter. A permit for an escort bureau or introductory service may be denied for the following reasons:

    (1)    The applicant, if an individual, or any of the directors, officers, or stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the partners, the holder of any lien of any nature or profit interest holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed escort bureau or introductory service, or a natural person employed or contracted with to an escort or to provide escort services, has been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime involving sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), or (h) of Section 647 of the Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd conduct; or has permitted, through an act of omission or commission, his or her employee or agent to engage in any type or moral turpitude or sexual misconduct offense, whether misdemeanor or felony (under such circumstances, the conduct of the employee or agent, if such resulted in a conviction of a plea or nolo contendere or guilty, will be considered imputed to the principal and shall be grounds for permit denial);

    (2)    The applicant has had an escort bureau, introductory service or escort permit or other similar license or permit denied or suspended or revoked for cause by the city or any other city or county located in or out of this state within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;

    (3)    That any person acting in the capacity of an escort and who holds a permit for that purpose is not at least eighteen years of age. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.060 Escort permit—Specific application information and fee.
    In addition to the general permit information required by Section 4.04.070 and the payment of the application fee as required by Section 4.02.040, specific application information for an escort permit is required as follows:

    (1)    A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the state, stating that the applicant has within thirty days immediately preceding the date of the application been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease;

    (2)    Satisfactory evidence that the applicant is employed, or has been offered employment, by an escort bureau or introductory service holding a valid permit issued by the city, including the name and address of the employer or prospective employer and the fact that such employment or continued employment is contingent upon the issuance of said permit;

    (3)    Such other identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application;

    (4)    The chief of police may require the applicant to appear in person at the police department in order to be photographed and fingerprinted; and

    (5)    That any person acting in the capacity of an escort and who holds a permit for that purpose is at least eighteen years of age. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.070 Escort permit—Specific application denial conditions.
    In addition to the general grounds for permit denial stated in Section 4.04.090, an escort permit shall be denied if:

    (a)    The applicant does not furnish an acceptable medical certificate as described in Section 4.65.060; or

    (b)    The applicant has had an escort bureau, introductory service, escort permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked by the city or any other city or county located in or out of this state within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; or

    (c)    The applicant is less than eighteen years of age; or

    (d)    The applicant has been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or a misdemeanor or felony crime involving sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), or (h) or Section 647 of the Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd conduct. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.080 Escort, escort bureau or introductory service permit—Additional grounds for permit suspension or revocation.
    (a)    An escort bureau or introductory service permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended if the person holding such permit has conducted such business in such a manner as would have been grounds for denial of a permit as set forth in Section 4.65.050.

    (b)    An escort permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended if the person holding such permit is found to be engaging in behavior or actions which would have been grounds for denial of a permit as set forth in Section 4.65.065.

    (c)    Whenever a permit has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter, no other application for a permit to carry on a similar business by such person shall be considered for a period of five years from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.090 Sale or transfer.
    Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in any escort bureau or introductory service, the permit shall immediately become null and void. A new application shall be made and an application fee paid by any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the escort bureau or introductory service. Any application involving the sale or transfer of any interest in an existing escort bureau or introductory service, as well as any permit which may thereafter be granted, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.100 Change of location, name or other information.
    (a)    A change of location of any premises or real property where a permitted escort bureau or introductory service is conducted may be approved by the chief of police provided all requirements of the chapter and all ordinances and regulations of the city are complied with and a change of location fee as established by resolution of the city council is deposited with the license collector. Application for such change shall be made within three days of such change.

    (b)    No permit holder shall operate an escort bureau or introductory service under any name or designation not specified in the permit.

    (c)    Any change of information that appears on the permit applications for any escort bureau, introductory service or escort shall be submitted in writing to the chief of police within twenty-four hours of such a change. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.110 Employment and activities of escorts—Age requirements.
    (a)    No holder of an escort bureau or introductory service permit shall employ as an escort any person under eighteen years of age.

    (b)    No holder of an escort bureau or introductory service permit shall furnish any escort or introductory service to, or accept employment from any patron, customer or person to be escorted, who is under eighteen years of age, except at the special instance and request of a parent, or other person in lawful custody of the person upon whose behalf the escort or introductory service is engaged. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.120 Escort permit identification card—Available upon request, surrendered at employment termination.
    Each escort permit holder shall be issued an identification card which will also service as an escort permit. The permit holder shall carry such card upon his or her person when acting as an escort and produce the same for inspection upon request. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender, to the chief of police, any escort permit issued by the city upon the suspension, revocation, or expiration of such permit, or upon leaving employment as an escort. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.130 Prohibited activities.
    No holder of an escort permit shall escort, offer to escort or perform any activity described in this chapter to any person under eighteen years of age, except at the special instance and request of a parent, or other person in lawful custody of the person upon whose behalf the escort or introductory service is engaged. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.140 Conducting business as a nuisance.
    Any escort bureau or introductory service operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an escort bureau or introductory service contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.65.150 Inspection.
    Each business subject to a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall be open at all times during business hours to inspection by members of the Fountain Valley police department. In addition, there shall be prominently displayed in the lobby, foyer, or entryway of each such business, a printed sign with lettering no less than three-quarter inches in height, stating “The Fountain Valley Police Department has a right to inspect these premises at any time during hours of operation.” (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.70 AMBULANCE SERVICES
Note
*   Prior ordinance history: Ord. 1181.

 

4.70.010 Purpose.
    The state has comprehensively regulated the provision of emergency pre-hospital care services in the Emergency Medical Services Act, Health and Safety Code Section 1797 et seq. According to the state statutory scheme, the state has taken over certain functions in establishing emergency services and has delegated other functions to the local agency, which is the county. The county has delegated to the city the authority to select the exclusive provider for the city and has established that the city shall administer the contract. (Ord. 1303 § 1, 2000)

 

4.70.020 County ordinance adopted—Penalties.
    The city has adopted the ambulance ordinance of the county as the same shall be amended from time to time. Violations shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 1303 § 1, 2000)

 

4.70.030 Selection of provider.
    The city council shall establish selection criteria in accordance with state law and subject to county input and shall establish a competitive selection process for the same. The city council shall also establish standards for performance. Performance shall be reviewed annually or at such intervals as the city council may determine. The bid process shall be repeated at such intervals as the city council shall determine. The fire chief shall advise the city council on the above process. (Ord. 1303 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 4.75 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OPERATIONS
4.75.010 Signs required—Prices—Hours of sales.
    Every person offering for sale or selling gasoline to the public from any place of business adjacent to a street or highway shall display in a manner so that it is clearly visible from any street or highway adjacent to the premises at least one, but not more than two signs which indicate:

    (1)    The actual price per gallon, including taxes, of each grade of gasoline being sold or offered for sale from the premises;

    (2)    Whether any grade of gasoline normally offered for sale from the premises is currently not being offered for sale;

    (3)    The hours during which gasoline will be offered for sale from the premises during the current day; and

    (4)    In the event a service station has no gasoline available for sale, but other services are available, a sign may be posted indicating that other services are available. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.75.020 Sign size.
    Any sign required or permitted by this chapter shall not exceed twenty square feet in area. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.75.030 Compliance with state law.
    Any sign required by this chapter shall meet the requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 13530 et seq. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.75.040 Relation to zoning ordinances.
    The provisions of this chapter shall supersede the provisions of Chapter 21, Fountain Valley Municipal Code (Zoning); except, that this chapter shall not be construed to require or authorize signs which would not be permitted by the applicable zoning regulations where it is possible to comply with the requirements of this chapter and the applicable zoning regulations; excepting further, that applications for conditional use permits shall not be required solely to conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.80 BINGO GAMES
4.80.010 Definition of bingo.
    As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.020 Organizations eligible for a city permit to conduct bingo games.
    Only those organizations authorized by Penal Code Section 326.5, subsection (a), shall be eligible to apply for a city permit and only if the receipts of such games are only used for charitable purposes. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.030 Permit—Applicant must be qualified.
    No permit shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 4.80.020 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.040 Permit—Contents of application.
    Each application shall contain the following:

    (1)    The name of the applicant organization and a statement setting forth how the organization is an eligible organization;

    (2)    The name, address and telephone number of all directors and officers of the organization or association;

    (3)    The bank(s) and account number(s) that will be utilized for all funds or proceeds generated by bingo games, or used to spend the funds or proceeds, along with a consent authorization for each such account to allow the city manager or chief of police or their designees access to those records. Prior notice shall be given to the organization before the city utilizes access to those records;

    (4)    A statement signed by the organization’s chief financial officer that he/she will keep adequate records documenting all receipts and expenditures and showing the purposes for all such expenditures;

    (5)    An identification of proposed expenditures from bingo proceeds;

    (6)    The name of a single individual who will ensure that all bingo games are conducted in accordance with the law. The individual will agree to be responsible for the conduct of the games. Names of all persons that will be assisting in operating any bingo game shall also be provided;

    (7)    A brief description of the organization and the purpose(s) that it serves with a narrative statement of how bingo proceeds will be used to further those purposes;

    (8)    A specific description of the premises on which the bingo games are proposed to be conducted, and an identification of whether the property is owned, leased or donated to the organization, and a description of the use or proposed use of the property for the organization’s purposes;

    (9)    A listing of the proposed days of week and hours of day for bingo games;

    (10)  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the permit to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon violation of any of such provisions;

    (11)  The signature of a duly authorized representative of the applicant under penalty or perjury;

    (12)  The license fee established by the city council;

    (13)  A certificate or determination of exemption under the Revenue and Taxation Code, letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board, or other evidence demonstrating eligibility;

    (14)  Such other information as is deemed necessary to evaluate eligibility.

    (b)    Permits may be renewed annually upon receipt of the annual permit fee along with the above information or such other information that will assure the issuing authority that the applicant should be granted a new permit. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.045 Permit—Daily fee.
    An applicant wishing to obtain a one day bingo permit may do so by providing the information as required under Sections 4.80.040 and 4.04.070 and paying a fee as set forth by city council resolution. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.050 Permit denial considerations.
    In addition to the general reasons for denying a permit application stated in Section 4.04.090, the license collector may deny a permit to conduct bingo games if it is found that any applicant organization or any person who is to be operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game, or who is a director, officer or managing employee of the organization:

    (a)    Has been convicted within the last five years of a crime including, but not limited to, lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud or similar crimes involving moral turpitude;

    (b)    Has committed any act within the last five years which would be a violation of Penal Code Section 326.5 or this chapter, regardless of whether that act resulted in a conviction. (Ord. 1225 § 2, 1995; Ord. 1221 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.060 Revocation—Reinstatement of exemption.
    Any organization whose permit is deemed revoked may not again apply for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.070 Permit—Required contents.
    Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager shall issue a permit to said applicant, which shall contain the following information:

    (a)    The name and nature of the organization to whom the permit is issued;

    (b)    The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

    (c)    The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

    (d)    The date of the expiration of such permit;

    (e)    Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.080 Personal services.
    No person shall receive or pay a wage, profit, salary or other compensation out of bingo proceeds for personal services rendered directly to the licensee, with the exception of security personnel. It is the intent of this section that no person shall receive a wage from bingo proceeds whether that wage is an employee or officer’s salary or whether it is paid to an independent contractor. It is also the intent of this section that personal services include all services rendered to the licensee, not just those relating to the bingo games. Only payments for direct personal services rendered to the licensee shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.090 Financial interest in licensee only.
    No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.100 Exclusive operation by licensee.
    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from such bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.110 Recordkeeping.
    (a)    All bingo income shall be documented to correspond to serialized tickets or such other memorialization approved by the chief of police to ensure that all income is reported. All expenditures shall be made by check with the specific purpose of the expenditure and the payee’s name recorded. Cash expenditures may only be made if a corresponding invoice is retained or if a properly executed declaration under penalty of perjury is provided documenting with specificity how such cash was spent. All income and expenses shall designate the date of the transaction and the documentation shall be recorded at or near the time of the transaction. A monthly tally sheet shall be submitted showing dates, and cumulative income, prizes, expenses, attendance, cards sold and other related cumulative information for each date’s games on a form provided by the city.

    (b)    The income and expenses reporting provisions of the ordinance codified in this section shall not apply to any organization that has bingo receipts of less than one hundred dollars per week. The organization shall provide proof that it comes within this exception. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.115 Independent audits.
    The license collector may require independent audits by a certified public accountant or other appropriate person whenever the license collector determines that such an accounting is necessary to understand a bingo permittee’s financial records. The cost of such an audit shall be paid for by the permittee as a condition of continued operation. (Ord. 1225 § 3, 1995; Ord. 1221 § 3, 1994)

 

4.80.120 Profits to be kept in separate fund or account.
    (a)    With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.

    (b)    With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes except as follows:

    (1)    Such proceeds may be used for prizes;

    (2)    A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel;

    (3)    Such proceeds may also be used to pay permit fees. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.130 Receipt of profit by a person—Misdemeanor.
    It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state of California for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.140 Bingo games open to public.
    All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the permittee organization. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.150 Hours of operation.
    Bingo games shall only be conducted on one calendar day in the week. No permittee shall conduct bingo games for more than six hours of any twenty-four-hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before ten a.m. or after eleven p.m. of any day. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may allow bingo to be played on more than one night of the week; provided, that not more than six hours of bingo is played during any one-week period. The city manager may also waive the limitations of this section for special occasions if it is determined that the public peace, safety, and welfare of the city so warrant. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.160 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
    Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building and safety department of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Permittee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.170 Bingo games conducted only on permittee’s property.
    A permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The permit issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the permittee is organized, the permit shall have no further force or effect. A new permit may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.180 Participation—Minors prohibited.
    No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that violations do not occur. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.190 Participation—Intoxicated persons prohibited.
    No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.200 Participation—Individual must be present.
    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.210 Maximum amount of prize.
    The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed the maximum amount set by state law for each separate game. (Ord. 1437 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

 

4.80.220 City may enjoin violation.
    The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.85 OFFICIAL POLICE TOWING
4.85.010 City referral towing service.
    The designation of “official police impound and garage and towing service” shall be awarded by the chief of police upon recommendation of the traffic bureau, pursuant to findings of public need from among meritorious applications who have offered the required services and facilities. Such designation shall remain in effect for a period of not more than five years. Such designation may be revoked by the chief of police upon finding of violation of one or more of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.020 City referral towing—Distribution of services.
    (a)    The city agrees that all towing services required by the city’s police department will be provided by two towing services according to the schedule of rotation of towing service calls set by the city’s police department. The city further agrees that the towing service rotation schedule set by the city’s police department will be structured as much as practicable, so that the city’s towing service calls will be fairly distributed among the tow service companies representing the city.

    (b)    Commencing May 1, 1995, the rotation schedule for tow agencies will be determined by the traffic bureau and notification given by letter from the chief of police.

    (c)    All appeals shall be made in writing to the city manager.  (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.130 City referral towing—Application.
    An application for city referral towing shall be filed with the chief of police on forms furnished by the chief of police, shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council, and shall contain the following information:

    (1)    The name, date of birth, driver’s license number, business and residence addresses of the applicant, if a natural person; or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business, and the name of its principal officers, together with their respective residence addresses; or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of the partners, or of the persons compromising such association or company, and the business and residence of each partner or person;

    (2)    A description of each tow truck or other vehicle proposed to be used by the applicant, together with vehicle identification numbers and state vehicle license numbers;

    (3)    The names, dates of birth, addresses and driver’s license numbers of all tow truck operators employed by the applicant;

    (4)    The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of the application, including if applicable, the business license and permit history while operating as a tow service;

    (5)    All criminal convictions or proceedings in which a plea of guilty or nolo contendere was entered, including vehicle code violations;

    (6)    Such other identification and information reasonably necessary for the chief of police to carry out the purposes of this chapter; with a description of its existing business operational area. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.140 City referral towing—Tow truck requirements.
    All tow agencies designated by the city as a referral towing agency must satisfy the following minimum requirements:

    (1)    Each tow agency shall have a minimum of three tow trucks in good operating condition available and ready to respond to calls at any time. Tow trucks may be inspected periodically by members of the police department traffic bureau. If inspection shows that the agency has less than three operational tow trucks, that agency will be taken out of rotation for a period of thirty days, or until there are three operating tow trucks after the first thirty-day period has passed.

    (2)    All towing equipment used by the towing agency must comply with the standards and requirements for such equipment set forth in the California Vehicle Code.

    (3)    All towing equipment used by the towing agency must be adequate to provide for the safe towing of any passenger vehicle, motorcycle or truck with gross vehicle weight rating fifteen thousand pounds. The towing agency must use standard tow trucks, not converted pick-up trucks, and have access to a flat bed tow truck and a tow vehicle capable of towing any trailer, tractor or similar heavy equipment which weighs fifteen thousand pounds gross vehicle weight or greater.

    (4)    Each tow truck must be equipped with a cable winch of sufficient size and capacity to retrieve vehicles which have left the traveled portions of roadways and come to rest in otherwise inaccessible locations.

    (5)    All tow operators must be proficient in unlocking locked vehicles without the owner’s key so as to quickly unlock vehicles upon request by a police officer.

    (6)    All tow trucks used by the tow agency shall be radio equipped with equipment approved by the city’s police department. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.150 City referral towing—Tow truck operators.
    All tow agency applicants must demonstrate sufficient ability on behalf of their tow truck operators to insure safe and proper disposition of their service responsibilities. Each tow truck operator shall possess a proper class of driver’s license according to Section 12804 of the California Vehicle Code. Proof of any of the following factors may result in denial of an applicant for city referral towing:

    (1)    The tow agency employs any tow truck operator who is under the age of eighteen years;

    (2)    The tow agency employs any tow truck operator who is a narcotics offender or uses dangerous drugs, or uses alcohol to an excessive degree;

    (3)    The tow agency employs any tow truck operator who has been convicted of moving violations showing disregard for public safety;

    (4)    The tow agency employs any tow truck operator who has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude within five years preceding the date of the application;

    (5)    The tow agency employs any tow truck operator who has been convicted of crime(s) involving theft(s) of vehicle(s) or part(s) therefrom;

    (6)    The tow agency employs any tow truck operator who does not hold a valid driver’s license of the appropriate class issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state or any other license which is required by the state;

    (7)    The tow agency has willfully furnished false information on its application or omitted information requested on the application. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.160 City referral towing—Storage requirements.
    City referral towing service agencies will be evaluated on their ability to provide a storage facility, including a business office, open vehicle storage area, and a fully enclosed structure capable of securing two vehicles.

    (1)    The fully enclosed parking structure shall be a minimum of five hundred square feet and shall be secured by a method approved by the Fountain Valley police department to prevent unauthorized access. Inside storage enclosures will be buildings provided with four walls (including access doors) and a roof. The structure(s) will be so constructed that the elements, particularly excessive moisture, and all unauthorized persons are prevented access. Impound space shall be fire resistant and possess adequate lighting for police investigations. If a tow service utilizes their public garage facility for inside storage, the space designated for the storage of police impounds shall be secured from the public. The impound area shall be separated from the remaining storage facility with wire mesh running from floor to ceiling or other approved fencing or wall(s)

    (2)    The open vehicle storage area shall be a minimum of five thousand square feet and shall be enclosed with a solid wall or a fence not less than six feet in height. The enclosure structure shall be provided with not less than one gate or door of adequate width and of a height equal to that specified above. The bottom edge of the enclosure structure shall not be more than two inches above the finished parking surface of the enclosed area. The five thousand square foot vehicle storage area shall not include fire lanes, driveways, landscape or buildings and shall be used exclusively for the temporary storage of impounded vehicles. Lots must be equipped so as to provide adequate lighting during the hours of darkness. The parking surface shall be finished paved asphalt or other approved material and/or gravel with sufficient runoff. The top edge of the fence or wall enclosure, including all gates or doors thereto, for open areas provided with roof shall be equipped with not less than two strands of barbed wire installed in such a manner as to discourage access over the top of the fence or wall. In cases where wire mesh is attached to the roof, the barbed wire will not be required or a wire mesh installation erected inside of a building need not be provided with barbed wire. All fence or wall enclosure structures shall be maintained in good order. Any damage to such fence or wall structures shall be repaired within twenty-four hours to insure proper protection for the stored vehicles. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.170 City referral towing—Storage inspection.
    (a)    Police-authorized tow service’s facilities will be inspected by the police, fire, health and building departments and approved by each prior to the placement of the towing service on the police department call list.

    (b)    Police-authorized tow service facility or facilities and equipment will be inspected annually by the police department, and a report filed thereon.

    If any deficiencies and/or requirement violations are discovered, the tow service will be so advised in writing. The tow service will be given a two-week (fourteen calendar days) period to rectify the deficiency or violation. Failure to comply will result in the tow service being suspended from the police department call list until the deficiency or violation is corrected. Subsequent deficiency and/or requirement violations will result in action as deemed necessary by the chief of police. The chief of police may suspend or revoke a tow service permit for subsequent deficiency and/or requirement violations. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.180 City referral towing—Response time.
    All tow service agency applicants must demonstrate their ability to respond to all requests for tow service by the city’s police department within twenty minutes of such requests, ninety-five percent of the time. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

 

4.85.190 Removal of debris.
    On accident calls, each tow service shall clean up and remove all debris from the accident as required by the police department. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.200 Tow service—Fee.
    A tow service fee shall be charged the recipient of a police impound tow service at the time that the police department’s release is obtained. No vehicle shall be authorized to be released from impound until said fee has been paid to the city. The tow service fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.210 City referral towing—Legal and insurance requirements.
    Each referral towing agency shall be evaluated as to its conformance with the following legal and insurance requirements:

    (1)    The tow service shall keep itself fully informed and must comply with all existing and future state and county laws and municipal ordinances and regulations which, in any manner, affects towing and storage of vehicles.

    (2)    The tow agency agrees that no discrimination shall be made in the employment of persons based on disability, race, color, national origin, ancestry or religion of such persons. A violation of this provision will subject the tow agency to all of the penalties imposed by law. All facilities shall comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act and other disabled access laws.

    (3)    Insurance. The tow agency shall submit to the city certificates indicating compliance with the following minimum insurance not less that five working days prior to the beginning of performance:

    (A)   Worker’s compensation insurance to cover its employees as required by California Labor Code;

    (B)   Comprehensive general commercial liability insurance, with a minimum personal injury liability limits of one million dollars per person and one million dollars per occurrence or combined single limits of one million dollars. Each such insurance policy shall:

    (i)     Be issued to an insurance company which is admitted to do business in the state and has a sufficient rating in Best’s Key Rating Guide as determined by city, or which is otherwise approved in writing by the city,

    (ii)    Name and list as additional insured the city, its officers and employees and provide the city with an endorsement evidencing the same,

    (iii)   Specify it acts as primary insurance,

    (iv)   Contain a clause substantially in the following words:

 

    It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor materially changed except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice thereof given to the City by registered or certified mail

 

    (v)    Cover the operations of the tow agency.

    Additionally, tow agency shall notify the city by registered or certified mail within fifteen days of any change which narrows or limits the scope of coverage provided. For purposes of this section, “scope of coverage” shall include the types of acts or omissions covered as well as the amounts of coverage provided;

    (C)   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance, including as applicable, owned, hired, and nonowned automobiles, with minimum personal injury liability limits of one million dollars per person, one million dollars per occurrence or combined single limits of one million dollars. Each policy of insurance shall:

    (i)     Be issued to an insurance company which is admitted to do business in the state of California or which is approved in writing by the city,

    (ii)    Name and list as additional insured the city, its officers and employees and provide the city with an endorsement evidencing the same,

    (iii)   Specify it acts as primary insurance,

    (iv)   Contain a clause substantially in the following words:

 

    It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor materially change except upon thirty (30) days’ prior written notice thereof given to the city by registered or certified mail.

 

    Additionally, tow agency shall notify the city by registered or certified mail within fifteen days of any change which narrows or limits the scope of coverage provided. For purposes of this section, “scope of coverage” shall include the types of acts or omissions covered as well as the amounts of coverage provided. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.220 City referral towing—Indemnification.
    Tow agency shall be responsible for any damage to persons or property arising in connection with their performance of services rendered pursuant to this resolution. Tow agency shall agree to indemnify the city, its officers and employees, against, and will hold and save them and each of them harmless from, any and all actions, claims, damages to persons, or by any firm, entity, corporation, political subdivision or other organization arising out of the wilful or negligent acts, errors or omissions of tow agency or its agents. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.230 Agreement.
    Official police tow operators may be required to enter into an agreement with the city setting forth their duties. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

 

4.85.240 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not to exceed six months, or by both a fine and imprisonment, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 1279 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 4.90 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
4.90.010 Purpose.
    (a)    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a permitting and regulatory program for sidewalk vendors that complies with Senate Bill 946 (Chapter 459, Statutes 2018). The provisions of this chapter allow the city to encourage small business activities by removing total prohibitions on portable food stands and certain forms of solicitation while still permitting regulation and enforcement of unpermitted sidewalk vending activities to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare.

    (b)    The city council hereby finds that to promote the public’s health, safety and welfare, restrictions on sidewalk vending are necessary to:

    (1)    Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;

    (2)    Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, firefighting apparatus, mailboxes, as well as access to locations used for public transportation services;

    (3)    Reduce exposure to the city for personal injury or property damage claims and litigation; and

    (4)    Ensure sidewalk vending activities occur only in locations where such activities would not restrict sidewalk and pathway access and enjoyment to individuals with disabilities. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 2019)

 

4.90.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

    “Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter.

    “Curb face” means the vertical or sloping surface on the roadway side of the curb.

    “Emergency vehicle access” means the roadway path or other surface that provides police or fire vehicular access from the dispatched point of origin to a facility, building, parcel, park or portion thereof. Emergency vehicle access includes, but is not limited to, fire lanes, public and private streets, parking lot lanes, access roadways, and walkways.

    “Food” means any item provided in Health and Safety Code Section 113781, or any successor section.

    “Heating element” means any device used to create heat for food preparation.

    “Merchandise” means any item(s) that can be sold and immediately obtained from a sidewalk vendor which is not considered food. Items for rent shall not be considered merchandise.

    “Park” means any area as defined in Section 12.08.030 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code.

    “Pathway” means a paved path or walkway for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

    “Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city.

    “Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the city, including, but not limited to, alleys, parks, pathways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and trails.

    “Residential” means any area zoned exclusively as residential in Chapter 21.08 of this code, including, without limitation, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, AH, and GH zoning districts and specific plan areas.

    “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

    “Sidewalk vending receptacle” means a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or non-motorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending activities.

    “Sidewalk vendor” or “vendor” means a person(s) who sells food or merchandise from a sidewalk vending receptacle or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or pathway.

    “Sidewalk vendor activities” or “sidewalk vending activity” means actions that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in anticipation of becoming a sidewalk vendor such as, but not limited to, installation, placement, or maintenance of any sidewalk vendor receptacles.

    “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

    “Street” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

    “Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 2019)

 

4.90.030 Permit required.
    (a)    Permit Required. No person, either for him or herself or any other person, shall engage in any sidewalk vendor activities within the city without first applying for and receiving a permit from the city manager, or designee, in accordance with this chapter.

    (b)    Application. A written application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be filed with the city manager, or designee, on a form provided by the city and shall contain the following information:

    (1)    The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to become a sidewalk vendor;

    (2)    The California driver’s license or identification number, individual taxpayer identification number, or municipal identification number (which shall not be available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the permit or comply with a state law or state or federal court order);

    (3)    The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be responsible for the person(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle;

    (4)    The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will be employed as roaming sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle;

    (5)    The number of sidewalk vending receptacles the sidewalk vendor will operate within the city under the permit;

    (6)    Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;

    (7)    The location(s) in the city where the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate;

    (8)    The day(s) and hours of operation the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate at such location(s);

    (9)    The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle(s), including a picture of each sidewalk vending receptacle operating under the permit;

    (10)  Whether the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, merchandise, or both;

    (11)  If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, a description of the type of food to be sold, whether such foods are prepared on site, and whether the vendor requires a heating element to prepare the food;

 

    (12)  If the vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the merchandise to be sold;

    (13)  California Department of Tax and Fee Administration sales tax number, if any;

    (14)  An acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all other generally applicable local, state, and federal laws;

    (15)  A certification that, to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained within the application is true and correct;

    (16)  An acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor’s use of public property is at their own risk and the city does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities; and

    (17)  Any other relevant information required by the city manager.

    (c)    Application and Permit Fees. Each application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution of the city council. The application and permit are only applicable to the individual(s) named on the application. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 2019)

 

4.90.040 Issuance of permit.
    (a)    The city manager, or designee, may issue a sidewalk vendor permit, with appropriate conditions, as provided for herein, if he or she finds based on all of the relevant information that:

    (1)    The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare;

    (2)    The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the vendor;

    (3)    The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;

    (4)    The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not require the diversion of police officers to properly police the area of such activity so as to interfere with normal police protection for other areas of the city;

    (5)    The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required information;

    (6)    The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the application process;

    (7)    The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this chapter;

    (8)    The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by city council resolution;

    (9)    The sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle and proposed activities conform to the requirements of this chapter;

    (10)  The vendor has satisfactorily provided all information requested by the city manager to consider the vendor’s application; and

    (11)  The sidewalk vendor has not applied for a permit during the term of a permit rescinded pursuant to Section 4.90.070(e).

    (b)    A sidewalk vendor permit is non-transferable. Any change in ownership or operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending receptacle requires a new permit under this chapter.

    (c)    All permits issued under this chapter, regardless of when issued, expire on December 31 of the year in which they were issued. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 2019)

 

4.90.050 Operating conditions.
    All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when conducting sidewalk vending activities:

    (a)    All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle, the overall space taken up by the sidewalk vendor receptacle shall not exceed the size requirements provided in this section.

    (b)    The sidewalk vendor permit shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle or the sidewalk vendor’s person. If multiple sidewalk vendors are staffing a sidewalk vendor receptacle or working as roaming sidewalk vendors, each person shall wear their permit on their person in a conspicuous manner.

    (c)    Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities. Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not be stored on public property and shall be removed when not in active use by a vendor.

    (d)    All sidewalk vendors shall allow a city police officer, firefighter, or code enforcement officer, at any time, to inspect their sidewalk vending receptacle for compliance with the size requirements of this chapter and to ensure the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.

    (e)    Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not exceed a total height of three feet, a total width of three feet, and a total length of three feet.

    (f)    No sidewalk vending receptacle shall be motorized.

    (g)    If a sidewalk vending receptacle requires more than one person to conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all sidewalk vendors associated with the sidewalk vending receptacle shall be within five feet of the sidewalk vending receptacle when conducting sidewalk vending activities.

    (h)    Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain a trash container in or on their sidewalk vending receptacle and shall not empty their trash into public trashcans. The size of the vendor’s trash container shall be taken into account when assessing the total size limit of a sidewalk vending receptacle. Sidewalk vendors shall not leave any location without first picking up, removing, and disposing of all trash or refuse from their operation.

    (i)     Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a minimum four-foot clear accessible path free from obstructions, including sidewalk vending receptacles and customer queuing area.

    (j)     Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the noise standards provided in Chapter 6.28 of this code, and any successor chapters.

    (k)    Sidewalk vendors shall not approach persons to sell food or merchandise and shall not interfere in any way with anyone engaged in an activity to sell food or merchandise.

    (l)     Sidewalk vendors shall not vend to or otherwise conduct transactions with persons in moving vehicles or vehicles illegally parked or stopped.

    (m)   Sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, grease or other fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities that falls on public property. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 2019)

 

4.90.060 Prohibited activities and locations.
    (a)    Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all operating conditions, including those conditions set forth in Section 4.90.050.

    (b)    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:

    (1)    Renting merchandise to customers.

    (2)    Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate sale.

    (3)    Selling cannabis or alcohol.

    (4)    Using an open flame on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle.

    (5)    All sidewalk vendors, regardless of whether a roaming sidewalk vendor or stationary sidewalk vendor, are prohibited from conducting sidewalk vending activities between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. daily. In residential areas, all stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited. In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vending activity is prohibited between the hours of six p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, and nine a.m. of the following day, Monday through Saturday, inclusive, and all day on Sundays and federal holidays.

    (6)    Continuing to offer food or merchandise for sale, following, or accompanying any person who has been offered food or merchandise after the person has asked the vendor to leave or after the person has declined the offer to purchase food or merchandise.

    (7)    Blocking or impeding the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase.

    (c)    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at the following locations:

    (1)    Within twelve inches of any curb face on all roads.

    (2)    Within fifteen feet of any entrance or exit to a building, structure or facility.

    (3)    On any designated emergency vehicle accessway.

    (4)    On any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk or pathway including, without limitation, any alley, park, street, roadway or parking lot.

    (5)    Within the immediate vicinity of an area designated for a temporary special event pursuant to a street or special event permit issued by the city pursuant to Sections 8.50.010 and 8.50.020, during the limited duration of the temporary special event or street permit.

    (6)    On any private property without the express written consent of the owner or lessee of the property.

    (7)    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within fifty feet of another sidewalk vendor.

    (8)    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within one hundred feet of a school, a place of worship, or a child day-care facility.

    (9)    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within two hundred feet of a permitted certified farmers’ market or swap meet during the operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or swap meet.

    (10)  Stationary sidewalk vending activities shall only occur on sidewalks or pathways with a minimum width of eight feet or larger.

    (11)  Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within twenty-five feet of a:

    (A)   Fire hydrant;

    (B)   Curb which has been designated as yellow or red zone, or a bus zone;

    (C)   Automated teller machine;

    (D)   Driveway, alley, or street corner;

    (E)   Trash or recycling receptacle, bike rack, bench, bus stop or similar public use item; or

    (F)    Public art object, item, and display.

    (12)  Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within the fifteen-foot corner cutback area, as defined in Section 21.18.040.

    (13)  Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities that would violate provisions of this code relating to visibility requirements for streets, alleys, driveways, and intersections.

    (14)  Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not sell food or merchandise or engage in any sidewalk vending activities at any park where the city has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire.

    (15)  Within two hundred feet of any public safety facility, including, without limitation, police stations and fire stations.

    (16)  Within twenty-four inches of a parallel parking space.

    (17)  On any sidewalk not adjacent to a state highway where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than four feet.

    (18)  On any sidewalk adjacent to a state highway where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than five feet, with temporary restrictions of no less than three feet.

    (19)  On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would restrict access requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

    (20)  On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would jeopardize the fire or life safety of any person.

    (d)    Sidewalk vending receptacles and merchandise shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to: lampposts, parking meters, mail boxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans, or traffic barriers. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 2019)

 

4.90.070 Penalties.
    (a)    Violations of this chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors and shall only be punished by the following:

    (b)    Any violation of this chapter may be punished by:

    (1)    An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

    (2)    An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

    (3)    An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

    (c)    If a sidewalk vendor violates any portion of this chapter and cannot present the citing officer with a proof of a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor may be punished by:

    (1)    An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation;

    (2)    An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

    (3)    An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

    (d)    Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the city, the administrative fines set forth in subsection (c) shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in subsection (b), or any successor sections.

    (e)    The city manager, or designee, may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations.

    (f)    When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to subsection (b), the person’s ability to pay the fine will be taken into consideration. The person will be provided with instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination from the city manager, or designee. The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive collection program.

    (1)    If the person requesting an ability-to-pay determination meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b) of Government Code Section 68632, the city manager, or designee, shall accept, in full satisfaction, twenty percent of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to subsection (b).

    (2)    The city manager, or designee, may also allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 2019)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapter 5.08 LICENSE FEES

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES
5.04.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Words and phrases used in this title not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved use of the language.

    Average Number of Employees. “The average number of employees” for any business having a fixed location in the city means the average number of persons employed daily for the preceding twelve-month period. For new businesses, the average number of employees shall be based upon an estimate by the owner of average number of employees to be employed daily for the succeeding twelve-month period. “The average number of employees” for any business not having a fixed location in the city means the average number of persons employed daily within the city for the period during which the applicant for a license conducts such business. This average shall be determined by using the three days in which the greatest number of persons is employed.

    Business. As used in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, “business” includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kind of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for the purpose of earning a profit or livelihood whether or not a profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby. Business shall include, but is not limited to, trades and occupations of all brokers, retailers, wholesalers, vendors, suppliers, peddlers, professions, the renting or supplying of living quarters, or rooms, or board, or both for six or more guests, tenants or occupiers in any other type of endeavor entered into within the city for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit whether paid for in money, goods, labor, or otherwise and whether or not the business, profession or trade has a fixed place of business in the city.

    “City” shall mean the city of Fountain Valley.

    Contractor. Any person who is licensed as a contractor with the state of California and who undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submit a bid to or does himself or by or through others construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, wreck, or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation, or other structure, project, development, or improvement or to do any part thereof including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith is defined as a “contractor.” “Contractor” includes subcontractor and specialty contractor.

    “Employee” as used in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in said business within the city.

    Gross Receipts. As used in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, “gross receipts” includes the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” are all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” are cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded whether in cash or by credit; amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected; receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; that amount of gross receipts which has been the measure of a license tax paid previously to any other city.

    “License collector” means the fiscal services manager and/or finance director and he/she shall be charged with the administration of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 and with promulgating rules and regulations to administer Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. He/she shall be responsible for the collection of the moneys due in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

    License Collector, Deputy City. “Deputy city license collector” means the person authorized to act in behalf of the license collector and shall serve as the license collector in his/her absence.

    License Period, Annual. The fee for “annual license period” shall be payable in advance. If the application is made on or before the fifteenth day of the month, the license will be dated and be effective from the first day of said month. If the application is made after the fifteenth day, it will be dated and effective the first day of the succeeding month.

    License Period, Daily. The “daily license period” shall commence at eight a.m. of any day and expire at eight a.m. of the following day.

    License Period, Monthly. The “monthly license period” shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on the day of issuance and terminate at twelve midnight on the same day of the following month with the exception of a license obtained in the last month of the fiscal year which shall expire on the thirtieth day of June.

    License Period, Quarterly. A “quarterly license” may only be issued to contractor pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08.030. The quarterly license shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on the date of the issuance and shall terminate at twelve midnight on the last day of the calendar quarter in which the permit is issued, except that a license issued within the last fifteen days of a calendar quarter shall expire on the last day of the next succeeding calendar quarter.

    “Owner/builder” means any person who obtains a building permit for the construction, reconstruction, installation or removal of improvements to a structure defined as an “R1” occupancy by the Uniform Building Code, adopted by the city, and who is the owner of the property, shall be deemed an “owner/builder.”

    Person. As used in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, “person” includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, businesses, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business or activity in the city, other than as an employee, whether pursued as a profit or nonprofit organization.

    “Subdivider, developer, realtor” means any person conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of acquiring, subdividing, improving, selling, or otherwise dealing in and/or disposing of real property as an independent contractor and not as an employee of another including but not limited to one who constructs improvements upon real property with the object of selling or renting the same shall be defined as a “subdivider,” “developer,” or “realtor.”

    “Subdivision” means the business of dividing, subdividing, or parceling of real property and the sale of such subdivided parcels. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.020 Intent.
    It is the intent of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 that the license collector be the administrator of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 with the powers and restrictions set upon him in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.030 Revenue measure.
    The fees, charges, penalties, deposits and all other sources of revenue to the city expressed in this ordinance are adopted and charged solely for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.040 Substitute for other revenue ordinances.
    Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.050 Effect of ordinance on past actions and obligations previously accrued.
    Unless otherwise stated, any present or future modifications or amendments to this ordinance or the present or future superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall be construed to affect the following:

    (1)    The prosecution for any violation committed prior to any present of future modifications or amendments to this title;

    (2)    The validity of any bond or cash deposit required by an ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations pertaining to any bond or cash deposits;

    (3)    The payment of any license or penal provision applicable to any violation committed prior to any present or future amendments or modifications to this title;

    (4)    Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for said business by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.060 Compliance with governmental regulations.
    Every business, trade, profession or service which additionally requires any federal, state or local regulatory license or permit, shall present evidence to the license collector of satisfactory compliance with such regulations prior to the issuance of any business license under this title. Additionally, no license shall be issued by the license collector to any business or service which fails to present any land use permit required by the Fountain Valley Zoning Ordinance, Title 21, or which has failed to comply with the provisions of any other regulation of this code having to do with trades, businesses or occupations. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.070 License collector—Powers.
    (a)    The license collector, at his discretion, is authorized to require city council approval or city manager approval for any business which is not specifically provided for in Chapter 5.04 or Chapter 5.08 and which, in his opinion, should have approval of the city council or city manager.

    (b)    The license collector is authorized to issue a special youth permit to any self-employed person eighteen years of age and under that qualifies for licensing under Category “Y” as set forth in Section 5.08.030.

    (c)    The license collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the power to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due in the public interest. He/she shall be further empowered to modify or limit the expiration date of any business license and to make other administrative and discretionary judgment as the public interest may require.

    (d)    The license collector is authorized to establish a list of specific businesses that are included within each of the categories set forth in general terms by Section 5.08.030. This list shall be reviewed and updated periodically so as to be as all-inclusive as possible. The list shall be kept on file in the offices of the license collector and city clerk and shall be available for use by the general public. The classification of any business into a general category shall be at the reasonable determination of the license collector as the administrator of this title. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the license collector shall have the right to appeal to the city council for a final decision. Notice of the appeal must be submitted to the city clerk in writing within ten days after notification by the license collector of his decision.

    (e)    The license collector may issue a license to a contractor, specialty contractor or subcontractor under the terms and conditions described in Section 5.08.040. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.080 License required.
    There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from said city or to do so without complying with any and all applicable provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

    This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable laws of the United States or of the state of California. Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.090 Application.
    (a)    All applications for licenses pursuant to this title shall be in writing and upon a form issued by the license collector. Applications shall be accepted by mail or in person at City Hall during regular business hours. Each form shall ask for general information for each business; specific information for each type of business may be required to be submitted to the city to conduct its investigation or to maintain its records concerning the business. General business information on the application shall include:

    (1)    The name, including any aliases, the date of birth, driver’s license number, social security number, and physical description of the applicant;

    (2)    Information as to whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation or joint venture;

    (3)    The full legal name of the business as well as the precise name under which the business is to be conducted;

    (4)    The signature of the owner of the business if it is owned by an individual, the signatures of the partners if the business is a partnership or the signatures of the president and the secretary if the business is a corporation;

    (5)    The home and business addresses and telephone numbers of the owner of the business if the business is owned by an individual, the home and business addresses and telephone numbers of the partners if the business is a partnership, and, if the business is a corporation, the home and business addresses and telephone numbers of all corporate officers of the business and all stockholders of the business holding greater than five percent of the stock in the business;

    (6)    If the business is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the application;

    (7)    A statement on the application, or as described in Section 5.04.100, acknowledging that any false information stated on the application is subject to prosecution under the penalty of perjury.

    (8)    A minimum fee to be set forth in a schedule to be adopted by city council resolution is required for the processing of any license application. The processing fee shall not be charged in addition to the license fee due, however, if the application is rejected as described in Section 5.04.190, the license fee collected minus the amount of the license processing fee shall be refunded to the applicant. The fee shall not be refunded if the application is rejected.

    (b)    Neither the filing of an application for a license, or renewal thereof, nor the payment of an application or renewal fee shall authorize a person to conduct business until such license or renewal has been granted or renewed. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.100 Applications—Supplementary statement.
    (a)    In all cases where the license is based upon gross receipts, the licensee shall submit to the license collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the licensee, a written statement, upon a form to be provided by the license collector, written under penalty of perjury, or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths setting forth such information concerning the licensee’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the license collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by the licensee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.08.

    (b)    The license collector is authorized to determine the probable gross receipts and make assessments therefrom on any new business which does not possess an existing record of gross receipts. Any error in such assessment as to overpayments and underpayments shall be added to or deleted from the business license fee on the subsequent annual assessment of such new business.

    (c)    The accuracy of all statements of gross receipts shall be subject to audit and verification by the license collector or his or her properly authorized deputies or assistants. The license collector is authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons licensed to carry on any business pursuant to this title. No statement filed by a person pursuant to this title shall be conclusive on any matters contained therein. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.110 Declaration of truth statement.
    (a)    Wherever in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 an application, return or statement is required to be filed with the license collector, each such application, return, or statement shall have included therein, or attached thereto, a certification or declaration, which shall be substantially in the following form:

    I declare, under penalty of perjury; that this application, return or statement (including any accompanying schedules, statements, and supporting data) has been examined by me, and, to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, is a full, true and correct application, return, or statement and I accordingly so represent.

 

    _________________________        ____

    Signature of Owner, Partner,                Date

    or Officer of Corporation (if a corporation)

 

    _________________________        ____

    Signature of Owner, Partner,                Date

    Manager, President, Vice-President,

    or Secretary.

         (Use one)

 

    (b)    The license collector shall not be required to receive, or consider, any application, return or statement unless the above quoted declaration, in substantially in the form hereinabove set forth, is contained therein or attached thereto and properly executed by the applicant or the authorized agent or representative of the applicant, and it is unlawful in any such application, return or statement for such applicant or authorized agent or representative of the applicant to make any statement which is false or which is contrary to the declaration or representation made in the above quoted form. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.120 Contractors statement required.
    Any general engineering contractor, general building contractor, specialty contractor or subcontractor, before engaging in business within the city, or applying for a renewal of a business license, shall file, or have on file, with the city, a signed statement that such licensee or applicant is duly licensed under state law including the Business and Professions Code of the state of California. Such statement shall state the contractor’s license number and that it is in full force and effect or, if the applicant is exempt from having such a required license under the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, he shall furnish proof of the facts that entitle him to such exemption.

    All contractors, subcontractors and builders, whether building for their own occupancy or not, shall file with the license collector a full, true and complete written list, signed by such contractor or builder, of all subcontractors performing any service whatever for such contractor or builder within the city for which a license is required under the provisions of this title before such subcontractors actually commence work on the building, structure, or project. Any subcontractor subcontracting any work shall be deemed a contractor for the purpose of this section.

    Final inspection on any building, structure, or project shall not be given by the building department until all contractors, subcontractors, or servicing businesses performing any work on such building, structure, or project are duly licensed. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.130 Affidavit—First license.
    Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the license collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the license collector, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.140 Personal application information confidential.
    All personal application information included on all applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this section for the purpose of ascertaining business license fees shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection. Personal application business license application information is any home address or telephone information required by Section 5.04.090(a)(5) and any information required by Section 5.04.090(a)(1) It shall be the duty of the license collector to preserve and keep the statements so that the contents thereof may not become known except as required by law. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.150 Preliminary license.
    Upon receipt of such application form, properly completed, the license collector shall collect from the applicant, at the time of the issuance of the license, the license fee determined by the estimated amount or number set forth in such application, and shall issue to such applicant a preliminary license for the license year, subject to filing of a supplementary statement as required by the license collector. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.170 Bonds—Execution.
    Where, by the terms of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, a bond is required to be furnished by any person securing or applying for a license, such person shall, before the issuance to him of such license, deliver to the city clerk a bond executed by any reliable surety company. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.180 Bonds—Form.
    The amount, form and substance of said bond shall be as required by the city attorney and approved by him in each case. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.190 License approval and denial.
    The license collector, after review of the application, may grant or deny an application for a business license. Within sixty days after the receipt of the application, the license collector shall mail to the applicant, postage prepaid, notice as to whether the license has been granted or denied. If the license collector should deny the application, the notice shall also inform the applicant as to the reasons why the license was denied and shall inform the applicant of his right to an administrative hearing before the city manager as provided for in Section 4.04.115 of this code. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.230 Payment of license fee—License as a receipt.
    All license fees shall be paid in lawful money of the United States of America.

    (a)    The applicant shall make payment of the license fee at the time of the application as set forth in Chapter 5.08. The business license issued in exchange for the license fee constitutes as receipt for the license fee paid and shall have no other legal effect. A business license is a requirement, not a permit, to conduct business activity within the city and shall not be construed as an authorization to conduct or to continue any illegal or unlawful business.

    (b)    Business license fees are not refundable except if a business is not approved by the city. If it is a business that does not need city approval, then half of the business fee may be refunded upon receipt.

    (c)    All discrepancies in the business license fee paid shall be adjusted and corrected within the licensing period. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.240 License tax—When payable and determination of due dates.
    (a)    All annual license taxes under  provisions  of  Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be due and payable as follows:

    (1)    Gross Receipts Basis. Payable in advance on the first day of the annual license period;

    (2)    Flat Rate Basis and Number of Employees or Vehicles Basis. Payable in advance on the first day of the annual license period;

    (3)    All Other Licenses. Payable in advance at the time of issuance of the license by the license collector;

    (4)    First License. All businesses obtaining a license for the first time shall pay the current license fee prior to the commencement of business or operations.

    (b)    The annual license fee due date and expiration date shall be determined in the following manner:

    (1)    If the license is initially issued on or before the fifteenth day of the month, the annual license fee due date and expiration date will be the first day of that month.

    (2)    If the license is initially issued after the fifteenth day of the month, the license fee due date and expiration date shall be the first day of the following month. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.250 License renewal and delinquency.
    (a)    Every person or business making application for the renewal of a license shall furnish to the license collector for guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a signed written statement, under oath, upon a form provided by the license collector, setting forth such information pertaining to the preceding year as may be required herein to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

    (b)    The license collector shall not issue to any such person or business a license for the same business, until such person or company shall have furnished to him the written statement and paid the license tax herein required.

    (c)    For failure of any business to pay a license tax when due, the license collector shall add a penalty as set forth by city council resolution. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.260 Exemptions.
    (a)    Nothing in this section shall apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to municipal corporations of such taxes as are prescribed in this section.

    (b)    The provisions of this section shall not require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, fraternal or scientific purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the city whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any casual sales, entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts of such casual sales, entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed, and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person; provided that nothing in this section shall exempt any such organization or association from complying with the provisions of this code or any city ordinance requiring a permit from the city council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade, calling or occupation.

    “Casual sales” as used in this section mean the sales or offer for sale of goods, wares, merchandise or food products for a period not exceeding seven days, except that casual sales shall not include the sale or offer for sale of Christmas trees from November 15th to December 26th of any year.

    (c)    Interstate Commerce. Every person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license provided for in this section upon the ground that such license casts a burden upon his rights to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among several states, or conflicts with the regulations of the United States Congress respecting interstate commerce, shall file a verified statement with the license collector disclosing the interstate or other character of his business entitling such exemption. Such statement shall state the name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and his address, the kind of goods to be delivered, the name from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded, the method of solicitation or taking orders, the location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state of California, the method of delivery, the name and location of the residence of the applicant and any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption. A copy of the order blank, contract form or other papers used by such person in taking orders shall be attached to the affidavit for the information of the license collector. If it appears that the applicant is entitled to such exemption, the license collector shall forthwith issue a free license. In case of such a dispute, the advice of the city attorney shall be sought.

    (d)    Exemption Under Other Provisions of Federal or State Law. Every person claiming to be entitled to an exemption from payment of any license fee provided for in this section upon the ground that such license fee is exempt under federal or state law shall file a verified statement with the license collector disclosing the character of the business entitling such exemption. The statement shall state the name and location of the company or firm claiming the exemption, the type of business conducted and facts establishing that the person, organization or firm comes within the exemption of the federal or state law. Additional information shall be supplied to the license collector, or city attorney upon request, in order to ascertain whether or not the claimant meets the exemption of the federal or state law.

    (e)    Public Utility and Franchise Holders Exemption. All public utilities or privately owned public utilities which are holders of a franchise from the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this business license law.

    (f)    Exempt Licenses to be Endorsed. Whenever the license collector shall issue any license granting any exemption provided for in this chapter, the person to whom such license is issued shall endorse thereon his signature in ink in the presence of the license collector or his or her designee, and no such license shall be transferable. Any such exempt license shall be issued by the license collector only for the minimum license period of any such business, and may be renewed for the same period under the same conditions and in the same manner as originally obtained.

    (g)    Revocation of License Exemptions. At any time that it shall appear to the satisfaction of the license collector that none of the conditions specified in this chapter as meriting exemption from license requirements exists as to any person to whom any such exemption has been allowed, the license collector may revoke such exemption and the exempt license issued thereunder. The revocation shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 4.04.100 of the municipal code. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.270 Nontransferability of license—Amendment for changed location.
    No license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be transferable as to applicant; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such license may, upon application therefor and paying a fee as set forth by city council resolution, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under such license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.280 Duplicate license.
    A duplicate license may be issued by the license collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact and at the same time of filing such statement, paying to the license collector a duplicate license fee as set forth by city council resolution. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.290 Posting and keeping licenses.
    All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:

    (1)    Any license transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

    (2)    Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business.

    (3)    Any licensee transacting and carrying on business as a solicitor going from house to house or place to place must have his or her soliciting badge or license prominently displayed by attaching it to his/her clothing. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.300 Requirements for branch establishments and partnerships.
    A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license.

    In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the city is organized as a partnership or joint venture, the scheduled license fee need be paid only by the partnership or joint venture and not by such individual partner or joint venture. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.310 Two or more businesses at same location.
    Every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost rental or commission basis, as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed under any provision of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to the appropriate provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, and shall be subject to all of the provisions of chapters 5.04 and 5.08.

    Except as otherwise expressly provided in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, any person conducting, managing or carrying on two or more businesses under the same business name, licensed by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, at the same location shall be required to apply for and obtain a license for only one of such businesses; provided, however, that if the amount of such license differs for such businesses, such person shall obtain a license for that business for which the largest amount or fee is provided by Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.320 Enforcement.
    It shall be the duty of the license collector, and he is directed to enforce each and all provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. The city’s law enforcement agency, building and safety director or representative, city clerk, and any other authorized representative of the city shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the license collector.

    The license collector and/or the city law enforcement agency in the exercise of their duties imposed upon them hereunder and acting through their deputies or duly authorized assistants shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 have been complied with.

    The license collector and each and all of his assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein, and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person having such license certificate theretofore issued in his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. It shall be the duty of the license collector and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of said provisions. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.330 Remedies cumulative.
    All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.340 License tax—A debt.
    The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties due.

    In the event the city must institute legal action to enforce any of its rights under Chapters 5.04 and 5.08, the licensee shall pay the city reasonable court costs and attorney’s fees which the city has incurred. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.350 Waiver of ordinance.
    The council or city manager may modify or waive any requirements of the ordinance codified herein including fees, upon proper showing to the council or city manager by the applicant that such waiver or modification would promote the general welfare of the community. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.04.360 Penalty for violation.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of the ordinance codified herein or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine set forth by city council resolution or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

Chapter 5.08 LICENSE FEES
5.08.010 Rates fixed and designated—Chapter purpose.
    (a)    The various rates for license fees charged by the city to persons commencing or conducting any business that requires a license as described in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 shall be designated in Chapter 5.08 and by resolution implementing the same. All business license fees described in Chapter 5.04 and Chapter 5.08 are designated, fixed and established for businesses to which they relate.

    (b)    The determination of starting a business, engaging in, or undertaking a business venture shall be as determined by the city, through the license collector. Such determinations shall be made in accordance with policy standards duly published and made available to all interested and affected persons. Any determination made by the license collector shall be appealable to the city council by the affected person.

    (c)    The intention and purpose of the city is to require a license from, and the payment of a license fee by, each and every person commencing or conducting any business within the city unless such business be expressly exempted from such requirements by the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 or by law.

    (d)    The city council finds and determines that the categories for licensing as set forth herein are reasonable, are based upon the particular experience in Fountain Valley of various business practices, and that each such category relates specifically to the types of businesses included therein. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.08.020 Fees—Based on categories, average number of employees and number of vehicles.
    (a)    There is established a business license fee, known as the “base fee” which is determined according to category and based upon the average number of employees and number of vehicles operated in excess of one. The “base fee” shall be applicable to all categories of businesses in Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. The total fee shall consist of the base fee which includes the company, owner or one employee and one vehicle, plus a separate fee for each additional employee and a separate fee for each additional vehicle and, where applicable, additional fees as outlined in Section 5.08.050.

    (b)    All businesses shall pay a license fee as set forth by city council resolution. The duration of the license shall be as indicated by letter after the fee amount. The letter “A” following the fee shall indicate an annual fee is required; the letter “S” following the fee shall indicate a semiannual fee is required; the letter “Q” following the fee shall indicate a quarterly fee is required; the letter “M” indicates a monthly fee is required; and the letter “D” following the fee shall indicate a daily fee is required. Any business indicated with a “CM” after the title requires the city manager’s approval. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.08.030 Categories—Established and defined.
    The following categories of businesses are hereby established:

    Category “A” Retail Sales and Service. Any person conducting, managing, or carrying on a business consisting mainly of selling at retail any goods, wares or merchandise, or conducting, managing or carrying on of any trade, occupation, calling or business designed to render accommodations or services of individual skills and not otherwise specifically licensed by other section of this chapter, shall be licensed as Category “A.”

    Category “B” Wholesaling and Manufacturing Businesses. Any person conducting, managing or carrying on a business consisting mainly of manufacturing, packing, warehousing, processing, carrying or selling at wholesale any goods, wares, merchandise or produce, and not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter, shall be licensed as Category “B.”

    Category “C” Professions. Any person engaged in the business activity of rendering professional services and not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter shall be licensed as Category “C.”

    Category “D” Contractors, Developers, Subdividers and Owner/Builders. Any person engaged in the business activity of a general engineering contractor (Class A), general building contractor (Class B) and swimming pool contractor (Class C53), as defined by the state of California Contractors License Law; and any person engaged in the business activity of subdividing land or developing land; and any person engaged in the business activity of building construction as the owner thereof, and not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter, shall be licensed as Category “D.”

    Category “E” Subcontractors. Any person engaged in the business activity of a specialty contractor (Class C except C53), shall be deemed a subcontractor, and if not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter, shall be licensed as Category “E.”

    Category “F” Real Estate Rentals. Any person engaged in the business activity of renting, leasing or managing apartments, motels, hotels, bungalows, auto courts, roominghouses, trailer parks and any similar residential units or the renting, leasing or managing or industrial or commercial property or improvements consisting of three or more units, offices, rooms or spaces, and not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter, shall be licensed as Category “F.”

    Category “U” Public Utilities.

    (A)   Telephone Companies. Every person engaged in the business of providing telephone services shall be licensed as Category “A.”

    (B)   Other Utility Companies. Every public utility company selling parts or appliances at retail within the city shall pay a business license fee for said activity in accordance with the schedule for Category “A.”

    Category “V” Vending Machines (Coin Operated) Any person engaged in a business which is limited exclusively to the activity of conducting, managing, operating or maintaining any laundry or cleaning machine, amusement device, or vending machine or device dispensing tangible personal property, not otherwise licensed under this chapter, and not prohibited by law, wherein a sum of money is charged or collected for such machine or device by means of a coin slot or otherwise, shall be licensed as Category “V-1.”

    Any person conducting, managing, operating or maintaining on his premises any laundry or cleaning machine, amusement device or vending machine or device dispensing tangible personal property, which machine or device is incidental to the ordinary business being conducted on the premises and which is not otherwise licensed under this chapter, and not prohibited by law, wherein a sum of money is charged or collected for such machine or device by means of a coin slot or otherwise, shall be licensed as Category “V-2.”

    Every person required to be licensed as Category “V-1” shall file a statement with the license collector setting forth the reportable gross annual receipts of the licensee’s business during the preceding calendar year. Said statement shall be upon a form provided by the license collector, signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be submitted with the remittance of the license fee shown to be due.

    No person required by this section to be licensed as Category “V-1” shall place any such machine for use at any location in the city unless there is affixed in a conspicuous place on each such machine a valid sticker or seal furnished by the city. The license collector or the chief of police may seal the coin slot or receptacle of any machine found without such a sticker or seal.

    The owner of the business wherein the machine or device is located shall be responsible for the full amount of the license fee if the owner of the machine or device has not paid the full fee when due.

    Government owned vending machines dispensing postage stamps of the United States Postal Service are exempt from the terms and provisions of this section.

    Category “X” Exceptions. Any business not specifically included by name or description within Categories “A” through “F,” inclusive, and Categories “U” and “V,” as defined above, and not specifically provided for as an exception in Section 5.08.060, shall be classified as Category “X.”

    Category “Y” Youth—Self-employed. Any person, a resident of the city, eighteen years of age and under, who is in regular attendance at any private or public school and who has the written permission from the superintendent, principal or master of the school, may make application to and receive a special license from the license collector to conduct business as Category “Y.” The Category “Y” license shall be issued only if the business activity to be conducted by the applicant is of the nature of self-employment, with no employees working for the applicant; and if no other licenses or permits, including zoning, are required from the city. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.08.040 Short-term contracting and part-time self-employment—Rules and fees.
    (a)    The license collector, at his or her discretion, is empowered to issue a license to a contractor, specialty contractor or subcontractor for a period of three or six months. If the license is issued on or before the fifteenth day of a month, it will be dates and be effective as of the first day of said month. If the license is issued after the fifteenth day of the month, it will be effective immediately, but will expire either three months or six months from the first day of the succeeding month. The fee payable hereunder cannot be applied as a credit toward a full year business license fee in the event such license is required and applied for at a subsequent date. The fees applicable to applicants under the provisions of this subsection are set forth in a schedule to be adopted by city council resolution.

    (b)    The license collector, at his or her discretion, is authorized to issue a license to a part-time, self-employed person engaged in a home occupation which has received approval by the planning department for a residential business, or is engaged in the sale of the products of the individual’s arts or handicrafts, or similarly related hobby activity; or to a part-time, self-employed person engaged in providing recreational or craft instructions exclusively for governmental agencies, all in accordance with the fee schedule set forth by separate resolution. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.08.050 Fee schedules.
    License fees for all categories of businesses shall be set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. (Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.08.060 Category exceptions.
    The following businesses are determined to be of a special nature and not otherwise capable of definition according to the categories established in Section 5.08.030. All businesses classified in this section shall pay a license fee set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. All businesses classified in this section shall also pay those fees stated in Section 5.08.020 pertaining to the number of employees in excess of one involved in the business, the number of vehicles in excess of one involved in the business, and the number of vending or amusement machines involved in the business as described under Category “V-2” of Section 5.08.030. The following commercial entities that cannot be defined by Section 5.08.030 are stated below:

 

    (1)    Amusement and Recreation Centers (CM). These include, but are not limited to, the following: boxing or wrestling exhibitions; carnival tent shows; open air shows; or in hall or building constructed for theatrical purposes; automotive racing or recreation; skating rinks; athletic/sport facilities; stadium facilities; amusement centers; rooms, businesses or parlors containing recreational devices and devices for entertainment, including, but not limited to, pool tables, billiard tables, bowling alleys, batting cages, trampolines, games of skill, games of non-skill and amusement games;

    (2)    Baths (CM);

    (3)    Circuses (CM);

    (4)    Dance Halls or Dancing Establishments (CM). For the purposes of this section, the following shall be defined: “Public dance hall” is a place open to the public upon the payment of an admittance fee wherein music is provided and people are allowed to dance, which is open at regular intervals or regular days of the week. “Public dance” is a dance open to the public for an admittance fee or charge, which is held on one day only. “Dinner-dancing place” is a place which is operated in the ordinary course of business as a restaurant and where music is provided and the public is permitted to dance without payment of a fee;

    (5)    Geophysicists core and test drilling (CM);

    (6)    Junk collector or junk dealer (CM);

    (7)    Oil well driller and drilling (CM);

    (8)    Pawnbroker (CM). Includes every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money either for him or herself, or for any other person, upon any personal property, personal security, or purchasing personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such property to the vendor or other assignee at prices previously agreed upon. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the loaning of money or personal property or personal security by any bank or savings and loan association authorized to do so under the laws of this state or the United States;

    (9)    Rentals;

    (10)  Solicitors, Transient Merchants, Sidewalk Vendors, and Peddlers. Includes, but is not limited to, the following: peddlers of dry goods and hardware; peddlers of food; solicitors or canvassers; and soliciting by telephone (CM). All persons described in this subsection must comply with all the provisions of Chapter 4.20;

    (11)  Stereopticon, biograph, moving pictures (CM);

    (12)  Theaters and Theatricals (CM). Includes drive-in/outdoor theaters and indoor or walk-in theaters. For purposes of this section, every indoor or walk-in theater building which is separated into independent programming areas for which separate admission fees are charged to patrons shall be considered as housing separate theaters, for each of which a separate license is to be obtained. For drive-in/outdoor theaters, a separate license shall be obtained for snack bars, food stands and other concessions, in accordance with Sections 5.04.300 and 5.08.030.

    Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed or construed to require the holder of a theater license issued pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph to procure an additional license to conduct, manage or carry on any theatrical or vaudeville performance, or to exhibit any moving or motion pictures at any theater so licensed; and

    (13)  Vehicular Advertising (CM). (Ord. 1547 § 6, 2019; Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

 

5.08.070 Businesses requiring city manager approval.
    All applications for a business license for the following described businesses must be submitted to and be approved by the city manager in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08.


 

Category

Ambulance service

A

Amusement and recreation centers

X

Auctioneer

X

Auto wrecker. For the purpose of this section, “auto wrecker” means and includes any person who buys any motor vehicle for the purpose of dismantling or disassembling, or who dismantles or disassembles any such motor vehicle, whether for the purpose of dealing in the parts thereof or using the same for purpose of reconditioning any other vehicle, or for the purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in the materials of such vehicle or vehicles.

A

Bail bond broker or house

A

Baths

X

Circus

X

Curb painting

A

Dance hall or dancing establishment

X

Detective agency or detective, merchant patroler, patrol systems and security guards

A

Geophysicists

X

Hypnotism

A

Junk collector and dealer

X

Massage parlor

A

Naturopath

C

Oil well driller and drilling

X

Pawnbroker

X

Sidewalk vendor

X

Skating rink

X

Soliciting by telephone

X

Stereopticon, biograph and moving pictures

X

Theaters and theatricals

X

Vehicles for hire. Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a taxi business or renting the use of a motor propelled vehicle for the transportation of persons to be driven by the person hiring or renting same at rates per mile, trip, hour, day, week or month and when such vehicles are routed under the direction of the person hiring same. “For hire” includes sight-seeing and cruising automobiles, and public transportation.

X

Vehicular advertising

A

Any other businesses not otherwise specifically described by name or description in Section 5.08.060 and not otherwise capable of general categorization as established by Section 5.08.030.

X

 

(Ord. 1547 § 7, 2019; Ord. 1181 § 2, 1992)

Title 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 6.04 GARBAGE REGULATIONS
Chapter 6.06 URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC
Chapter 6.08 SOLID WASTE
Chapter 6.09 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF WASTE FROM CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
Chapter 6.10 LEAF BLOWERS
Chapter 6.12 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESSES
Chapter 6.13 HEALTH SERVICES FEE
Chapter 6.20 MANURE STORAGE
Chapter 6.24 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS REGULATIONS
Chapter 6.28 NOISE CONTROL
Chapter 6.30 HABITATION IN VEHICLES

Chapter 6.04 GARBAGE REGULATIONS
6.04.010 Dumping, placing or depositing restrictions.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, copartnership or corporation to dump, place or deposit any trash, refuse, vegetable trimmings or rubbish of any kind whatsoever upon any private or public property in the city other than trimmings from vegetables grown on said property, except as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 147 § 1, 1958)

 

6.04.020 Exceptions.
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed as to prohibit the spreading of vegetable trimmings upon private property in the city provided the same shall be spread on such property in a continuous layer and plowed or disced under the surface of the ground not later than six days from and after the date of spreading the same, and, providing further that no such vegetable trimmings shall be spread upon property that vegetable trimmings have been spread upon within a period of the preceding three months. (Ord. 14 § 2, 1958)

 

6.04.030 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person, firm, copartnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    Each separate act of dumping, placing or depositing such trash, refuse, vegetable trimmings or rubbish contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be considered a separate offense and violation hereof. (Ord. 14 §§ 3 and 4, 1958)

Chapter 6.06 URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC
6.06.010 Prohibited.
    No person shall urinate or defecate upon any private or public property within the city except when done within the confines of a restroom toilet facility or temporary sanitary outhouse facility. (Ord. 904 § 1, 1981)

 

6.06.020 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 904 § 1, 1981)

Chapter 6.08 SOLID WASTE
6.08.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the collection and disposition of solid waste within the city in compliance with all laws and to facilitate the recycling of materials and otherwise reduce waste going to the landfills. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.020 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

    “Garbage” means all putrescible solid wastes, including but not limited to vegetable matter, discarded food containers or other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, packing, canning, storage and decay of meats, fish, fowls, vegetables, fruit, and food products intended for human and animal consumption, excluding excrement.

    “Green waste” includes lawn trimmings, plant material, sod, soil, tree branches, leaves, and other green waste.

    “Person” means any individual, firm, organization, partnership, corporation, company or other entity.

    “Recyclable material” includes paper products such as: (1) newspaper, cardboard, magazines, telephone books, junk mail, office paper, computer paper, other white and colored paper; (2) food containers such as metal cans, glass or plastic bottles or jars; and (3) other plastics made from high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density polyethylene (LDPE), and polyethylene (PET).

    “Refuse” includes garbage and rubbish.

    “Rubbish” means all nonputrescible solid wastes, including but not limited to special handling items such as trees, tree limbs, logs, automobile bodies, motor vehicle parts, building materials, appliances, household goods, sod and dirt, metal, wood and rock.

    “Solid waste” includes all garbage, rubbish, recyclable material and green waste. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.030 Franchise or agreement.
    (a)    The city may award a contract or a partial or full franchise to a collection company to provide waste collection services within the city.

    (b)    Any person desiring to obtain a franchise or contract to remove or convey any garbage or rubbish from a container within the city to a waste disposal or transfer station in the county utilizing any public street, alley or highway or other public place within the city shall first file an application with the city clerk stating his or her name and address and the conditions under which he or she intends to perform said services under a contract or franchise for the city.

    (c)    If the city has exercised its option to award an exclusive franchise for solid waste collection pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 40059, no person other than the franchisee or its officers, agents, and employees, shall engage in such activity within the city limits during the term of that exclusive franchise. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.040 Waste diversion.
    The city and the city’s contractor or franchisee shall ensure that the city meets all state requirements for diversion of waste from landfill disposal. The city shall encourage source reduction and recycling and other ways to divert waste from the landfills in ways that benefit the environment. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.050 Flow control.
    The city shall maintain waste flow control and shall retain the authority to direct the disposition of refuse. The conditions under which such power is exercised may be set forth in the city’s contract or franchise agreement for collection services. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.055 Ownership of material.
    The city and its duly authorized contractor or franchisee shall own all material once it is deposited into receptacles for collection. Before such materials are deposited in those receptacles for collection, the owner may dispose of those materials in any lawful manner, including self-hauling waste to an appropriate landfill or other appropriate facility, or selling or donating recyclable material. Once the material is placed in a residential refuse or recycling container at curbside or in a commercial dumpster, title to the material passes to the city or its duly authorized contractor or franchisee. (Ord. 1496 § 1, 2014)

 

6.08.060 Scavenging prohibited.
    (a)    Prohibition. Scavenging is prohibited. No person shall remove any item, including, but not limited to, newsprint, cardboard, bottles, cans, or metal, that has been placed in any recycling or refuse bin, container, cart, trashcan, or dumpster.

    (b)    Affirmative Defense. This section shall not apply to:

    (1)    City’s duly authorized trash contractor or franchisee; or

    (2)    Persons removing items from a bin, container, cart, trashcan, or dumpster that is located at their residence, place of business, or place of employment. (Ord. 1496 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.070 Responsibility for providing containers.
    The authorized contractor or franchisee shall provide every single-family dwelling unit or units with one ninety-five-gallon cart for collection of refuse, one ninety-five-gallon cart for the collection of green waste material, and one ninety-five-gallon cart for collection of recyclable material. The authorized contractor or franchisee may provide one sixty-five-gallon cart for collection of refuse and one sixty-five-gallon cart and one sixty-five-gallon cart for collection of recyclable waste, or one sixty-five-gallon cart for collection of refuse for customers with inadequate storage for the standard three ninety-five-gallon carts allocation. The authorized contractor or franchisee shall repair or replace damaged carts within three days of notification of such damage by resident or city. Carts damaged through misuse by the resident will be repaired or replaced by the contractor or franchisee and the resident charged the cost for the repair or replacement of the cart. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.080 Refuse, green waste and recyclable material cart requirements.
    (a)    All refuse, green waste and recyclable material set out for collection at curbside shall be placed in containers that satisfy the following requirements:

    (1)    Carts shall not exceed ninety-five gallons in capacity;

    (2)    Carts shall be constructed of plastic or similar watertight material;

    (3)    Carts shall be equipped with fixed handles located below the top edge of the cart that are large enough to accommodate a gloved hand;

    (4)    Carts shall have a watertight cover that is attached to the cart;

    (5)    Carts shall have two wheels at their base;

    (6)    Carts shall be supplied by the city’s franchisee and shall be standardized as approved by the city;

    (7)    Lids of containers shall be closed for sanitary and odor purposes and to prevent varmint, vermin and bird access and insect and pest breeding.

    (b)    No person shall place any container or cart with refuse, green waste, or recyclable material on public property for collection unless the cart fully complies with subsection (a) of this section. No refuse will be collected from the curbside unless the refuse is placed in carts that comply with subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.090 Commercial refuse bin requirements.
    Any multiresidential complex or business which utilizes commercial refuse bins for the storage of garbage or refuse shall utilize a bin with a lid or cover sufficient to prevent: (1) odor from escaping the container; (2) flies and other insects from coming into contact with the contents of the container; (3) the contents from leaving the interior of the container; and (4) rain or water from entering the interior of the container. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to ensure that lids are completely closed and bins are not overfilled. Further, any multiresidential complex or business utilizing any commercial refuse bins shall ensure that the garbage and refuse accumulated in the bins is picked up and disposed of at least once per week and shall maintain each bin and bin enclosure in a clean and sanitary manner. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.100 Contents of carts.
    Persons disposing of their solid waste shall place the same as follows:

    (1)    Recyclable materials shall only be deposited in the recyclable container.

    (2)    Green waste shall only be placed in the green waste container.

    (3)    Solid waste that is not recyclable material or green waste, and that is not prohibited material, shall be placed in the refuse container.

    (4)    Persons shall not place their solid waste in containers except as provided herein. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.110 Prohibited materials.
    (a)    No person shall set out for collection any of the following materials:

    (1)    Ammunition or explosives;

    (2)    Industrial wastes, caustic or hazardous chemicals or acids;

    (3)    Pathological, biomedical, toxic or radioactive waste;

    (4)    Drugs or medicines;

    (5)    Human feces, unwrapped animal feces or dead animals;

    (6)    Liquids, paints, or any substance the disposal of which is regulated by the Hazardous Substances Act, or regulations adopted pursuant thereto;

    (7)    Any material, the disposal of which is prohibited within county landfills, including, but not limited to, items longer than four feet in length or items more than eighteen inches in diameter;

    (8)    Lube oils;

    (9)    Items which are too large for, or which may damage, the collection equipment or machinery such as large pieces of metal, machine parts, logs and tree stumps;

    (10)  Hypodermic needles unless broken and placed within a plastic container which cannot be pierced by the needle.

    (b)    Sod, building scraps, bricks, concrete and other building or construction material may be refused at the discretion of the collector. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.120 Accumulation limitation.
    No person who owns, controls or occupies any premises shall permit garbage to accumulate for a period in excess of one calendar week, or refuse or cuttings to accumulate for a period of fifteen days, or fail, refuse or neglect to place such garbage and such refuse and cuttings for collection in accordance with schedules established therefor, the provisions of this chapter, and rules and regulations established pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.130 Storage and placement of carts for collection.
    (a)    Carts shall be stored in a garage, trash enclosure, or in the side yard and away from public view except when the containers are placed out for collection.

    (b)    Placement for Collection.

    (1)    Carts shall be placed for collection in a location easily accessible to the refuse collector in the street adjacent to the curb.

    (2)    If refuse is collected from an alley abutting the premises, carts shall be placed for collection as close to the alley property line as feasible and on private property.

    (3)    Carts shall not be considered placed for collection and garbage, refuse and cuttings will not be collected unless containers are removed from any enclosure, structure, cabinet, or shelf.

    (4)    Carts shall be placed for collection before six a.m. on collection days, but not earlier than six p.m. the day preceding the collection day, and containers shall be relocated to their required storage place as soon as possible after collection, but no later than nine p.m. of the day of collection.

    (c)    The owner and tenant are each responsible for the placement of carts provided.

    (d)    No person shall store or place carts in violation of this section. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.140 Standards for collections.
    (a)    Equipment used by the contractor for collection and hauling of garbage and trash shall be such as to assure, in the opinion of the city manager, that adequate standards of collection will be maintained. It is the declared interest of the city that the contractor be able to provide a wide variety of containers to meet the capacity requirements of commercial, industrial and multiple residential users. Equipment used shall be watertight. Complete metal operating covers must be a part of the design of equipment employed. No material shall be permitted to leak, fall or be spilled onto city streets, alleys or highways. Any such leakage or spills occurring shall be immediately corrected and the area cleaned. Equipment used must employ adequate safety conditions for operating personnel and the public and must be maintained in good mechanical condition.

    (b)    All collections shall be made as quietly as possible and no unnecessarily noisy trucks or equipment shall be used. Employees of the contractor who are unnecessarily noisy or who violate the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and/or any applicable city ordinance in the collection of such materials shall be barred from the performance of any duties on city streets and rights-of-way upon demand of the city manager.

    (c)    Collections shall only be made between the hours of six-thirty a.m. and six-thirty p.m. unless the permission of the city manager is obtained. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.160 Burial prohibited.
    No person shall bury refuse. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.170 Burning prohibited.
    No person shall burn refuse. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.180 Residential charges.
    The city may impose charges for refuse collection for residential properties by resolution or ordinance. The city may collect such charges with the water bill or in any other manner that the city council may determine and thereafter pay to the city’s contract or franchisee collector such amounts as may be due. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

 

6.08.190 Violations.
    Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 6.09 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF WASTE FROM CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
6.09.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to increase the diversion of solid waste from construction and demolition projects from landfill disposal and to thereby comply with both the spirit and intent of the law as set forth in Public Resource Code Sections 42910 et seq. and Sections 41821 and 41850 and the California Green Building Standards Code, Sections 4.408 and 5.408 as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.020 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

    A.    “Contractor” means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor’s license of any type under the laws of the State of California, or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor or owner-builder) any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in Fountain Valley.

    B.     “Construction” means all building, landscaping, remodeling, addition, removal or destruction involving the use or disposal of Designated Recyclable and Reusable Materials as defined in subsection E below.

    C.     “Covered project” shall mean all residential construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city that expand the area, size or volume of a building and all new construction or any non-residential construction project requiring a permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, “covered project” shall not include projects with building permits issued solely for roof replacement, electrical, and/or plumbing.

    D.    “Demolition and construction waste” means:

    1.     Discarded materials generally considered to be not water soluble and non- hazardous in nature including, but not limited to, metal, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, roofing material, and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping, and development operations for a construction project;

    2.     Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction and/or landscape project;

    3.     Non-construction and non-demolition waste wood scraps;

    4.     De-minimis amounts of other non-hazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry;

    5.     Mixing of construction and demolition waste with other types of solid waste will cause it to be classified as other than demolition and construction waste.

    E.     “Designated recyclable and reusable materials” means:

 

    1.     Masonry building materials including all products generally used in construction including, but not limited to, asphalt, concrete, rock, stone and brick;

    2.     Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, pressure treated, contaminated or painted;

    3.     Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush, or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction or other use;

    4.     Metals including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, doorframes and fences;

    5.     Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as asphalt, stone, and slate based roofing material;

    6.     Salvageable material and structures including, but not limited to, wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs, and appliances.

    F.     “Hazardous waste” means:

    1.     Waste substances which can pose a substantial or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly managed. Hazardous waste possesses at least one of these four characteristics: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity or toxicity; or appears on U.S. EPA lists;

    2.     Waste materials or mixtures of waste which require special handling and disposal because of their potential to damage health and /or the environment;

    3.     Waste materials or mixtures of waste that are regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and are listed in 40 CFR 261.33(d).

    G.    “Waste management plan” means a written plan documenting the diversion of construction and demolition debris that is submitted by the applicant for any covered project and approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.030 Deconstruction and salvage and recovery.
    Every covered project planned for demolition shall be made available for deconstruction, salvage and recovery prior to demolition. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, the general contractor and all subcontractors to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable designated recyclable and reusable materials prior to demolition. recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials from the deconstruction phase shall qualify to be counted in meeting the diversion requirements of this chapter. Recovered or salvaged materials may be given or sold on the premises, or may be removed to reuse warehouse facilities for storage or sale. Title to recyclable materials forwarded to the operator of recycling facilities that are under contract to the city will transfer to the service provider upon departure of materials from the site. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.040 Diversion requirements.
    A minimum percentage of the waste tonnage of demolition and construction waste generated from every covered project shall be diverted from going to landfill by using recycling, reuse and diversion programs as specified in the California Green Building Standards Code Sections 4.408 and 5.408, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.050 Information required before issuance of permit.
    Prior to starting the project, every applicant shall submit a properly completed waste management plan to the public works department as part of the building or demolition permit process of a covered project. The waste management plan shall contain an accurate estimate of the tonnage or other specified units of construction and/or demolition waste to be generated from construction and demolition on the site. Approval of the waste management plan as complete, accurate, and responsive to the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any building or demolition permit. Approval is not required when emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.060 Administrative fee.
    As a condition precedent to issuance of any building or a demolition permit that involves the production of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee sufficient to compensate the city for all expenses incurred in administering the permit. The amount of this fee shall be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.070 On-site practices.
    During demolition or construction of a covered project, the applicant shall recycle, reuse, or divert the required percentages of materials, and keep records thereof in tonnage or in other measurements that can be converted to tonnage. The public works department will evaluate and monitor each project to gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged and disposed from the project. The required diversion of a minimum of the required percentages of the demolition and construction waste will be measured separately with respect to the demolition segment and the construction segment of a project where both demolition and construction are involved. To the maximum extent feasible on-site separation of scrap wood and non- contaminated green waste in a designated roll-off or temporary box shall be arranged, in order to permit chipping and mulching for soil enhancement or land cover purposes. In order to protect chipping and grinding machinery, metal and other materials that cannot be chipped or ground shall not be placed in such boxes. On-site separation shall include salvageable materials (e.g., appliances, fixtures, plumbing, etc.) lumber, wallboard, concrete, metals, and cardboard. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.080 Record keeping.
    The applicant shall keep documentation which proves compliance with the requirements of Section 6.09.030. The documentation shall consist of a completed waste management plan showing actual data of tonnage of materials recycled and diverted, supported by original or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether all materials, including hazardous waste, generated from the site have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed of. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.090 Condition of building permit issuance and sign off.
    For demolition projects, building permits will not be issued until all documents and records are received and reviewed by the city for compliance with the waste management plan. For construction projects, an inspection will occur before the framing inspection and before final inspection. During these inspections, documents and records will be reviewed and approved for compliance before project sign off.

    All city sponsored construction, demolition, or renovation projects are subject to all applicable provisions of this section. City sponsored public works capital improvement projects will be required to submit documentation as part of a project’s progress payment. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019)

 

6.09.100 Penalties.
    Each violation of the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance and shall be punishable and subject to all criminal, civil, administrative, and other remedies provided in Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1373 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 6.10 LEAF BLOWERS
6.10.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings as set forth below:

    “Leaf blower” means any machine, however powered, used to blow leaves, dirt and other debris off sidewalk, driveways, lawns and other surfaces.

    “Parcel” means an area of real property with a separate or distinct number or other designation shown on a plot recorded in the office of the county recorder. Contiguous parcels owned by the same individual or entity shall be considered one parcel for purposes of this section. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1991)

 

6.10.020 Unlawful to propel debris beyond parcel boundary.
    It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any leaf blower in such a manner as to blow, dispel or make airborne, dust, leaves, grass cuttings, paper, trash or any other type of unattached debris or material, beyond the parcel boundaries of the parcel being cleaned, unless the consent of the adjoining owner or person in possession is obtained. It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any leaf blower within the city in such a way as to blow leaves, dirt and other debris onto the public rights-of-way and to allow such debris to remain there in excess of thirty minutes. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1991)

 

6.10.030 Special prohibitions.
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a leaf blower within a residential zone or within one hundred feet of a residential zone of the city except under the following conditions:

    (1)    Time Restrictions. Leaf blowers shall not be operated except between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. Monday through Friday and nine a.m. to six p.m. on Saturday, and at no time on Sunday.

    (2)    Distance Restriction. Leaf blowers shall not be operated within a horizontal distance of ten feet of any operable window, door, or mechanical air intake opening or duct.

    (3)    Duration of Use Restriction. Leaf blowers shall not be operated for more than fifteen minutes per hour on parcels less than one-half acre and no more than thirty minutes per hour on parcels greater than one-half acre.

    (4)    Number Restrictions. No person shall operate more than one leaf blower per parcel.

    (5)    The maximum decibel level of seventy dBA as measured ten feet from the leaf blower shall not be exceeded. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1991)

 

6.10.040 Violations—Penalty.
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and is punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 6.12 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESSES
6.12.010 State law controls.
    State law as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 113700, the “California Retail Food Code,” governs food handling businesses. (Ord. 1429 § 2, 2009)

 

6.12.020 Local enforcement officer.
    The county health officer shall be the local enforcement officer. (Ord. 1429 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 6.13 HEALTH SERVICES FEE
6.13.010 Definitions.
    The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning indicated below:

    “Health department” or “department” shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency.

    “Health officer” shall meant he county health officer or his or her duly authorized representative.

    “Person” shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.

    “Receipt” shall mean a county public health services fee receipt. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

 

6.13.020 Purpose and authority.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the health officer in enforcing state statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of state offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the state. The authority for this chapter is contained in Section 510 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

 

6.13.030 Area of application.
    This chapter shall be enforceable within the territory in which the health officer enforces any state statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any state office or department relating to public health, including incorporated as well as unincorporated territory. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

 

6.13.040 Violation.
    It is unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in Chapter 6.12 without a valid receipt. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

 

6.13.050 Separate activities.
    If a person shall conduct more than one of the activities for which a receipt is required, he must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

 

6.13.060 Applications.
    Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the health department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or recipient of a receipt shall provide the health officer with any information requested by him or her. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

 

6.13.070 Rules and regulations.
    The health officer shall administer this chapter and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

 

6.13.080 Fees.
    The county shall, by annual board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. When so adopted, those fees shall be in force in this city. Such fees are to be paid directly to the county health officer and retained by the county as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. (Ord. 1192 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 6.20 MANURE STORAGE
6.20.010 Storage on another’s property.
    It is unlawful for any person to allow another to store on his property manure or like substance, not for the use of the property owner so storing or maintaining said substances. (Ord. 99 § 1, 1962)

 

6.20.020 Contracting for storage and maintenance.
    It is unlawful for any person to contract for the storage or maintenance of any manure or like substance within the city limits on any property within the city limits, not for the sole use of the property where said substance is so stored or maintained. (Ord. 99 § 2, 1962)

 

6.20.030 Treatment required for sale or delivery.
    No person shall deliver into the city, nor shall any person within the city deliver or sell to any other person within the city, any manure or like substance that has not first been treated according to the standards of the Orange County Mosquito Abatement District to eliminate flies, fly breeding, and like insects and animals. (Ord. 760 § 2, 1975; Ord. 99 § 3, 1962)

 

6.20.040 Storage within city limits for use outside.
    It is unlawful for any person to store manure or like substance on any property within the city limits for use outside the city limits. (Ord. 99 § 4, 1962)

 

6.20.050 Treatment required for spreading.
    No person shall spread any manure or like substance until said substance has been treated, according to the standards of the Orange County Mosquito Abatement District, to eliminate flies, fly breeding, and like insects and animals. (Ord. 760 § 3, 1975; Ord. 99 § 5, 1962)

 

6.20.060 Commercial manure dealer defined.
    “Commercial manure dealer” means any person, firm or corporation who, for a fee, gathers, collects, hauls, stockpiles, spreads or sells any manure or manure-like substance. (Ord. 594 § 3, 1970)

 

6.20.070 Registration.
    It is unlawful for any commercial manure dealer to gather, collect, haul, stockpile, spread or sell any manure or manure-like substance within the city without first registering with the Orange County Mosquito Abatement District on forms prescribed by it. Such registration shall expire at the end of each calendar year and shall be renewed annually during the first week in January. There shall be no fee for such registration nor any subsequent renewal. (Ord. 760 § 4, 1975; Ord. 594 § 3, 1970)

 

6.20.080 Failure to register a misdemeanor.
    Failure to register as a commercial manure dealer as provided in this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or one hundred days’ imprisonment in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 594 § 3, 1970)

Chapter 6.24 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS REGULATIONS
6.24.010 Scope—Purpose.
    All mobile x-ray units shall comply with the requirements of the Radiation Control Law, Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code, together with regulations enacted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 570 § 1, 1970)

 

6.24.020 Definitions.
    “Mobile x-ray unit” means any x-ray generator which is, or can be, used. for the purpose of making medical diagnostic photofluorographic films of persons, and which is installed in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer so that it may be transported from place to place. (Ord. 570 § 1, 1970)

 

6.24.030 Investigation.
    Any person or entity desiring to operate a mobile x-ray unit within the city shall make application to the county health officer on forms prescribed by him for issuance of a license. The county health officer shall cause to be conducted an investigation of said applicant for a license to determine, among other things, the following items of information:

    (a)    Whether or not said unit has a valid state registration as provided by Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code;

    (b)    Whether or not said applicant has complied with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, including those relating to he reporting to the health officer of abnormal x-ray findings pursuant to regulations of the State Department of Public Health;

    (c)    Whether the proper public notices, as required by state law, regulations enacted pursuant thereto, and local ordinances, have been posted in or upon the mobile unit;

    (d)    The location and mailing address of all film files to be maintained by said mobile unit as provided, in Section 6.24.060(d);

    (e)    Whether the applicant and his specified personnel are qualified by reason of training and experience to operate a mobile x-ray unit in such a manner as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life, and property;

    (f)    Whether the applicant’s equipment, facilities, proposed uses and procedures are such as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property;

    (g)    Such other information as shall be required by the county health officer. (Ord. 570 § 1, 1970)

 

6.24.040 License.
    No license shall be granted, renewed, or reinstated unless the county health officer determines, upon completing his investigation, that the mobile x-ray unit is, or can be, operated in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, and administrative regulations, and in a manner not detrimental to the health of the patrons, employees, and the general public and that all operations of mobile x-ray equipment have been certified by the county health officer to operate same. (Ord. 570 § 1, 1970)

 

6.24.050 Duration.
    Licenses may be granted at any time during the year, but all licenses shall expire on December thirty-first of each year. (Ord. 570 § 1, 1970)

 

6.24.060 Conditions.
    All mobile x-ray units shall be operated so as to comply with the following conditions:

    (a)    No person under the age of fifteen years is to be x-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test and presents a written statement, signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, showing the method and the date of such positive skin test. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location of the mobile x-ray unit stating that no person under the age of fifteen years is to be x-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test;

    (b)    No pregnant woman shall be x-rayed in a mobile x-ray unit unless so ordered in writing by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile x-ray unit stating that no pregnant woman shall be x-rayed;

    (c)    The mobile X-ray operator shall require all persons, before being x-rayed, to complete an information form showing the following: Name; age; sex; address; telephone number; physician’s name and address; if a female, whether pregnant; if under fifteen years of age, whether the person has had a positive tuberculin skin test, and the date of such test;

    (d)    All x-ray films shall be retained by the operator for at least ten years. Each patient shall receive from the mobile x-ray operator a report of his x-ray findings within thirty days. Every thirty days, the operator shall submit to the health officer a report of the total number of x-ray films taken during the preceding calendar month;

    (e)    The mobile x-ray operator shall make x-ray films available for use by the physician of the person x-rayed, provided said person gives his consent in writing. The operator may make a reasonable charge for such service;

    (f)    A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile x-ray unit stating essentially the following: “A chest x-ray film is a useful aid to the physician in diagnosing chest disease. It is not a complete examination. See your family doctor for an examination at least once a year.” The county health officer shall have the right to determine the location, size, and wording of all required signs;

    (g)    The mobile x-ray operator shall give the county health officer notice at least fourteen calendar days in advance concerning proposed dates, times, and places of use of the unit. All such information shall be forwarded by the county health officer to the city prior to the date when said unit is to be operated within the city;

    (h)    The name and address of the mobile x-ray operator shall be plainly printed on each side of the exterior of the vehicle or trailer in letters at least three inches high. The name and address of the mobile x-ray operator shall appear on all forms, letters, pamphlets, or other printed matter used in conjunction with the unit. Neither sign nor printed matter shall contain any statements expressed or implied that the mobile x-ray unit is associated with any health department or other public or private health agency;

    (i)     The mobile x-ray operation shall comply with all applicable city ordinances and resolutions while operating within the city. (Ord. 570 § 1, 1970)

 

6.24.070 Operation.
    No mobile x-ray unit shall be operated unless the operator thereof has been licensed as provided in this chapter. No mobile x-ray unit shall be operated by any person other than the applicant or the persons specified in this license. (Ord. 570 § 1, 1970)

Chapter 6.28 NOISE CONTROL
6.28.010 Declaration of policy.
    (a)    In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds emanating from incorporated areas of the city, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in this chapter.

    (b)    It is determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to public interest; therefore, the city council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to create, maintain or cause any noise in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.020 Definitions.
    The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning as indicated below:

    (1)    “Ambient noise level” means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.

    (2)    “Cumulative period” means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

    (3)    “Decibel” (dB) means a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio.

    (4)    “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

    (5)    “Emergency machinery, vehicle or work” means any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect. provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

    (6)    “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless including but not limited to industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigerator equipment.

    (7)    “Grading” means any excavating or filling of earth material, or any combination thereof, conducted at a site to prepare said site for construction or other improvements thereon.

    (8)    “Impact noise” means the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest.

    (9)    “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

    (10)  “Noise level” means the “A” weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of twenty microNewtons per square meter. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB(A).

    (11)  “Noise variance board” means an administrative board of five members appointed by the board of supervisors of the county, per Title 4, Division 6, Article 1 of the codified ordinances of the county.

    (12)  “Person” means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.

    (13)  “Residential property” means a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels.

    (14)  “Simple tone noise” means a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished.

    (15)  “Sound level meter” means an instrument meeting American National Standard Institute’s Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.

    (16)  “Sound pressure level” of a sound, in decibels, means twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a referenced pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.030 Noise level measurement criteria.
    Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in Section 6.28.020. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.040 Designated noise zone.
    The residential properties hereinafter described are assigned to the following noise zones:

    Noise Zone 1: All properties located in residential zone districts. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.050 Exterior noise standards.
    (a)    The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone:

 

Noise Standards

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 dB(A)

7 a.m. — 10 p.m.

 

50 dB(A)

10 p.m. — 7 a.m.

 

    In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by 5 dB(A).

    (b)    It is unlawful for any person at any location within the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured on any other residential property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed:

    (1)    The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than thirty minutes in any hour; or

    (2)    The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than fifteen minutes in any hour; or

    (3)    The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or

    (4)    The noise standard plus fifteen dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

    (5)    The noise standard plus twenty dB(A) for any period of time.

    (c)    In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first four noise limit categories set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.060 Interior noise standards.
    (a)    The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone:

 

Interior Noise Standards

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 dB(A)

7 a.m. — 10 p.m.

 

45 dB(A)

10 p.m. — 7 a.m.

 

    In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five dB(A).

    (b)    It is unlawful for any person at any location within the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level when measured within any other dwelling unit on any residential property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed:

    (1)    The interior noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or

    (2)    The interior noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

    (3)    The interior noise standard plus ten dB(A) for any period of time.

    (c)    In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first two noise limit categories set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.070 Special provisions.
    The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter:

    (1)    Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college;

    (2)    Public dances, provided said events are conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the city pursuant to Chapter 5.24 relative to the staging of said events;

    (3)    Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such park or playground is owned and operated by a public entity;

    (4)    Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work;

    (5)    Noise sources associated with the construction, repair, remodeling or grading of any real property, provided said activities take place between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. Monday through Friday, nine a.m. through eight p.m. on Saturday and at no time on Sunday or any legal holiday. For purposes of this exception the use of saws, buffers, sanders, drills, and sprayers shall be included, as shall similar activity;

    (6)    All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions;

    (7)    Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations, provided such operations do not take place between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a legal holiday;

    (8)    Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided that the application is made in accordance with the restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced by the agricultural commissioner;

    (9)    Noise sources associated with the landscape maintenance of real property, provided said activities take place between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. Monday through Friday, nine a.m. through eight p.m. on Saturday, or nine a.m. through six p.m. on Sunday or legal holidays. For purposes of this exception, the phrase “landscape maintenance of real property” shall include, but not be limited to, the use of power mowers, edgers, chain saws, trimmers, hedgecutters, and other devices that are not hand-powered. Leaf blowers shall not be included in said exception and shall be regulated as provided in Chapter 6.10 of this code;

    (10)  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 1998; Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.080 Schools, hospitals and churches—Special provisions.
    It is unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church while the same is in use to exceed the noise limits as specified in Section 6.28.050 prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital or church is located, or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three separate locations within one-tenth of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.090 Air conditioning and refrigeration—Special provisions.
    Until January 19, 1979, the noise standards enumerated in Sections 6.28.050 and 6.28.060 shall be increased eight dB(A) where the alleged offensive noise source is an air conditioning or refrigeration system or associated equipment which was installed prior to November 26, 1976. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.100 Noise level measurement.
    The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected dwelling unit. The measurement shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the alleged offensive noise source and may be made with the windows of the affected unit open. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.110 Manner of enforcement.
    The county health officer and his duly authorized representatives are directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The county health officer and his duly authorized representatives are authorized, pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, to arrest any person without a warrant when they have reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed a misdemeanor in their presence.

    No person shall interfere. with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with enforcement of this chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his duty. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.120 Variance procedure.
    The owner or operator of a noise source which violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an application with the health officer for a variance from the provisions thereof wherein said owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with said provisions, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method of achieving compliance, and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. Upon receipt of said application and fee, the health officer shall refer it with his recommendation thereon within thirty days to the noise variance board of the county for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

    An applicant for a variance shall remain subject to prosecution under the terms of this chapter until a variance is granted. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.130 Noise variance board.
    The noise variance board shall evaluate all applications for variance from the requirements of this chapter and may grant said variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms, conditions and requirements as it may deem reasonable to achieve maximum compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Said terms, conditions and requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, limitation on noise levels and operating hours. Each such variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving maximum compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment. In its determinations said board shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise, the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise, the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work, the economic factors related to age and useful life of equipment, and the general public interest and welfare. Any variance granted by said board shall be by resolution and shall be transmitted to the health officer for enforcement. Any violation of the terms of said variance shall be unlawful. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.140 Appeals.
    (a)    Within fifteen days following the decision of the variance board on an application the applicant, the health officer, or any member of the city council may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the secretary of the variance board. In the case of an appeal by the applicant for a variance, the notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee to be computed by the secretary on the basis of the estimated cost of preparing the materials required to be forwarded to the city council as discussed hereafter. If the actual cost of such preparation differs from the estimated cost appropriate payments shall be made either to or by the secretary.

    (b)    Within fifteen days following receipt of a notice of appeal and the appeal fee, the secretary of the variance board shall forward to the city council copies of the application for variance, the recommendation of the health officer, the notice of appeal, all evidence concerning said application received by the variance board and its decision thereon. In addition, any person may file with the city council written arguments supporting or attacking said decision and the city council may in its discretion hear oral arguments thereon. The city clerk shall mail to the applicant a notice of the date set for hearing of the appeal. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing date.

    (c)    Within sixty days following its receipt of the notice of the appeal, the city council shall either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the variance board. Such decision shall be based upon the city council’s evaluation of the matters submitted to the city council in light of the powers conferred on the variance board and the factors to be considered, both as enumerated in Sections 6.28.120 and 6.28.130.

    (d)    As part of its decision the council may direct the variance board to conduct further proceedings on said application. Failure of the city council to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the variance board within said sixty-day period shall constitute an affirmation of the decision. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

 

6.28.145 Alternative noise prohibition.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully make, continue, maintain, permit, or cause to be made, continued, maintained, or permitted, any loud, unnecessary and unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any residential neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. It shall be a prima facie violation of this section if any radio, receiving set, television, musical instrument or similar device is played, used or permitted to be played or used between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. when audible from a distance of fifty feet from the property line of the noise source or from a distance of one hundred feet from any nonstationary noise source. The determination may be made by a peace officer or may be proven by the testimony of any other person. (Ord. 1018 § 1, 1985)

 

6.28.147 Idling motor vehicles.
    No person shall leave standing any motor vehicle, including refrigeration trailers, with engine idling or auxiliary motor running for in excess of ten minutes between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. if the engine or motor noise disturbs the peace or quiet of any residential neighborhood or causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal  sensitivity residing in the area. The driver, owner, registered owner and legal owner of the motor vehicle or refrigeration trailer shall each be guilty of the offense described herein. (Ord. 1156 § 1, 1990)

 

6.28.148 Commercial delivery prohibition.
    No person shall make, cause, accept or permit a delivery of goods, merchandise, material, equipment, meat, poultry, fish, groceries, dairy products, foodstuffs, food, or beverage within one hundred feet of a residentially zoned property between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. or at any time on a Sunday or legal holiday so as to disturb the peace and quiet of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. Proof of such a violation may be established by the testimony of a peace officer, code enforcement officer, or any other person. For purposes of this section “delivery” shall not only mean the completed act of a delivery, but all preparatory and related steps taken within the one hundred-foot distance including, but not limited to, driving, stopping, idling or parking a vehicle, the opening or shutting of doors, or the movement of pallets, dolleys, floor jacks, or lifts. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1992)

 

6.28.149 Parking lot sweepers.
    No person shall operate a parking lot sweeper or similar device for cleaning or maintaining commercial property within one hundred feet of a residential area except during the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday, between nine a.m. and six p.m. on Saturday, and at no time on Sunday. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2002)

 

6.28.150 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 806 § 2, 1976)

Chapter 6.30 HABITATION IN VEHICLES
6.30.010 Prohibited.
    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle, trailer, boat, camper or motor home as defined in the California Vehicle Code, shall utilize or allow others to utilize the vehicle for human habitation except in an approved trailer park or court. (Ord. 1365 § 3, 2005)

Title 7 ANIMAL CONTROL, WELFARE AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 7.04 COUNTY ORDINANCES ADOPTED

Chapter 7.04 COUNTY ORDINANCES ADOPTED
7.04.010 County animal control laws adopted.
    Subject to the particular additions, deletions, and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the rules, regulations and conditions of the codified ordinances of the county of Orange as contained in:

    (a)    Division 1 of Title 4;

    (b)    Article 1 of Division 1 of Title 5;

    (c)    Sections 5-1-29 and 5-1-30 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title 5;

    (d)    Article 3 of Division 1 of Title 5;

    (e)    Division 2 of Title 5; and

    (d)    Article 17 of Division 3 of Title 5;

as may be amended from time to time by the board of supervisors of the county of Orange, California, as well as such other regulations adopted by the board of supervisors concerning animal control, including those which relate to fees, are adopted by reference under the authority of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.9 of the Government Code of the state of California and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein as part of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code and the same are hereby established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions, and conditions to be observed and followed to govern animal control, welfare, and license requirements in the city of Fountain Valley. One full copy of the above-specified provisions of the codified ordinances of the county of Orange, certified to be a true copy by the city clerk of the city of Fountain Valley is to be kept on file at the office of the city clerk of the city of Fountain Valley for public inspection. (Ord. 1534 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1404 § 1, 2008; Ord. 796 § 1, 1976; Ord. 754 § 2, 1975)

 

7.04.020 Amendments.
    The ordinances adopted hereby are intended to apply to animal control and regulation within the jurisdiction of the city of Fountain Valley in the same manner as they apply to animal control and regulation within the unincorporated area of the county of Orange. Therefore, the ordinances adopted hereby shall be amended as necessary to achieve that goal, including amending references to the county or the unincorporated area of the county to references to the city of Fountain Valley, as necessary to achieve that goal. Only those provisions of Title 5 of the Orange County ordinances relevant to animal related facilities including animal exhibitions, animal rental establishments, animal rescuers, commercial stables, grooming parlors, kennels, and pet shops are adopted hereby. (Ord. 1534 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1404 § 1, 2008; Ord. 796 § 2, 1976; Ord. 754 § 2, 1975)

 

7.04.030 Penalties.
    (a)    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) below.

    (b)    Any person who violates any provision of Section 4-1-48, 4-1-51, or 4-1-95 of Division 1 of Title 4 or any provision of Title 5 of the codified ordinances of Orange County adopted hereby is guilty of a misdemeanor. Moreover, any person who violates any other provisions of Division 1 of Title 4 the codified ordinances of Orange County and the violation occurs within one year of the occurrence of two other separate violations of this division by that person is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.

    (c)    Any license required by Article 4, Division 1 of Title 4 of the codified ordinances of the county of Orange not purchased or renewed within fifteen days after expiration, or the date on which they come due, shall be considered delinquent and a late fee as determined by resolution of the board of supervisors shall be added to the cost of the new license. The director may waive the above late fee if the director determines the applicant made a reasonable effort to comply with the above deadline.

    (d)    Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or by statute, be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    (e)    Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or by statute, be punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same code provision within a period of one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same code provision within one year.

    (f)    An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a trial by jury. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her unless he or she is arrested and not released on his or her written promise to appear, his or her own recognizance or a deposit of bail.

    (g)    Except as otherwise provided by law, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to infractions including, but not limited to, powers of peace officers, jurisdiction of courts, periods for commencing action and for bringing a case to trial and burden of proof.

    (h)    Barking Dog and Animal Nuisance Civil Fines. Fines for violating the provisions of Subarticle 2 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title 4 of the codified ordinances of Orange County shall be as follows:

    (1)    Fine for first offense (per citation): two hundred fifty dollars.

    (2)    Fine for second offense within same twelve-month period (per citation): two hundred seventy-five dollars.

    (3)    Fine for third offense within same twelve-month period (per citation): three hundred three dollars.

    (4)    Fine for fourth offense within same twelve-month period (per citation): three hundred thirty-three dollars.

    (5)    Fine for fifth offense within same twelve-month period (per citation): three hundred sixty-six dollars.

    (6)    Fine for sixth and subsequent offense within same twelve-month period (per citation): four hundred three dollars.

    In the event that a fine imposed under the authority granted by said Subarticle 2 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title 4 remains unpaid for thirty days after it is due and payable pursuant to Section 4-1-59.7 of the codified ordinances of Orange County, an amount equal to the fine shall be added as a late penalty and the late penalty and fine shall become due immediately. If a hearing officer upholds the issuance of a citation in an administrative hearing, the late penalty will be assessed if the fine is not paid within thirty days from the conclusion of the hearing. Failure to timely remit payment of a citation fine and/or late penalty authorized pursuant to said Section 4-1-59.7 will result in criminal liability and a warrant may be issued for a violator’s arrest. Nonpayment of such fine and/or late penalty shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The city at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines and late penalties. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines and late penalties owed by a violator under this subarticle have been collected. (Ord. 1534 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1404 § 1, 2008; Ord. 796 § 3, 1976)

Title 8 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1560 and 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 8.04 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.06 GRAFFITI
Chapter 8.08 FALSE REPORTS INDUCING PROSECUTION
Chapter 8.12 CONSTRUCTION AND ABANDONMENT OF WELLS
Chapter 8.16 SWIMMING POOL SAFETY
Chapter 8.20 FIREARMS
Chapter 8.24 TRESPASSING
Chapter 8.28 CONDUCT ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 8.32 CURFEW
Chapter 8.36 DRINKING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
Chapter 8.37 VENDING MACHINES DISPENSING TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Chapter 8.40 GAMES OF CHANCE
Chapter 8.48 NUDE PERFORMANCES IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED/ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 8.49 HARMFUL MATTER
Chapter 8.50 SPECIAL EVENTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 8.51 SHOPPING CART REGULATION
Chapter 8.53 VACANT PROPERTIES SECURITY AND MAINTENANCE AND REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY IN FORECLOSURE
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 8.55 CAMPING IN PUBLIC AREAS
Chapter 8.60 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Chapter 8.61 NON-MEDICAL MARIJUANA

Chapter 8.04 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
8.04.010 Purpose.
    (a)    In order to further the stated goals of the city and to protect its citizens and their property from conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public in such ways as to be a nuisance, the city council has determined that an ordinance is necessary to effectively abate or prevent the development of such conditions in this community.

    (b)    It is the intention of the city council, in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, to set forth guidelines for determining what conditions constitute a nuisance; to establish a method for giving notice of the conditions and an opportunity to correct them; and finally, in the event the nuisance is not corrected, to provide a procedure for a hearing and determination of the facts and manner in which the conditions shall be corrected or removed.

    (c)    It is the purpose of the provisions of this chapter to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby lands or buildings which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, cluttered with weeds, debris, or abandoned machinery or equipment, or are menace to life, limb, health, morals, property, safety and the general welfare of the people of this city or which tend to constitute a fire hazard or a nuisance may be required to be repaired, vacated, demolished, made safe, or cleaned up by removal of the offensive conditions.

    (d)    In addition to the abatement procedures provided herein, this chapter declares certain conditions to be public nuisances and provides that such conditions are unlawful and that violations are a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.020 Declaration of nuisance.
    (a)    Each of the following conditions is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever the hearing officer or planning commission determines that any of such conditions exist upon any premises, they may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter and make the costs of abatement a lien upon the property:

    (1)    Any public nuisance known in law or in equity jurisprudence;

    (2)    Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, or unsafe as defined in the adopted Uniform Building Code, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction. An unreasonable state of partial construction is defined as any unfinished building or structure which has been in the course of construction two years or more, and where the appearance and other conditions of the unfinished building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or reduces the property values in the immediate neighborhood;

    (3)    Unpainted buildings and those having dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. Buildings on which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation so as to render the buildings unsightly and in a state of disrepair;

    (4)    Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief;

    (5)    Building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, sidewalks, and walkways which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes depreciation of the values of surrounding property or is materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements;

    (6)    The accumulation of dirt, litter, or debris in vestibules, doorways, or the adjoining sidewalks of a building;

    (7)    Lumber, junk, trash, garbage, salvage materials, rubbish, refuse, rubble, broken asphalt, concrete, containers, scrap metal or other debris stored or deposited on a property such that they are visible from a public street, alley, or adjoining property;

    (8)    Attractive nuisances dangerous to children, including abandoned, broken, or neglected equipment and machinery; hazardous pools, ponds, and excavations; abandoned wells, shafts, or basements; abandoned refrigerators or motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fence or structure; or any other lumber, trash, garbage, rubbish, refuse, fence, debris, or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;

    (9)    Abandoned, discarded or unused furniture, stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other household appliances or fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible at ground level from a public street or alley or from adjoining property;

    (10)  Construction equipment, supplies, materials, or machinery of any type or description parked or stored in any zone other than the M-1 manufacturing district, except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property. The foregoing is not meant to prohibit the use and storage of shopsmiths and tablesaws that are customarily incidental and accessory to residential hobby or home improvement use when stored out of view at ground level from a public street or alley or from adjoining property;

    (11)  Improper maintenance of signs relating to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on the property;

    (12)  Maintenance of property so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties;

    (13)  Vehicles parked in the open space area of front yards in a residential zone except when such vehicles are operative, have current licensing and are parked on a paved drive approach to a required garage or other permitted driveway or on a fully paved narrow side yard strip adjacent thereto;

    (14)  Property maintained in relation to others so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments, and social and economic maladjustments to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from such particular areas are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered therein;

    (15)  Maintenance of property in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined in California Civil Code Section 3480, including, but not limited to, anything dangerous to human life or detrimental to human health, or any habitation that is overcrowded with occupants or that lacks adequate ventilation, sanitation or plumbing facilities, or that constitutes a fire hazard;

    (16)  Dead, decayed, diseased, overgrown or hazardous trees, weeds, and vegetation, cultivated or uncultivated, which is likely to harbor rats or vermin, or constitute an unsightly appearance, or is detrimental to neighboring properties or property values;

    (17)  Clotheslines in front yard areas and in side yard areas of corner lots;

    (18)  Any wall, fence, or hedge maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property or to cause depreciation in the value of any adjacent or neighboring property;

    (19)  Any property with pooled oil accumulation, oil or other hazardous material flowing onto public rights-of-way, or excessive accumulations of grease, oil or other hazardous material on paved or unpaved surfaces, buildings, walls, or fences, or on any public street or property;

    (20)  Any front yard area which contains excessive weeds, debris, uncultivated dirt or other conditions which created an unkempt appearance or which lacks appropriate decorative healthy planted matter. Concrete or decorative rock or bark shall be allowable front yard treatment provided that appropriate turf, plants or other living landscape materials, or synthetic turf in good condition and meeting the criteria of Section 21.20.055, are also used in front yards;

    (21)  Any condition of vegetation overgrowth which encroaches into, over or upon any public right-of-way including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or property or an impediment to public travel;

    (22)  The outside storage of boats, catamarans, dinghies, vessels, or other watercraft in any required front or side yard other than on a validly licensed trailer parked in a lawful manner;

    (23)  A swimming pool, pond or other body of water which is unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. “Polluted water” means water which contains bacterial growth, algae, insects, animal life, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, papers, chemicals or other matter or material which, because of its magnitude, nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition.

    (24)  Any property upon which there have been repeated violations of the municipal code or other laws or for which there has been a pattern of activity that would be a violation of the municipal code or other laws. (Ord. 1431 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1351 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.030 Unlawful property nuisances.
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain such property in such manner that any of the conditions set forth in Section 8.04.020 shall exist. The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter shall not be the exclusive means by which such conditions may be abated and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or provisions of the municipal code or from abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.040 “Abandoned” defined.
    For purposes of this chapter the term “abandoned” shall, in addition to such other definitions that may be provided by law, mean and refer to any item which has ceased to be used for its designed and intended purpose. The following factors, among others, will be considered in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned:

    (1)    Present operability and functional utility;

    (2)    The date of last effective use;

    (3)    The condition of disrepair or damage;

    (4)    The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item;

    (5)    The status of registration or licensing of the item;

    (6)    The age of the item and degree of obsolescence;

    (7)    The cost of rehabilitation or repair of the item versus its market value;

    (8)    The nature of the area and location of the item. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.050 “Owner” defined.
    The terms “owner” and “property owner” as used in this chapter, and unless otherwise required by the context, shall be deemed to include any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property in the city. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.060 Initiation of proceedings.
    Whenever the city manager determines, based on the recommendation of city staff, that any premises within the city may be maintained in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance, then the city manager may direct that a public hearing be conducted to ascertain whether the same constitute a public nuisance. The notice shall describe the premises involved by street address or legal description or assessor’s parcel number, shall give a brief description of the conditions constituting the nuisance, and a brief statement of the proposed methods of abatement. The city manager may also appoint a hearing officer, to conduct the nuisance abatement hearing, who may be the director of public works, director of planning, chief of police or fire chief or any other person deemed appropriate. The notice shall advise the owner what corrections need to be done to avoid a public hearing, may suggest methods for correction, and shall provide a reasonable period to make those corrections. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.070 Notice of hearing.
    (a)    The city clerk shall cause the notice of the hearing to be served upon the owner of the affected premises by providing a certified copy of the notice of the time, date and place of the hearing and of the appointment of the hearing officer.

    (b)    Such service shall be made by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s last known address, as shown upon city records or the last equalized taxroll, whichever appears to be the more reliable address. The city clerk may also cause the property to be conspicuously posted with the notice, and such posting shall constitute adequate service in the event that mailed notice is not delivered for any reason.

    (c)    The notice shall be mailed or posted so as to give at least fourteen days notice of the hearing. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.080 Form of notice.
    The notice given shall be provided in substantially the following format:

 

“NOTICE OF HEARING ON ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE

    A hearing will be held at ______________ on __________ at City Hall, 10200 Slater Avenue, Fountain Valley, before the ___________, acting as hearing officer, to determine if the premises at _______ constitute a public nuisance.

    The conditions constituting the public nuisance include the following: ________________ ______________________________________.

    A public hearing may be avoided if the following corrections are made at least two days before the date set for the hearing ______________________________________________________________________________

    If it is determined that the property constitutes a public nuisance, the following abatement action may be taken by the City if the owner has not taken corrective action:

_____________________________________________________________________________.

    If abatement action is taken by the City, the costs of the abatement will be assessed against the property and will attach as a lien until paid. All persons having an interest in this matter may attend the hearing and give testimony and evidence which will be given due consideration.”

(Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.090 Hearing.
    (a)    At the time stated in the notice, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence relating to the condition of the property. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

    (b)    Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether the premises constitutes a public nuisance. If the hearing officer determines that a public nuisance exists, the hearing officer shall declare such premises to be a public nuisance and order the abatement of the same by the property owner within a specified time. Such declaration shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections or abatement methods.

    (c)    A copy of the declaration shall be served upon the owner in the same manner as the notice of hearing. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.100 Appeal.
    (a)    Any person entitled to notice of the heating who has participated in that hearing and who is dissatisfied by the determinations of the hearing officer, may appeal those determinations by filing an appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the order by paying the appeal fee set by resolution. The appeal shall specify:

    (1)    A description of the property;

    (2)    The abatement proceedings appealed;

    (3)    The owner’s legal or equitable interest in the property;

    (4)    A statement of disputed and undisputed facts;

    (5)    A statement specifying that portion of the proceedings that are being appealed, together with any evidentiary or supporting materials that would support the appeal;

    (6)    A verification of the truth of all matters asserted.

    (b)    The planning commission, in its sole discretion, may determine whether or not to grant an appeal. If an appeal is not granted, the decision of the hearing officer shall be considered the final action on the matter and the appellant shall be so notified.

    (c)    If the planning commission determines to grant an appeal, it may limit the issues on appeal, may consider the record produced before the hearing officer, and may allow additional evidence to be produced. If the planning commission determines to grant such an appeal, it shall provide the appellant with a notice utilizing substantially the same procedure as required for the hearing before the hearing officer. In said notice the appellant will be apprised of the scope of the appeal. If an appeal is allowed, the decision of the planning commission shall be final action and the property owner shall be so notified of its determinations. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.110 Abatement of nuisance by city.
    If the nuisance is not completely abated by the date specified in the hearing officer’s declaration, or in the planning commission’s determination, as appropriate, the city manager may immediately cause the same to be abated by city personnel or under private contract. The hearing officer or planning commission are also authorized to grant reasonable extensions on the time period for abatement based on a proper showing by the property owner of extenuating circumstances made before the date of city abatement. The owner of the premises shall be liable to the city for all costs of such abatement, including administrative costs. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.115 Emergency abatement.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 8.04.060 through 8.04.110, whenever the city manager determines, based on the recommendation of staff, that an immediate threat to the public health or safety exists, the city manager may order the abatement without notice and a hearing. The emergency conditions shall be stated in the order of abatement and reasonable efforts to preserve the evidence of the same shall be undertaken before the abatement occurs. This remedy shall be in addition to any additional authority that may exist for immediate abatement. (Ord. 1197 § 1, 1993)

 

8.04.120 Cost accounting—Notification.
    City personnel, or any private contractor authorized to abate the nuisance, shall keep an account of the cost, including incidental expenses, of abating the nuisances on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council by showing the cost of abatement by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair of the property, buildings or structure, including any salvage value relating thereto. A copy of the report shall be posted at City Hall or other official location for posting city notices for at least five days before it is considered by the city council. Proof of posting shall be made by affidavit of the city clerk or deputy city clerk. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.130 Nuisance abatement lien procedures.
    (a)    Before the city council confirms the costs for the abatement as a lien on property, prior notice shall be given in compliance with Government Code Section 38773.1, or any successor statute. The notice shall be provided to the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance was maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons, provided that if the owner cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice may be served by posting and publication, all as is more specifically provided for in Section 38773.1.

    (b)    The notice of lien for recordation shall be in substantially the following form:

 

“NOTICE OF LIEN

Claim of the City of Fountain Valley

 

    TO: [Name and address of recorded owner of the parcel]

 

    Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Chapter 8.04 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code, the City Manager of the City of Fountain Valley did on or about the _________ day of ____________, 20 ___, cause the property hereinafter described to be declared a nuisance and the nuisance conditions thereon abated. The City Council of the City of Fountain Valley did on the _______ day of _____________, 20___, assess the cost of such abatement upon the property and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof. The City of Fountain Valley does hereby claim a lien for such abatement in the amount of the assessment, to wit: the sum of $____________; the same shall be a lien upon the real property until paid in full and discharged of record.

    The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Fountain Valley, County of Orange, State of California, particularly described as follows:

[legal description]

 

[street address]

 

[AP number]

 

    Dated this _______ day of ___________, 20___.

 

    ________________________________

    City Manager, City of Fountain Valley”

 

    (c)    A nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder’s office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien.

    (d)    If the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, notice of the discharge shall be recorded.

    (e)    A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action of the city for a money judgment. (Ord. 1174 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.135 Alternative special assessment procedure.
    As an alternative to the procedure specified in Section 8.04.130, the cost of the abatement may be made a special assessment against the property on which the nuisance was located. Notice of the special assessment shall be given to the owner of record before the assessment is made, and thereafter the assessment may be collected in the same time and manner as ordinary municipal taxes, and the provisions of Government Code Section 38773.5 or any successor statute shall apply. (Ord. 1174 § 2, 1992)

 

8.04.137 Procedures to recover attorneys’ fees.
    In any proceeding to abate a public nuisance for which attorneys’ fees may be recovered pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, recovery of attorneys’ fees shall be allowed pursuant to this section. Reasonable attorneys’ fees shall be allowed to the prevailing party. To obtain such attorneys’ fees, the city must elect to proceed pursuant to this section at the initiation of the individual action or proceeding. (Ord. 1400 § 1, 2007)

 

8.04.140 Alternative actions available.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any other means available to it under provisions of applicable ordinances or state law to correct hazards or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as alternatives to the proceedings herein set forth. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.150 Owner’s responsibility.
    The owner of any premises within the city has the primary responsibility of keeping his premises free of public nuisances. Tenants and occupants of the premises, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to be the agents of the owner. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.160 Abandoned and stored vehicles.
    The following procedures are adopted from the California Vehicle Code, Section 22660 et seq. and are established as the procedures for the abatement and removal as public nuisances of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private property or public property not including highways and for the recovery or assumption by the city, of costs of administration and removal thereof. The following procedures are to be used compatibly and in conjunction with the foregoing sections of this chapter, but shall take precedence wherever a conflict occurs.

    (1)    In addition to the notice provided in Section 8.04.080, at least ten days’ notice shall also be sent to the last registered and legal owner of record, by registered or certified mail, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

    (2)    The notice of determination and declaration set forth in Sections 8.04.070 and 8.04.080 shall include a description of the vehicle, the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle insofar as they are available. The notice of determination and ruling shall be served on both the owner of the premises and the registered and legal owners of the vehicle, if known, as provided above.

    (3)    (A) The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land along with his reasons for such denial. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the city shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the owner.

    (B)   Vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler’s yard or any suitable site operated by the city for processing scrap or by any other final disposition consistent with these provisions.

    (C)   Any person authorized by the city to administer this chapter may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of any vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. When such entry would violate any person’s reasonable expectation of privacy, a warrant shall first be obtained.

    (D)   A certified copy of the order of disposition of the vehicle or parts thereof shall be given to and retained by any person or commercial organization making a final disposition of the vehicle or parts thereof and said order shall be retained by them in their business records.

    (4)    After a vehicle has been removed as a public nuisance, it shall be destroyed and under no circumstances shall the vehicle be reconstructed or made operable.

    (5)    This chapter’ shall not apply to a vehicle or other personal property mentioned herein which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, or a vehicle or other personal property which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard; provided, however, that this exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under the provisions of this chapter or any other law.

 

    (6)    This chapter shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city except that actual abatement of the nuisance and removal of any and all items constituting a nuisance hereunder may be by any other duly authorized person.

    (7)    Within five days after removal of any motor vehicle under this chapter, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the date of removal, disposition thereof and identity of the vehicle or parts. In addition, all evidence of registration available including registration certificate, license plates and certificates of title shall be forwarded to the Department of Motor Vehicles as soon as possible. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.170 Violations—Misdemeanor.
    (a)    The owner or other person having charge or control of any buildings or property who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter or who violates any order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor except as provided in 8.04.175.

    (b)    Any unauthorized person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

    (c)    No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in the property which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished and removed whenever any such representative of the city or person having any estate or interest in such property is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating or demolishing and removing any such property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant hereto.

    (d)    Except as provided in 8.04.175, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. A criminal prosecution may be initiated without a nuisance hearing, as provided in this chapter, or upon a violation of any order resulting from such a hearing. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.175 Violations—Discretion to charge as infraction.
    A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor except that notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction shall be punishable by fine only as follows: upon a first conviction, a fine of not exceeding one hundred dollars; for a second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not exceeding two hundred dollars; and for each additional violation within a one-year period, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.180 Violations—Authority to arrest.
    The following designated officers and employees shall have the power to arrest persons for the misdemeanor violations of this chapter whenever the officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed the offense in his presence:

    (1)    The planning/building director;

    (2)    The code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

 

8.04.190 Violations—Citation procedure.
    (a)    If any person is arrested for a misdemeanor violation of this chapter, and such person is not taken before a magistrate as is more fully set forth in the California Penal Code, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court.

    (b)    The time specified in the notice to appear shall be not less than ten days after such arrest.

 

    (c)    The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either:

    (1)    Before a judge of the municipal court in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or

    (2)    Before an officer authorized to receive a deposit of bail.

    (d)    The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his or her written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the arrested person from custody.

    (e)    The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate notice with the magistrate specified in such notice. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail set by such magistrate. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may at his or her discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid in the county treasury for distribution as provided by Section 1463 of the California Penal Code.

    (f)    A warrant shall not issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has given such written promise to appear in court unless and until he or she has violated such promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law.

    (g)    Every person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested.

    (h)    When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest within twenty days after his or her failure to appear as promised. If a person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he or she promised to appear, then within twenty days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest. When such person violates his or her promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 8.06 GRAFFITI
8.06.010 Intent and purpose.
    The city council has found that graffiti is obnoxious and a blight on the community causing reduced property values, inviting further vandalism and crime, loss of neighborhood pride and loss of business to neighboring commercial enterprises. This chapter is intended to be complementary to, and not in conflict with, Penal Code Sections 594 and 594.1. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 1993; Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.015 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

    “Felt tip marker” means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width is greater than one-eighth inch, containing an ink that is not water soluble.

    “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any surface of public or private buildings, structures or places.

    “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, or a paint stick or etching tool capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood.

    “Paint stick” or “graffiti stick” means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty feet, and not water soluble. (Ord. 1196 § 3, 1993)

 

8.06.020 Unlawful activities and duties of removal.
    In addition to the crimes defined by Penal Code Sections 594 and 594.1:

    (a)    It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk, etch, or otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned buildings, permanent structures, or places located on public or privately owned property within the city.

    (b)    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for the purpose of defacing property, any graffiti implement while in any public park, schoolground, playground, swimming pool, public recreational facility, any public right-of-way, or other public grounds in the city. It shall be presumed that the graffiti implement was possessed for the purpose of defacing property whenever the person possesses such implement after dusk and before dawn, or whenever the person is in a public facility when the facility is closed.

    (c)    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, for the purpose of defacing property, any graffiti implement while on private property not open to the public without the owner’s or agent’s permission. It shall be presumed that the graffiti implement was possessed for the purpose of defacing property whenever the person is on property closed to the public, without permission from the owner or lawful agent.

    (d)    In addition to any other crime, it shall also be unlawful for any person who applied graffiti not to remove the same within twenty-four hours of its application. It shall be a misdemeanor for each and every day that the graffiti remains unremoved. Parents shall be responsible for the costs of removal when the graffiti has been applied by his and/or her minor child. Should community service be ordered, the parents and child should both be involved in the project. (Ord. 1196 § 4, 1993; Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.030 Graffiti removal authorized.
    Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the director of public works is authorized to use city funds to remove graffiti from publicly and privately owned structures located on public or privately owned property within the city, in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.3 or any successor statute. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.040 Findings required.
    Prior to causing the removal of the graffiti,  the director of public works shall make a finding that the graffiti or other inscribed material is obnoxious and comes within the intent and purpose of this chapter and in his or her order of abatement shall state his or her reasons therefor. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.050 Owner’s consent required.
    In the case of a privately owned structure, the consent of the owner shall first be obtained. In the case of a publicly owned structure, the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction shall first be obtained. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.060 Limitations.
    Only the removal of the graffiti itself is hereby authorized. The painting or repair of any more extensive area is not authorized. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.070 Public nuisance.
    The city council does hereby find that graffiti is a public nuisance and authorizes abatement by the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.04 of this code, in addition to any other remedies available. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.080 Rewards.
    The city council may provide a reward, by resolution, for information leading to the identification, apprehension and conviction of any person who applies graffiti within this city. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 1991)

 

8.06.090 Summary graffiti abatement and remedies.
    (a)    The city does hereby adopt the summary nuisance abatement procedures of Government Code Section 38772. The expense of the abatement shall be a lien or a special assessment against the property of any minor or other person creating, causing, or committing the nuisance.

    (b)    Provided the responsible person for graffiti nuisance is determined through a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, admission, confession or through a nuisance abatement hearing conducted pursuant to Chapter 8.04 of this code, the expenses of abatement may be made a lien or a special assessment using the procedures set forth hereinafter.

    (c)    The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor and liens for the expense of the nuisance abatement may be placed on their property and a personal obligation pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773.2 and 38773.6.

    (d)    Pursuant to Government Code Section 38772(c), the names and addresses of parents or guardians shall be reported by the probation officer to the city clerk or chief of police when such damage occurs in the city.

    (e)    As provided in Government Code Section 38772(d), the expenses of abatement shall include, but not be limited to, court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal, costs of repair and replacement of damaged property, and costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person. (Ord. 1486 § 1, 2013)

 

8.06.100 Summary graffiti abatement lien and procedures.
    (a)    The procedures for collecting abatement and other related administrative costs by a graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall include prior notice to the minor or his or her parent or guardian or other person who owns property that will be subject to the recordation of the lien.

    (b)    The notice shall be served in the same manner as a civil action and as provided in Government Code Section 38773.2(b). The notice shall provide detail of the costs of the abatement and shall be served at least ten days before the city council meeting where the costs shall be confirmed by resolution.

    (c)    A graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder’s office and shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. Such liens may be enforced through foreclosure.

    (d)    Abatement and related administrative costs shall include court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal or replacement of damaged property, costs of repair, and law enforcement costs incurred in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person. (Ord. 1486 § 2, 2013)

 

8.06.110 Special assessments for graffiti abatement.
    As an alternative to the remedy specified in Section 8.06.100, the costs of abatement of graffiti may be collected as a special assessment on the property tax rolls. Notice and confirmation of the charges shall be provided as described in Section 8.06.100. The assessment shall be collected at the same time as regular municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties. (Ord. 1486 § 3, 2013)

 

8.06.120 Treble damages available.
    Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that the owner of property or minor or other person is responsible for a condition that may be abated, the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 1486 § 4, 2013)

Chapter 8.08 FALSE REPORTS INDUCING PROSECUTION
8.08.010 Making false reports prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person to wilfully make to the law enforcement agency of the city, or any deputies thereof, or to the district attorney or any of his deputies, or to the city attorney or any of his deputies, any false, misleading or unfounded reports for the purpose of inducing or causing to be issued a complaint, for indictment against any person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 106 § 1, 1962)

Chapter 8.12 CONSTRUCTION AND ABANDONMENT OF WELLS
8.12.010 Purpose.
    It is the purpose of this chapter to control the construction and reconstruction of wells to the end that the ground water of this city will not be impaired in quality and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city; that the obligation of the city to produce and distribute water for the present and future use, benefit and protection of the citizens and residents of the city will not be impaired; and to provide for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances to the end that such wells will not impair the quality of the ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning provided in this section:

    “Abandoned and abandonment” shall apply to a well which has not been used for a period of one year, unless the owner declares in writing to the public works director his intention to use the well again for supplying water or other associated purposes (such as an observation well or injection well) and receives approval of such declaration from the public works director. All such declarations shall be renewed annually and at such time be resubmitted to the public works director for approval. Test holes and exploratory holes shall be considered abandoned twenty-four hours after construction work has been completed, unless otherwise approved by the public works director.

    “Agricultural well” means a water well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so-called stock wells.

    “Cathodic protection well” means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection, electrically, of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as a cathodic protection well or a deep anode.

    “Community water supply well” means a water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to Sections 4010 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code (the California Pure Water Act).

    “Construct, reconstruct (construction, reconstruction)” means to dig, drive, bore, drill or deepen a well, or to reperforate, remove, replace or extend a well casing.

    “Destruction” means the proper filling and sealing of a well that is no longer useful so as to assure that the ground water is protected and to eliminate a potential physical hazard.

    “Electrical grounding well” means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty feet constructed by any method for the purpose of establishing an electrical ground.

    “Individual domestic well” means a water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or commercial establishment.

    “Industrial well” means a water well used to supply an industry on an individual basis.

    “Observation well” means a well used for monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality.

    “Permit” means a written permit issued by the public works director permitting the construction, reconstruction or destruction of a well.

    “Person” means any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency.

    “Public nuisance,” when applied to a well, means any well which threatens to impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health or safety of the public.

    “Public works director” means the public works director of the city of Fountain Valley or his designee.

    “Salt water (hydraulic) barrier well” means a well used for extracting water from or injecting water into the underground as a means of preventing the intrusion of salt water into a fresh water bearing aquifer.

    “Test or exploratory hole” means an excavation used for determining the nature of underground geological or hydrological conditions, whether by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means.

    “Well” means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, for providing cathodic protection or electrical grounding of equipment, for making tests or observations of underground conditions, or for any other similar purpose. Wells shall include, but shall not be limited to, community water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, agricultural wells, cathodic protection wells, electrical grounding wells, test and exploratory holes, observation wells and salt water (hydraulic) barrier wells, as defined herein, and other wells whose regulation is necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter as determined by the city council. Wells shall not include: (a) oil and gas wells, geothermal wells, or other wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells; (b) wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments; or (c) other wells whose regulation is not necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter as determined by the city council. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.030 Well standards advisory board.
    Reference is made to Ordinance No. 2607, especially Section 4-5-16 thereof, duly adopted by the board of supervisors of the county of Orange, California. This section establishes a well standards advisory board consisting of five members with certain qualifications appointed by the county board of supervisors. The public works director and city council may be guided in their determinations by the suggestions and advice of the well standards advisory board in order to carry out the purpose of this ordinance and to effectuate uniformity within the county of Orange, relative within the city of Fountain Valley as to the construction and destruction of wells. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.040 Acts prohibited, permit required.
    No person shall, within the incorporated area of the city of Fountain Valley, construct or reconstruct any well unless such construction or reconstruction is carried out pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued for that purpose by the public works director as provided in this chapter.

    Nor shall any such person allow a well to remain abandoned, but shall destroy it pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued by the public works director.

    Nor shall any such person violate the terms of any order issued by the public works director pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.045 Permit issuance/denial.
    A permit shall only be issued for the construction of a well if the director of public works determines that the issuance of the permit will not cause:

    (1)    The withdrawal of more water from the groundwater basin than will be replenished over time;

    (2)    Saltwater intrusion;

    (3)    Adverse effects on the rate of flow through the aquifer;

    (4)    Significantly adverse effects on the water table;

    (5)    Overdraft of groundwater based upon the pre-existing and reasonably foreseeable beneficial use of water on lands within the corporate limits overlying the aquifer;

    (6)    The operation of any well in a manner that causes a cone of depression in the water table that affects a Fountain Valley municipal waterwell;

    (7)    Significantly increased energy or other production costs to the city’s water production facilities;

    (8)    Other significantly adverse environmental effects; unless the director of public works determines that the public’s interest is otherwise provided for such as, but not limited to, by agreement to mitigate or otherwise provide for such impact or through arrangements with the Orange County water district or successor entity. (Ord. 1236 § 1, 1995)

 

8.12.050 Permits.
    Applications for permits shall be made to the public works director containing such information as the public works director shall require.

    Each application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the city council on the basis of the cost incurred in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Fifty percent of the fee shall be returned to the applicant should the permit be denied or if the permit is canceled within sixty days after issuance and no work has been done. A permit shall remain in effect for one year from date of issuance.

    Permits may be issued subject to any condition or requirement found by the public works director to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

    A permit may be canceled or the conditions amended by the public works director if the public works director determines that to proceed with the work would result in a public nuisance or the permit holder has violated the terms of the permit or this chapter. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.060 Completion of the work.
    The permittee shall notify the public works director in writing upon completion of the work and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such written notification has been received. A final inspection of the work shall be made by the public works director and no permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this chapter or his permit until such inspection has been performed and all work thereon completed to the satisfaction of the public works director. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.070 Notice—Cancellation or denial of permit.
    In the event a permit is denied or cancelled, the applicant or permit holder shall be given written notice by the public works director, which notice shall specify the reasons for his action, and shall notify the applicant or permit holder of his right to request a hearing before the city council within ten days. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.080 Notice—Public nuisance.
    In the event the public works director determines that a well constitutes a public nuisance, the city clerk shall mail a written notice to the landowner and the permit holder if other than the landowner. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the affected property. The notice shall state the specific facts giving rise to such nuisance; the corrective measures deemed necessary; and time, date, and place at which a hearing shall be held by the city council relating thereto, which date shall not be less than ten nor more than thirty days after the date such notice is mailed. The notice shall state that in the event the city council determines that a public nuisance exists a special assessment shall be imposed upon the land for any costs of abatement. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.090 Immediate abatement.
    If the public works director finds that immediate action is necessary to prevent impairment of the ground water or a threat to the health or safety of the public, he may abate the nuisance without giving notice. Within twenty-four hours after initiating such abatement, the city clerk shall give notice of a hearing before the city council in the manner prescribed in Section 8.12.080. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.100 City council hearing.
    At the time fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the landowner, and by any other interested person. In the event the city council finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall direct the public works director to take any necessary action to protect the ground water or the health and safety of the public, unless the situation is corrected by the landowner on or before a date to be specified by the city council. The costs of such corrective work by the public works director shall become a special assessment upon the land pursuant to Section 8.12.110.

    If the city council finds that a permit was improperly denied or cancelled, it shall order the public works director to issue or reinstate such permit. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.110 Abatement costs a special assessment.
    Upon finding by the city council that a well constitutes a public nuisance, all costs of abatement carried out under the terms of this section shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon the parcel of land involved. If such costs are not paid within sixty days, they shall then be declared a special assessment and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. The city shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.120 Standards.
    Standards for the construction, reconstruction or destruction of wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, Chapter II. Standards for the construction, reconstruction or destruction of cathodic protection wells and electrical grounding wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

 

8.12.130 Penalty.
    Any violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall render a person guilty of a misdemeanor, and such person shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.16.010 of the Fountain Valley municipal code. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1974)

Chapter 8.16 SWIMMING POOL SAFETY
8.16.010 Purpose.
    The intent of this law is to follow the “Swimming Pool Safety Act” set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 115920 et seq., except as this chapter imposes more restrictive requirements. (Ord. 1438 § 1, 2009)

 

8.16.020 Definitions.
    Those definitions set forth in the Act shall apply except that the definition of “swimming pool” shall be amended as follows: “pool” also includes decorative ponds over eighteen inches deep, including, but not limited to, koi ponds and water features. (Ord. 1438 § 1, 2009)

 

8.16.025 Remodel.
    Whenever this chapter requires additional measures for a new pool when the pool is “remodeled,” it means a remodel that reconfigures the shape of the pool or adds new plumbing features such as a spa or fountain. Replastering or retiling an existing pool to restore the pool to the same basic configuration shall not trigger the new pool/remodeled pool requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1438 § 1, 2009)

 

8.16.030 Fence requirements for existing pools.
    This section shall apply to all pools. Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser, under contract, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool, shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises, a fence or other solid and substantially built structure not less than five feet in height with no openings therein (other than doors or gates) or projections on the exterior surface which, in the opinion of the administrative authority, would serve as a hand or foot hold to facilitate climbing of such fence or structure. A wrought iron fence, if of straight, vertical bars, not over four inches apart and with no horizontal intermediate bars which, in the opinion of said administrative authority, would defeat the purpose and intent of this chapter and “chain link” fences, if openings do not exceed two inches square, would meet the requirements of this chapter. All gates and doors opening through such enclosure shall be kept securely closed at all times when not in actual use and shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use. Such latch and device must be not less than fifty-six inches above ground for pools built prior to 1998 and sixty inches for pools built in 1998 or after, provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required, need not be so closed or so equipped. (Ord. 1438 § 1, 2009)

 

8.16.040 Fence requirements for new pools.
    (a)    Notwithstanding any provision of the Swimming Pool Safety Act, whenever a building permit is issued for construction of a new swimming pool or spa, or any building permit is issued for remodeling of an existing pool or spa, at a private, single-family home, it shall be equipped with an enclosure in accordance with Section 115923 and at least one of the following drowning prevention safety features:

    (1)    The pool shall incorporate removable mesh pool fencing that meets American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specifications F 2286 standards in conjunction with a gate that is self-closing and self-latching and can accommodate a key lockable device.

    (2)    The pool shall be equipped with an approved safety pool cover that meets all requirements of the ASTM Specifications F 1346.

    (3)    The residence shall be equipped with exit alarms on those doors providing direct access to the pool.

    (4)    All doors providing direct access from the home to the swimming pool shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device with a release mechanism placed no lower than fifty-four inches above the floor.

    (5)    Swimming pool alarms that, when placed in pools, will sound upon detection of accidental or unauthorized entrance into the water. These pool alarms shall meet and be independently certified to the ASTM Standard F 2208 “Standards Specification for Pool Alarms” which includes surface motion, pressure, sonar, laser, and infrared type alarms. For purposes of this section, “swimming pool alarms” shall not include swimming protection alarm devices designed for individual use, such as an alarm attached to a child that sounds when the child exceeds a certain distance or becomes submerged in water.

    (6)    Other means of protection, if the degree of protection afforded is equal to or greater than that afforded by any of the devices set forth above, and have been independently verified by an approved testing laboratory as meeting standards for those devices established by the ASTM or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME).

    (b)    Prior to the issuance of any final approval for the completion of permitted construction or remodeling work, the local building code official shall inspect the drowning safety prevention devices required by this act and if no violations are found, shall give final approval.

    (c)    Thereafter said property shall be continuously maintained with said enclosures and drowning safety features, all in good working order. (Ord. 1438 § 1, 2009)

 

8.16.050 Penalty.
    Any violation of this chapter by failure to install or maintain a safety feature as described herein shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this code. (Ord. 1438 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 8.20 FIREARMS
8.20.010 Use within city limits restricted.
    It is unlawful for any person, other than a police officer acting in his or her official line of duty, to shoot, fire or discharge, or for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit to be shot, fired, or discharged within the city limits, any rifle, shotgun, carbide cannon, pistol, revolver, BB gun, air gun, spear gun or any firearm except when it may be necessary so to do to protect life or property or with the written permission of the chief of police or designated representative. Shot, fired or discharged shall include blank ammunition. (Ord. 512 § 17, 1968; Ord. 293 § 1, 1964)

Chapter 8.24 TRESPASSING
Note
*   Prior ordinance history: Ords. 512, 1160 and 1203.

 

8.24.010 Entering business premises after closing hours.
    Whenever business property of any kind is posted with a sign in a conspicuous place on the premises stating that the property is closed to the public during certain hours, it is unlawful for any person to enter those premises during those hours, unless given permission by the owner or other person in lawful possession. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1999)

 

8.24.020 Trespassing on school grounds.
    (a)    No person shall enter posted school grounds during school hours without first obtaining permission from the administrative office of the school or school district, except for the following persons:

    (1)    Students, currently enrolled at that school;

    (2)    Teachers, staff members and other employees of the school district;

    (3)    Service providers and vendors doing business with the school, including counselors;

    (4)    Volunteers approved by the school;

    (5)    Parents of students currently enrolled;

    (6)    Law enforcement and other governmental employees and representatives having business at the school;

    (7)    Attendees at school events that are open to the public, while the events are open and only in the area open for the event;

    (8)    Those attending functions of authorized groups pursuant to Education Code Section 38130 et seq.

    (b)    For purposes of this section, “school hours” shall be defined to extend from one hour before classes begin to one hour after classes end, and those hours shall be posted. (Ord. 1505 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1286 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 8.28 CONDUCT ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Note
*   Prior ordinance history: Ords. 50 and 671.

 

8.28.010 Obstructing passage prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter, stand, or sit in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or cross walk so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing or attempting to pass along the same. (Ord. 1286 § 2, 1999)

 

8.28.020 Sales of merchandise prohibited.
    No person shall sell, offer to sell, or engage in the business of selling or offering for sale, or distribute or offer to distribute without charge any goods, wares, merchandise, including foods, food products and flowers, within the limits of any major, primary or secondary highway right-of-way in the city. (Ord. 1286 § 2, 1999)

Chapter 8.32 CURFEW
8.32.010 Purpose and intent.
    The city council finds that a juvenile curfew ordinance is necessary and desirable because the protection of minors warrants a higher degree of governmental regulation. This higher degree of regulation is premised upon the peculiar vulnerability of children and minors’ inability to make critical decisions in an informed and mature manner. The city council recognizes a compelling interest in preserving the safety of the community generally and providing a higher degree of protection for its minors specifically during nighttime hours. Evidence has demonstrated that enforcement of a curfew has led to decreased crime and decreased victimization of juveniles. (Ord. 1269 § 2, 1997)

 

8.32.020 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

    “Business invitee” means and includes a business establishments’ customers, patrons or other persons present at the establishment at the express or implied invitation of the business owner or manager.

    “Curfew hours” means the period from ten p.m. any evening of the week, until six a.m. the following day.

    “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

    “Establishment” means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

    “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

    “Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

    “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person.

    “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common area of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

    “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

    “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1269 § 2, 1997)

 

8.32.030 Violations.
    (a)    It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours unless excused by the provisions of Section 8.32.040.

    (b)    It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours unless excused by the provisions of Section 8.32.040. (Ord. 1269 § 2, 1997)

 

8.32.040 Defenses.
    It is a defense to prosecution of the above offenses that the minor was:

    (1)    Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or by a responsible adult;

    (2)    On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian or responsible adult, without detour or delay;

    (3)    In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel;

    (4)    Engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from employment, without detour or delay;

    (5)    Involved in an emergency;

    (6)    On the sidewalk adjacent to the minor’s residence, providing the minor is not otherwise violating the law;

    (7)    Attending an official school, religious or other adult supervised recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor, or going to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or delay;

    (8)    Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly;

    (9)    Emancipated pursuant to law;

    (10)  A business invitee of an establishment or returning home from such activity, without detour or delay. (Ord. 1269 § 2, 1997)

 

8.32.050 Enforcement procedure.
    Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under Section 8.32.040 is present or applicable. (Ord. 1269 § 2, 1997)

 

8.32.060 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who violates the offenses described in this chapter shall be guilty of an misdemeanor. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (Ord. 1269 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 8.36 DRINKING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
8.36.010 Drinking in public prohibited.
    No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage in any public place in the city. (Ord. 1268 § 1, 1997)

 

8.36.020 Public place defined.
    “Public place” is defined for the purposes of this chapter to mean and include public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways, parks, playgrounds, parking lots open to the public, school grounds, and public recreation areas within the city. “Public place” shall also include open areas and common areas of apartments, condominiums and other multifamily dwelling property including landscaped common areas, recreation areas, private streets, common pool areas, hallways, open garage ports, alleys, and other areas not enclosed by a private fence. (Ord. 1268 § 1, 1997)

 

8.36.030 Front yard areas excluded.
    Excluded from the definition of “public place” for the purposes of this chapter are the front yard areas of any single-family residence, whether the same is enclosed or not. (Ord. 1268 § 1, 1997)

 

8.36.040 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 1268 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 8.37 VENDING MACHINES DISPENSING TOBACCO PRODUCTS
8.37.010 Vending machines dispensing tobacco products.
    No person shall maintain or operate any vending machine offering cigarettes or other tobacco products except within a saloon, bar or tavern when the vending machine is located at least twenty feet from the entrance. (Ord. 1248 § 1, 1996)

 

8.37.020 Prohibition supplemental to state law.
    This chapter is intended to be supplemental to state law, and in particular Business and Professions Code Section 22960 and as the same may be amended. The definitions set forth therein may be applied to this chapter. (Ord. 1248 § 1, 1996)

 

8.37.030 Violation—Penalty.
    Violations shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 1248 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 8.40 GAMES OF CHANCE
8.40.010 Keeping, operating, conducting or maintaining prohibited.
    Every person who for profit, or for anything of value, or for commercial purposes of any nature, keeps, operates, conducts or maintains, either directly or indirectly, in the city, any house, room, apartment, dwelling place, or other place where any game, gambling or gaming not mentioned or included in Section 330 or 330A of the Penal Code of the state of California is played, conducted, dealt or carried on whether with cards, dice or any other device of whatsoever nature for money, checks, credit, merchandise or other representative of value shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail, not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    Every person either as owner, lessor, lessee, principal, agent, employee or participant or otherwise who maintains or keeps or operates or conducts directly or indirectly in whole or in part, or who directly or indirectly is in possession in whole or in part of any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place upon or in which any gambling, games or gaming prohibited in this section are played, conducted, dealt, or carried on, and who imposes or collects a fee or anything of value for the privilege of participating in any way whatsoever ion any such games, gambling or gaming, or who directly or indirectly gains or receives anything of value or any financial profit form playing, conducting, or dealing of any such games, gambling or gaming shall for the purposes of this chapter be deemed to be keeping, conducting, operating and maintaining the same for profit or commercial purposes. (Ord. 11 § 1, 1957)

 

8.40.020 Property owner violation.
    Every person who knowingly permits any of the games, gambling or gaming which by Section 8.40.010 are made unlawful to be played, maintained, operated, conducted or dealt in any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place owned or rented by such person in whole or in part is punishable as provided in Section 8.40.010. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1957)

 

8.40.030 Violation—Penalty.
    Every person who visits, frequents, participates in or knowingly permits any games, gambling or gaming which by Section 8.04.010 is or are made unlawful to be played, operated, maintained, conducted or dealt in any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail, not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 11 § 3, 1957)

 

8.40.040 Placing or betting at prohibited.
    Every person who shall place or bet at or against any of the games, gambling or gaming which by Section 8.04.010 are made unlawful shall be punishable as provided in Section 8.04.010. (Ord. 11 § 4, 1957)

Chapter 8.48 NUDE PERFORMANCES IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED/ADULT BUSINESSES
8.48.010 Nude/topless performances prohibited.
    No person shall, while acting as a waiter, waitress or entertainer in any adult or sexually oriented business establishment, expose his or her genitals, anus or the areola of a female breast. (Ord. 1283 § 2, 1998)

 

8.48.020 Adult or sexually oriented business.
    For purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding any definition in Chapter 4.37 of this code, an adult or sexually oriented business establishment means any establishment that regularly features live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of the genitals or buttocks of any person or the breasts of any female person or sexual activities that involve the exposure of the genitals or buttocks of any person or the breasts of any female person. (Ord. 1283 § 2, 1998)

 

8.48.030 Permit revocation.
    Violations of the provisions of this chapter or permitting a violation of this chapter to occur shall be cause for a revocation or suspension of a license issued pursuant to Chapter 4.37. (Ord. 1283 § 2, 1998)

 

8.48.040 Violations.
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. (Ord. 1283 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 8.49 HARMFUL MATTER
8.49.010 Harmful matter.
    No person shall display matter which is harmful to minors in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded. Compliance with this section may be effected by the placement of blinder racks in front of the material so that at least the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 1145 § 1, 1990)

 

8.49.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the terms “harmful matter” and “matter” shall have the definitions contained within Penal Code Section 313 et seq. (Chapter 7.6 “Harmful Matter”) or any successor statute. (Ord. 1145 § 1, 1990)

 

8.49.030 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter by displaying or causing to be displayed such harmful matter or by permitting such harmful matter to be displayed on property owned, leased or under the control of that person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person so violating this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violations of this chapter is committed. (Ord. 1145 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 8.50 SPECIAL EVENTS
8.50.010 Street permit.
    All street events, which are likely to attract at least seventy-five persons, including parades, processions, foot and bicycle races, assemblages and other events, including, but not limited to, marathons, bike-a-thons, triathlons and other such uses of the public streets, highways, thoroughfares, rights-of-way and other public property which are also utilized by motor vehicles, constitute traffic hazards and a threat to the public safety and are prohibited unless a properly issued street permit has first been obtained. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.020 Special events permit.
    All special events which are likely to attract at least seventy-five persons occurring on property within the city, other than that property specified in Section 8.50.010 of this code, shall be prohibited unless a properly issued special events permit has first been obtained. As hereinafter mentioned in this chapter, “special events” mean any assembly, congregation, attraction, display, entertainment, demonstration, carnival, bazaar, circus, rodeo, or other traveling show, fair, festival, food faire, cook-off, dance, concert or performance, foot race, bicycle race, walking event, parade or any other planned occurrence that is likely to become a hazard to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. The prediction of attendance or other factors that make the event likely to become a hazard shall be documented by the issuing authority at the time the determination is made. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.022 Special event exception.
    (a)    Small events shall be regulated in accordance with this section. A “small event” is any special event that is likely to draw less than five hundred persons in a four-hour period.

    (b)    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the requirements for a small event may be lessened consistent with the lessened impacts and dangers of such a small event. Those requirements shall, however, require that an application be made, that a plot plan and/or parking plan be provided, that insurance is in effect protecting the city in a form that comports with the dangers of the event but usually necessitating one million dollars in coverage, and that a letter from an owner or manager of the site be presented that confirms that permission to use the property for the event proposed has been given.

    (c)    The community services manager shall be authorized to issue such a small event permit if the event is to occur on public property other than public property located in right-of-way; as defined in Section 8.50.010. The planning/building director shall be authorized to issue such a permit if the event is to be conducted on private property, subject to the provisions in Chapter 21.48 of this code. (Ord. 1544 § 6, 2019; Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.023 Expressive activities.
    “Expressive activities” are those events which involve pure noncommercial speech under the constitutions of the United States and California and shall be subject to less regulation to comport with constitutional law as described in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.024 Spontaneous events.
    “Spontaneous events” are those expressive activities that are planned because of a current event that has occurred in the last five days. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.025 Aerial activity prohibited.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall conduct, promote, organize, stage, participate or exhibit any aerial activity in or over the city limits. “Aerial activities” include, but are not limited to, aircraft, balloons, parachutes, skydiving, hang gliders, or other device or contrivance so constructed that will carry a person on wind or air, by human power, and/or motor. Specifically exempted from this prohibition are aerial activities completely preempted by the federal government. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.030 Permit and appeal processing.
    All applications for street or special events permits must be on file with the city sixty days before the scheduled event unless an exemption applies. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager shall waive the time limits contained herein for noncommercial activity involving freedom of speech, whenever necessary to protect First Amendment rights. The city manager shall either approve or deny the application within thirty days of the date the completed application is filed. Any determination to deny or condition a permit shall be supported by facts and be in writing. The applicant shall thereafter have five days to file an appeal with the city council in the event of denial. All appeals shall be in writing and list all grounds upon which the appeal is based. Any member of the city council may also appeal any decision of the city manager. The city council may, by resolution, set appropriate fees for the filing of applications or appeals. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.040 Street permit application.
    All applications for a street permit shall be on a form provided by the city and shall provide the information necessary for staff to make their recommendations to the city manager. Said form shall provide for at least the following information:

    (1)    The applicant’s identity and the identity of a responsible natural person that will serve as the city’s primary interface for communications. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners shall appear. Where the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by the president and secretary of such corporation and shall contain the addresses of such corporate officers, and a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the application. The name, date of birth, driver’s license number, resident and mailing address of the responsible natural person shall be included. When the applicant intends to utilize a professional event-organizer, the city manager shall have the discretion to require all or some of the information required by this section for either or both so that the city shall have the identities of the responsible parties;

    (2)    The route of the event shall be provided on a diagram and shall show the starting point and terminus;

    (3)    Staging and parking areas shall be identified;

    (4)    A description of the type of event will be provided;

    (5)    The likely number of participants, assistants, workers and spectators will be provided;

    (6)    All security and directional devices proposed to be employed shall be identified. The level and type of security and personnel shall be at the sole discretion of the chief of police based on the facts presented which shall be documented;

    (7)    Water and sanitation facilities to be provided shall be identified. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.050 Street permit conditions.
    Street permits will be issued conditionally whenever the public health and safety so require. All such conditions shall be justified by determinations supported by facts. Conditions that may be imposed in such permit include, but are not limited to, the following:

    (1)    That the event only proceed along a designated route and only within certain designated parameters;

    (2)    That the permittee provide certain security or traffic directional measures for the event;

    (3)    That the permittee provide for the sanitation, trash disposal and/or water needs of all participants, assistants, workers and spectators;

    (4)    That an appropriate cash deposit or bond be posted with the city to compensate it for any special services that may be required, including but not limited to, police, fire, traffic-control and cleanup; provided that with respect to constitutionally protected noncommercial parades and demonstrations, no police fees shall be charged other than for traffic control. All charges shall be based on the hourly rate of all employees expected to be required to perform services during the event and shall contain an administrative charge to cover the support services incurred as a result of the event. The permittee shall post said deposit or bond at least fourteen days before the event. The permittee shall be given an accounting of all charges within a reasonable time after the event, and a refund if due. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.060 Special event permit application.
    All applications for a special event permit shall be on a form provided by the city, and shall provide the information necessary for staff to make their recommendations to the city manager. Said form shall provide at least the following information:

    (1)    The applicant’s identity, and the identity of a responsible natural person that will serve as the city’s primary interface for communications. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners shall appear. Where the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by the president and secretary of such corporation and shall contain the addresses of such corporate officers, and a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the application. The name, date of birth, driver’s license number, residence and mailing address of the responsible natural person shall also be included. When the applicant intends to utilize a professional event-organizer, the city manager shall have the discretion to require all or some of the information required by this section for either or both so that the city has the identity of the responsible parties;

    (2)    The address or legal description of the place where the proposed special event is to be conducted, operated or carried on. Additionally, the applicant shall submit proof of ownership of the place where the special event is to be conducted or a written statement of the owner of the premises indicating his or her consent that the site be used for the proposed special event;

    (3)    The date or dates and the hours during which the special event is to be conducted;

    (4)    A list of all employees of the applicant that will be working within the city limits prior to and during the event. The list shall include a current residence address, date of birth, driver’s license number, and a current photo of each employee. No employees may be added unless the police department has had an opportunity to investigate the proposed employee;

    (5)    A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, municipal ordinance or other crime, the nature of the offense, and the penalty or punishment assessed therefor;

    (6)    If the special event will involve rides or other concessions that are operated by independent contractors, the information required by this section will be required for each independent contractor/concessionaire;

    (7)    A detailed written explanation of the applicant’s plan to provide security, fire protection, water supplies and facilities, food supplies and facilities, sanitation facilities, vehicle access, parking spaces and on-site traffic control, and provisions for cleanup of the premises. A dimension site plan shall be submitted setting forth the location of the above items and the details of Section 8.50.070. The level and type of security and personnel shall be at the discretion of the chief of police based on the facts provided in the application which shall be documented. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.070 Special event plan requirements.
    The dimensioned plan shall be in compliance with, and set forth the details of the following:

    (1)    Location of rides and their type, games, concessions, fire extinguishers, waste disposal and sanitation facilities, tents and awnings, generators and fuel storage, food service booths and methods of cooking, and fire vehicle accessways;

    (2)    A minimum of one eight-foot aisle way shall be provided between rides, games, concessions, waste and sanitation facilities;

    (3)    One twenty-five foot fire lane shall be provided within one hundred fifty feet of the most remote event. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.080 Special event conditions.
    All special events shall be conducted in accordance with the following conditions:

    (1)    Exits, aisles, ramps, corridors and passageways shall not be blocked nor have their required width obstructed in any manner by ticket offices, turnstiles, concessions, chairs, equipment or persons.

    (2)    All combustible waste material and rubbish shall be stored in approved containers.

    (3)    Each ride, game and concession shall provide a minimum of two thirty-gallon metal trash containers, and one special dumpster shall be located on site.

    (4)    The applicant shall clear the carnival area and adjacent streets of trash and debris each evening after closing of the activity.

    (5)    All trash, debris, garbage and special dumpsters shall be removed within twenty-four hours of closing of the event.

    (6)    Fire extinguishers shall be provided at every ride and every food service booth where cooking is conducted in accordance with the fire department’s special event checklist. Travel distance shall not exceed seventy-five feet to any extinguisher located within the special event.

    (7)    All food preparation and cooking appliances shall be in accordance with the fire department’s special event checklist.

    (8)    Copies of State Fire Marshal approved certificates of flame retardance shall be provided for all tents, awnings, hangings and covers with overhangs.

    (9)    Copies of the annual state certification verifying that each ride meets all requirements of the State Industrial Safety Division shall be provided. All rides shall be marked with the current CAL-OSHA color-coded seal. All rides shall be assembled and stabilized in a manner approved by CAL-OSHA.

    (10)  An electrical permit shall be secured for any temporary electrical usage at the site. All electrical shall comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code. Fuel storage for generators shall be located a minimum of seventy-five feet from the public area. Generator fuel shall be stored in approved safety cans; maximum capacity five gallons. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.090 Inspection of games, rides and food concessions.
    At least one day prior to the opening of the special event, representatives of the city shall inspect the games, rides and concessions, and said inspections may be made at any time thereafter. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to coordinate inspections with all appropriate departments so that timely inspections are performed.

    (1)    Inspection of rides and installations regulated by the Electrical Code shall be the responsibility of the building department.

    (2)    Inspection of fire-protection devices, public assembly areas, emergency vehicular access, cooking and heating devices, flame retardancy and fuel storage shall be the responsibility of the fire department.

    (3)    Inspection of the games shall be the responsibility of the police department.

    (4)    Food service and sanitary facilities shall be the responsibility of the county health department. The applicant shall secure appropriate permits from the county therefor. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.100 Authorities for violations.
    Notwithstanding any approval given pursuant to this chapter, any city police officer, fire official or building official is hereby granted the authority to stop or prevent any immediate threat to the public health or safety, including the right to issue a cease and desist order for all or any part of the special event or any special event that is in a nuisance condition provided due process is given and the condition is documented. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.110 Investigation of application.
    Upon receipt of a complete special event application and the application fee, the business license department shall refer same to concerned departments of the city, including, but not limited to, the city attorney, police chief, fire chief, planning department, building and safety department, public works department, community services manager and the county health officer, who shall investigate the application and report in writing to the city manager within fifteen days, with appropriate recommendations relating to their official functions as to the granting of a permit and the establishment of special conditions therefor. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.120 Investigation of applicant.
    An applicant for a special event permit shall be prima facie disqualified for a permit under this chapter if he or she has been convicted of a felony. The applicant may also be prima facie disqualified if a professional event organizer or any proposed employee has been convicted of a felony. As used in this chapter, the term “conviction” includes a plea of guilty. The chief of police is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state. The chief of police shall disqualify the applicant, without a hearing by the city manager and without further proceedings, if it is determined that the applicant has been convicted or had entered a plea of guilty to a felony. An applicant who is thus prima facie disqualified for a permit may make an appeal in writing to the city manager. The city manager shall consider any mitigating factors such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of the person at the time of the conviction, contributing social or environmental conditions surrounding the conduct, and whether the conviction is unrelated to the permit or license. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.130 Insurance, indemnification and bonds.
    (a)    The applicant for a street or special event permit shall submit proof of personal injury and property damage insurance of the combined limits as determined by the documented risk exposure of the event, provided that such amount shall not be less than one million dollars. Such insurance shall provide coverage and be placed with a company with a rating approved by the city attorney with a Best’s A XII or equivalent rating. The city and its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds on said policy and the city shall be provided with a certificate of insurance evidencing this fact. Both the applicant and any independent contractors shall also provide copies of their worker’s compensation certificates for all employees.

    (b)    The applicant shall also agree to indemnify the city, its officers and employees from any claim or liability arising out of the street or special event.

    (c)    The applicant shall also post such cash deposit or bonds to protect the city from costs incurred by it for employee and other costs related to safety, security, traffic control, sanitation and other matters. The city manager shall determine the amount of the bond after receiving the department’s estimates with respect to estimated city costs. Any part of the bond not necessary to reimburse the city for its costs shall be refunded to the applicant after the event is over and an accounting available. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.140 Business license tax.
    All applicants and others required to pay a business tax for the privilege of engaging in business within this city shall also pay said tax in addition to any fees provided for herein. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.150 Waivers.
    (a)    Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any requirement of this chapter that may conflict with overriding noncommercial First Amendment protected activity shall be waived, when legally required.

    (b)    The provisions of this chapter may also be waived for nonprofit corporations that are engaged in charitable or public benefit purposes whenever those purposes benefit the city or its citizens. The insurance and indemnification provisions of this chapter shall not be waived for those nonprofit corporations. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.155 Expressive activities.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, expressive activities shall not require the payment of police costs, insurance or indemnification for the reaction of speakers. Changes in route, conditions on events or other restrictions on such speech shall also offer reasonable alternative means of communication, when feasible. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.157 Spontaneous events.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, spontaneous activities as defined in this chapter shall only require twenty-four hours’ notice and shall be limited to restrictions necessary for the public health or safety. Any permit decision shall be made within twelve hours of being provided such notice and adequate information to make a decision. Any determinations shall be in writing and supported by facts. Such determinations may be communicated to the applicant by electronic mail when necessary. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.158 City sponsored events.
    This chapter shall not apply to city sponsored events conducted on city recreational facilities or other public property. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.160 Approval or denial.
    (a)    The city manager, after consulting with the chief of police, fire chief, director of public works, director of planning/building, city attorney and any other staff person deemed appropriate, shall deny any event application if the city manager finds:

    (1)    That the application is incomplete;

    (2)    That the applicant has made a false, fraudulent or misleading statement of a material fact in the application;

    (3)    That the applicant has been convicted of a felony;

    (4)    That the applicant has failed to meet the conditions imposed by this chapter;

    (5)    That the safety, health or public welfare of the citizens would be endangered by the granting of the permit.

    (b)    Additionally, the permit may be denied, or the proposed employee disqualified from working at the special event, if the applicant, professional event-organizer, or proposed employee has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, substance/drug abuse, sexual conduct, or physical assault. In all other instances the permit shall be granted subject to such related conditions as may be imposed to further the purposes of this chapter.

    (c)    For applications not involving expressive activity protected by the First Amendment, that the application is not in the public interest.

    (d)    All determinations shall be made in writing and shall be supported by facts. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

 

8.50.170 Penalty.
    Any person violating or falling to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed. Violators may include not only those persons staging the street or special event but any person knowingly participating in the event after being advised of its illegality. (Ord. 1457 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 8.51 SHOPPING CART REGULATION*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


8.51.010 Findings and purpose.
    (a)    The Fountain Valley city council finds that abandoned shopping carts cause blighting conditions in our community. More specifically, abandoned shopping carts detract from the aesthetics of streets, sidewalks, neighborhoods, and residences and diminish property values. The abandonment of shopping carts is a public nuisance. Left in streets or on sidewalks, abandoned shopping carts are a danger to the safety and welfare of persons using public rights-of-way and interfere with the pedestrian and vehicular travel. Abandoned shopping carts are an attractive nuisance to children and may cause injury to children.

    (b)    This chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and welfare of citizens by requiring shopping cart owners to contain shopping carts on their premises. This chapter is not to be construed or applied in any manner that is inconsistent with California Business and Professions Code Section 22435 et seq., or any other provision of state law. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

    “Abandoned shopping cart” means a shopping cart which has been removed from the business premises with or without the consent of the shopping cart owner and left in or adjacent to any public right-of-way.

    “Premises” means the entire lot area maintained and managed by the shopping cart owner, including the building, parking lot, and adjacent privately owned walkways where s shopping carts are permitted.

    “Shopping cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind.

    “Shopping cart containment plan” means the plan defined in Section 8.51.090.

    “Shopping cart owner” means any owner, manager, or other person in charge of a business, firm, corporation, partnership, company or similar entity that, in connection with the conduct of a business, makes shopping carts available for customer or public use within the boundaries of the business premises.

    “Shopping cart retrieval service” means a service operated by the shopping cart owner or an independent professional retrieval service that searches for, retrieves and/or restores abandoned shopping carts to the possession of the shopping cart owner. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.030 Enforcement.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the planning director or his or her designees. The planning director or his or her designees may enter on the private property to examine a shopping cart or to cause the removal of a shopping cart pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.040 Applicability.
    This chapter shall apply to all shopping cart owners that provide shopping carts for customer use. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, Sections 8.51.060 through 8.51.110 shall only apply to shopping cart owners providing ten or more shopping carts for customer use. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.050 Shopping cart containment.
    Every shopping cart owner who provides shopping carts for customer or public use shall contain and control all shopping carts within the boundaries of the premises, except as expressly provided for in California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.4. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.060 Shopping cart retrieval.
    All shopping cart owners with ten or more shopping carts shall develop and implement a shopping cart retrieval plan for the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts which have been removed from the premises of their business. The plan may employ the personnel of the business itself or a professional retrieval service. Whether employees of the business or a professional service, the plan shall ensure adequate forces and frequency of patrol for lost, stolen or abandoned carts are employed so that all abandoned s shopping carts can be retrieved within a twenty-four hour period. All shopping cart owners shall file a copy of their shopping cart retrieval plan with the city within sixty days of opening for business, including the name and contact information of the professional retrieval service should one be employed. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.070 Mandatory signage on premises.
    Shopping cart owners must post a sign in a conspicuous place on their premises within two feet of all customer entrances and exits from the building which states at a minimum:

“Removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by law.

Business and Professions Code Section 22435.2.”

(Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.080 Shopping cart identification.
    Shopping cart owners with ten or more shopping carts shall permanently affix a sign to all shopping carts which contains the following information:

    (a)    The identity of the shopping cart owner, including business name and store number, if applicable;

    (b)    A notification of the procedures for authorized removal of the shopping cart from the premises;

    (c)    A notification that unauthorized removal of the shopping cart from the premises, or unauthorized possession, is a violation of law; and

    (d)    A valid address and telephone number to enable the shopping cart to be returned to the shopping cart owner. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.090 Shopping cart containment plan.
    If a shopping cart retrieval plan as specified in Section 8.51.060 fails to adequately contain shopping carts as determined by the planning director, the shopping cart owner shall submit a shopping cart containment plan within thirty days of a written request by the planning director or designee. This plan, at a minimum, shall include:

    (a)    Identification of Owner. The name, address, phone number, and store number of the business/owner. The plan must also include the address where the shopping carts are offered for use.

    (b)    Shopping Cart Inventory. The total number of shopping carts maintained in or on the premises.

    (c)    Mandatory Signage. A complete description of all signs to be placed in or on the premises and the shopping carts pursuant to this chapter. These descriptions must include size, wording and location where the signs are to be placed.

    (d)    Shopping Cart Containment Measures. Shopping cart owners shall describe the specific measures to be implemented to prevent unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises. Containment measures may include, but are not limited to, electronic disabling devices, use of physical barriers such as bollards, use of courtesy clerks to walk shopping carts out for customers and to return them to the store, requirement of a deposit for use of a shopping cart, or any other measures that prevent removal of shopping carts from the premises.

    (e)    Shopping Cart Retrieval. Description and identification of the shopping cart retrieval service maintained pursuant to this chapter. If an independent shopping cart retrieval service is used, a copy of the valid contract must be submitted. The owner may delete information relating to the cost of the contract or other personal information from the copy. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.100 Containment plan approval or denial.
    (a)    The shopping cart containment plan must be submitted to the planning director within thirty days after initial notification of the plan requirement. The planning director may approve or deny a plan and must notify the owner in writing of the decision. If approved, the plan shall be implemented by the owner within thirty days from the date of approval.

    (b)    The planning director may revoke or deny a plan for any of the following reasons:

    (1)    The implementation of the plan would violate any city code, law or ordinance, or state or federal law, statute or regulation;

    (2)    The plan fails to include all of the information required by this chapter;

    (3)    The plan does not prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises; or

    (4)    The plan omits facts, including special or unique conditions of the premises, which are required to be provided to ensure adequacy of the plan.

    (c)    If a plan is rejected the planning director shall inform the owner in writing of the reasons for the rejection and any corrections which need to be made to the plan for it to be approved. The owner will have ten days from the date of rejection to submit a corrected plan.

    (d)    If, at any time, the plan is ineffective, the planning director may revoke the plan and require the owner to submit a new plan for approval or denial pursuant to the provisions set forth herein. A plan shall be deemed ineffective if the shopping carts originating from the shopping cart owner’s premises are found abandoned.

    (e)    If, at any time, the shopping cart owner wants to modify the plan, the shopping cart owner shall submit the modified plan for approval or denial by the planning director pursuant to the provisions set forth herein.

    (f)    It is unlawful for any shopping cart owner in the city to fail to submit a complete plan when required by this chapter, fail to implement an approved plan, fail to maintain shopping cart retrieval service, fail to correct a rejected plan, or maintain an ineffective plan in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 8.51.110 Appeal of plan denial or revocation.
    A shopping cart owner may appeal the imposition, denial or revocation of a shopping cart containment plan. The appeal must be submitted to the city clerk in writing within twenty calendar days of the date of mailing of the notice by the city informing the shopping cart owner of the imposition, denial or revocation of a cart containment plan. The appeal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be set forth by city council resolution. Upon timely receipt of a written request for an appeal, the city manager or designee shall schedule a hearing which shall be held no later than thirty calendar days of receipt of the request for an appeal. The city manager or designee shall serve as hearing officer. At the hearing, the shopping cart owner shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and relevant documentary evidence. The hearing will be conducted informally and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence which is deemed reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered. The city manager shall provide the shopping cart owner with a written decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the shopping cart containment plan imposition, denial or revocation within ten calendar days after the hearing. The city manager’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

 

8.51.120 Violations.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.53 VACANT PROPERTIES SECURITY AND MAINTENANCE AND REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY IN FORECLOSURE
8.53.010 Purpose/scope.
    It is the purpose and intent of the Fountain Valley city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish vacant building security and maintenance standards and registration of property in foreclosure program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Abandoned” means any property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale, and/or any property which has been the subject of a foreclosure sale trustee sale or judicially authorized sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary under its deed of trust upon the conclusion of the foreclosure and any property transferred by the trustor under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale to either the beneficiary, the trustee or to another authorized entity as approved by the beneficiary.

    “Accessible property” means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc.

    “Accessible structure” means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.

    “Agreement” means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange.

    “Assignment of rents” means an instrument that assigns rents from and income generated by the tenant of a property to the mortgage lender in the case of a default on the mortgage.

    “Beneficiary” means a lender under a promissory note to pay money secured by a deed of trust on property. The word “beneficiary” as used in this chapter means and includes any assignee or successor to such beneficiary, whether such assignee or successor acquires its interest in the beneficiary’s promissory note either before a notice of default is recorded on the property securing the obligation payable to the beneficiary or after a notice of default is recorded. In the event that a property may provide security for the loan or obligation of more than one beneficiary, the beneficiary who causes its notice of default to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property as set forth in this chapter.

    “Boarded” or “boarding” shall mean and refer to the coverings of all entry points to a building or structure, including all doors, windows and roof openings, with plywood or other materials for the purpose of preventing entry into the building by any person except the owner or an authorized agent of the owner. For the purposes of residential property, the standards for boarding a vacant residential building or structure shall be substantially in accordance with those established by separate resolution of the city council. For the purpose of commercial or industrial use property, the standards for boarding a vacant commercial or industrial building or structure to prevent unauthorized entry into the building shall be as directed by written instruction of the director of planning and building based upon an inspection of the vacant building by the director of planning and building or designee.

    “Buyer” means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this section.

    “Dangerous building” means any building/structure that is in violation of any condition referenced in Chapter 8.04 of this code.

    “Days” mean consecutive calendar days.

    “Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale” means an instrument that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

    “Deed of trust” means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc.       “Default” means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation.

    “Default inspection” means a physical inspection of the exterior areas of the property conducted by the beneficiary or its designee following the occurrence of a default by the trustor under a deed of trust. When practicable, each default inspection shall be conducted upon prior reasonable notice and consent of the trustor and/or the occupant of the property. In instances when the trustor and/or the occupant consent cannot reasonably be obtained despite due and diligent inquiry by the beneficiary, or where the trustor or the occupant may expressly refuse to give the beneficiary consent to a default inspection, the beneficiary or its agent shall conduct the default inspection of the exterior areas of the property which may be viewed from the adjacent public right-of-way or from adjacent property on which the owner or occupant of such adjacent property has consented to entry onto such adjacent property by the beneficiary for the purpose of conducting a default inspection of the adjoining property. The beneficiary, or its agent, shall maintain a written record of the time and date of each default inspection and shall identify the individual who conducted the default inspection. The written record of each default inspection shall at a minimum indicate whether, at the time of the default inspection, the property was: (1) occupied or vacant, and if vacant, set forth facts to support the evidence of vacancy; (2) in compliance with the general maintenance and monitoring standard set forth in Section 8.53.040; and (3) if security appliances have been installed on the property by either the trustor, the beneficiary or its agent, or by another entity, the default inspection report shall indicate whether the installed security appliances are intact and in good and serviceable condition. A default inspection report shall contain such other property-specific information as the director of planning and building may direct in writing to the beneficiary.

    “Distressed” means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

    “Evidence of vacancy” means any set of facts or conditions that on its own or combined with other facts and conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant.

    “Foreclosure” means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults.

    “Notice of default” means a recorded notice that states that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale. This is part of the foreclosure process.

    “Owner” means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.

    “Owner of record” means the person having recorded title to the property at any given point in time the record is provided by the Orange County recorder’s office.

    “Property” means any residential, commercial or manufacturing zoned or occupied real property or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on such property, regardless of condition.

    “Residential building” means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as “residential” whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use.

    “Securing” means such measures as may be directed by the director of planning and building or designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the installation or repair of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door, window and/or other openings. In the case of residential buildings the boarding of doors, windows and/or other openings shall be installed in accordance with those standards established by separate resolution of the city council.

    “Trustee” means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a property.

    “Trustor” means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.

    “Vacant” means a building/structure that is unoccupied or not legally occupied.

    “Vacant building” means and refers to any building that is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.030 Required boarding and maintenance of vacant buildings.
    (a)    Each vacant building shall be boarded by the owner when the building can no longer be secured against intrusion by unauthorized persons by means of the closing and locking of doors and windows.

    (b)    Vacant buildings that are immediately dangerous are defined in Chapter 8.04 of this code, and if any such vacant building is open and accessible to the general public, it may be summarily boarded by the city, pursuant to Chapter 8.04 of this code.

    (c)    Any building that is boarded, whether by voluntary action of the owner, or as a result of enforcement activity by the city, shall be boarded in compliance with the standard as set forth in Section 8.53.020, under the definition of the term “boarded.”

    (d)    Each vacant building shall be actively maintained and monitored by the owner of the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.040 Maintenance and monitoring of vacant buildings.
    Active maintenance and monitoring of each vacant building or structure on each parcel of land shall include all of the following:

    (a)    If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable law, are being satisfied.

    (b)    Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials on the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located in good condition.

    (c)    Maintenance of the exterior of the building and exterior signage and signage structures, in good condition.

    (d)    Regular removal of all exterior trash and debris from the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located. Including junk mail, flyers, and or newspapers.

    (e)    Maintenance of the vacant building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations.

    (f)    Prompt removal of graffiti which has been applied to any exterior surface on the vacant building or fencing surrounding the building, including graffiti applied to any sign attached to the vacant building.

    (g)    Prevention of criminal activity on the premises (vacant building and/or the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located), including, but not limited to, use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution and criminal street gang activity. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.050 Vacant building regulations.
    (a)    Application. No owner shall allow a building designed for human use or occupancy to be a vacant building for more than thirty days, unless one of the following applies:

    (1)    The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the work of repair or rehabilitation;

    (2)    The condition of the building complies with all codes, does not contribute to blight, is ready for occupancy, as evidenced by a current certificate of occupancy, and is both actively being:

    (A)   Offered by the owner for sale, lease, or rent, and

    (B)   Maintained and monitored by the owner as provided in Section 8.53.040, or

    Notwithstanding the above, this section shall not apply when the occupant is temporarily away and has provided for the maintenance of the property in his or her absence.

    (b)    Posting Required. A vacant property shall be posted with name and address of the beneficiary and shall include a twenty-four hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five feet and shall contain along with the name and twenty-four hour contact number the words “THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY” and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL. [XXXXXXXX] OR CALL THE CITY OF FOUNTAIN VALLEY AT (714) 593-4444.” The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.060 Security and maintenance requirements for property in the foreclosure process.
    (a)    Properties in the foreclosure process shall be maintained by the beneficiary in a manner to comply with the standards set forth in Sections 8.53.040 and 8.53.050.

    (b)    The local property management company shall make available to the city upon request written confirmation that the property has been inspected not less frequently than once per week to confirm that the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.070 Additional authority.
    In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter, the director of planning and building, or designee, shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property and/or the vacant building. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.080 Fees.
    Fees and charges for the administration of the regulatory program established by this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council including, without limitation, the fee for registering with the city a property for which a notice of default has been recorded, and the separate fee for registering with the city a property which either the beneficiary or the city has found to be vacant or abandoned. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.090 Monitoring fee for vacant nuisance properties.
    Any vacant building that also constitutes a public nuisance, as defined under this code or as declared to be a public nuisance by the city council or by the city manager in a manner permitted by other applicable law, shall be subject to a monthly monitoring fee and an enforcement response fee, to recover the city’s regulatory costs to monitor and respond to the vacant building. The separate monthly monitoring fee and enforcement response fee as authorized under this section, shall be in an amount set by resolution of the city council and payable by the owner of the parcel of land on which the vacant building is situated. The monitoring fee shall be applicable even in the absence of any action, administrative or otherwise, by the city pursuant to any other provision of the city code. The monitoring fee shall be imposed upon the initial determination that the vacant property or building constitutes a public nuisance. The fee shall thereafter be imposed during each thirty-day period following the imposition of the initial monitoring fee and until the property changes its status. On buildings requiring more than one involuntary city enforcement response within any thirty-day period, an additional and separate enforcement response fee shall be imposed upon the owner of the property, for each response, upon the owner. Monitoring fees shall be imposed as long as the vacant building remains a public nuisance as provided in this section. Any monitoring fee imposed pursuant to this section may be appealed by the owner of the parcel of land on which the vacant building is situated to the city in the same manner as is specified in Chapter 1.17 of this code. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.100 Administrative penalty.
    (a)    Application. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.13.070 of this code, any owner of a parcel of property on which a building is situated which is in violation of Section 8.53.030 or 8.53.040 shall be subject to an administrative penalty, in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars per building for the first violation.

    (b)    Subsequent Violations. A second administrative penalty shall be imposed upon an owner pursuant to this chapter if the owner’s building remains in violation of Section 8.53.030 or 8.53.040 thirty days following the imposition of the first administrative penalty in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars. Additional penalties may be imposed for each succeeding thirty-day period following the imposition of the preceding administrative penalty under this chapter. Additional penalties may be imposed for each violation so long as the violation continues. Subsequent penalties shall be in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars.

    (c)    Obligation to Correct Violation. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to mean that because a responsible party has paid the administrative fine he, she, or it is excused from correcting the violation. If the responsible party fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter.

    (d)    Discretion of Penalty. The issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter is solely at the discretion of the enforcement official and is one option the city of Fountain Valley has to address violations of this code. The procedures established in this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to any criminal, civil or other remedy established by law or under the provisions of this code to address violations of this municipal code or violations of any other Fountain Valley ordinance. Issuance of an administrative citation shall be cumulative to, and shall not limit or be deemed a waiver of, the use of any other remedy. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.110 Registration of properties in the foreclosure process.
    (a)    Prior to recording a notice of default on a property located in the city of Fountain Valley which is subject to a deed of trust, the beneficiary, or its trustee, shall conduct a default inspection. Property which is vacant at the time of such default inspection shall be deemed abandoned for the purposes of this chapter. Properties that have already filed a notice of default and are currently in the foreclosure process shall be subject to the same requirements of this section.

    (b)    The beneficiary, or its agent shall register the property with the director of planning and building, on forms provided by the city within ten days from the earlier of the following dates: (1) the date a notice of default is recorded on a property; or (2) the date of a default inspection which indicates that the property is vacant or abandoned.

    (c)    In the event that at the time of the initial default inspection, the property is not vacant, the beneficiary or its agent shall conduct subsequent default inspections of the property at least once per month, commencing thirty days after the date of the recordation of the notice of default, until such time as:

    (1)    The trustor cures the breach or event of default under the deed of trust and the notice of default is rescinded by the beneficiary or the trustor; or

    (2)    The property is deemed abandoned, and the beneficiary or its agent, has registered the property as abandoned with the director of planning and building on forms provided by the city; or

    (3)    The trustor has surrendered the property to the beneficiary as evidenced by either a letter from the trustor addressed to the beneficiary confirming such surrendered, or by the trustor’s delivery of the keys to the property to the beneficiary or its agent, and the beneficiary or its agent has registered the property as abandoned with the director of planning and building on forms provided by the city; or

    (4)    The beneficiary has obtained possession of the property under the state of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1161 or 1161a or 1161b, as applicable, following the completion of the foreclosure proceeding, and the beneficiary or its agent has registered the property as abandoned with the director of planning and building on forms provided by the city. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.120 Re-registration of property subject to this chapter.
    The beneficiary or its agent shall annually renew a registration of each property which the beneficiary has previously registered with the city under this section, and in which such beneficiary retains either an equitable or legal interest as of the first anniversary of the registration of such property with the city. The beneficiary or its agent shall re- register the property on forms provided by the city. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.130 Enforcement.
    A violation of this chapter may be enforced by any means authorized by Chapter 1.13 of this code. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.140 Fine for failure to timely register a property with the city.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or Chapter 1.13 the city may impose a fine on a beneficiary for its failure to timely register a property with the city. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.150 Special provisions where property is encumbered with the security interests of multiple beneficiaries.
    (a)    In the event that a property is encumbered by the security interests of more than one beneficiary at the time when a notice of default is recorded, the beneficiary who causes a notice of default for its security interests to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property with the city as provided in Sections 8.53.110 and 8.53.120.

    (b)    Upon the recordation of a notice of default on a property by any beneficiary, regardless of the security lien interest priority of such beneficiary in the property in relation to the priority of the security interests of the other beneficiaries in the same property, the city, in its discretion may elect to enforce the provisions of this section against one or more beneficiaries who have not separately recorded a notice of default against the property. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.160 Appeals.
    (a)    Any person entitled to notice of the hearing who has participated in that hearing and who is dissatisfied by the determinations of the hearing officer, may appeal those determinations by filing an appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the order and by paying the appeal fee set by resolution. The appeal shall specify:

    (1)    A description of the property;

    (2)    The proceedings appealed;

    (3)    The owner’s legal or equitable interest in the property;

    (4)    A statement of disputed and undisputed facts;

    (5)    A statement specifying that portion of the proceedings that are being appealed, together with any evidentiary or supporting materials that would support the appeal;

    (6)    A verification of the truth of all matters asserted.

    (b)    The planning commission, in its sole discretion, may determine whether or not to grant an appeal. If an appeal is not granted, the decision of the hearing officer shall be considered the final action on the matter and the appellant shall be so notified.

    (c)    If the planning commission determines to grant an appeal, it may limit the issues on appeal, may consider the record produced before the hearing officer, and may allow additional evidence to be produced. If the planning commission determines to grant such an appeal, it shall provide the appellant with a notice utilizing substantially the same procedure as required for the hearing before the hearing officer. In said notice the appellant will be apprised of the scope of the appeal. If an appeal is allowed, the decision of the planning commission shall be final action and the property owner shall be so notified of its determinations. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.170 Notice by beneficiary to city of disposition of registered property.
    (a)    Within ten days following the release of a notice of default and the reinstatement of the loan of the trustor, the beneficiary or its agent shall give the city written notice of such release and reinstatement.

    (b)    Within ten days following the sale, transfer or other conveyance to a third person of a property registered with the city under this section, the beneficiary or its agent, shall give the city written notice of such sale, transfer or other conveyance together with current contact information for such bona fide purchaser/successor-in-interest to the beneficiary in such property. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

 

8.53.180 Violation—Penalty.
    Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution under Chapter 1.16 and/or administrative enforcement under Chapter 1.13. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 8.55 CAMPING IN PUBLIC AREAS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1560. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


8.55.010 Purpose.
    Public streets and public areas should be readily available and accessible to residents and the public for their intended purposes. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public streets and other public areas in the city in a clean and accessible condition. Camping and storage of personal property in those areas interferes with the rights of others to use those areas for the purposes for which they were intended. (Ord. 1485 § 1, 2013)

 

8.55.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    (a)    “Camp” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia.

    (b)    “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters.

    (c)    “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

    (d)    “Public area” means any public place, including, but not limited to:

    (1)    Streets, sidewalks, and alleyways, whether publicly or privately owned;

    (2)    Parking lots, whether publicly or privately owned;

    (3)    Parking structures, whether publicly or privately owned;

    (4)    Landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned;

    (5)    Privately owned parks and playgrounds;

    (6)    Privately owned plazas and marketplaces; and

    (7)    Other publicly owned or publicly managed property, whether the property is open to the public or not.

    “Public area” shall not include any area designated as a public campground pursuant to federal, state, or local law and shall also not include privately owned residential property.

    (e)    “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location.

    (f)    “Street” means the same as defined in the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1485 § 1, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 8.55.030 Unlawful camping.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in any public area. (Ord. 1485 § 1, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 8.55.040 Unlawful storage of personal property in public areas.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in any public area or in any park as defined in Section 12.08.030 of this code unless pursuant to Section 12.08.090. (Ord. 1485 § 1, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 8.55.045 Limitation.
    Section 8.55.030 (Unlawful camping) and Section 8.55.040 (Unlawful storage of personal property in public areas) shall not apply at any time there are a greater number of homeless individuals in Orange County than the number of available shelter beds in Orange County. (Ord. 1546 § 1, 2019)

 

8.55.050 Violations.
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Each day a person violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute a new and separate violation. A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 1485 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 8.60 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
8.60.010 Definitions.
    (a)    The definitions in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5, as the same may be amended from time to time, apply to this chapter and are incorporated herein by reference.

    (b)    “Qualified patient” and “person with an identification card” have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2015)

 

8.60.020 Prohibition.
    (a)    Commercial cannabis activity of all types is prohibited. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis activity in the city.

    (b)    Cultivation of cannabis is prohibited. No person, including a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall cultivate cannabis in the city.

    (c)    Delivery of cannabis to or from any location in the city is prohibited. No person shall conduct any delivery of cannabis that either originates or terminates in the city and no person shall own, manage, or operate a cannabis delivery service or business in the city.

    (d)    Dispensing cannabis is prohibited. No person shall dispense cannabis in the city.

    (e)    Cannabis dispensaries are prohibited. No person shall own, manage, operate, or work in, whether as an employee or independent contractor, a cannabis dispensary in the city.

    (f)    Nothing in this section shall prohibit a qualified patient or person with an identification card from bringing medical cannabis into the city for his or her own personal use.

    (g)    Nothing in this section shall prohibit a primary caregiver from bringing medical cannabis into the city for the use of a qualified patient or person with an identification card if that qualified patient or person with an identification card has designated the primary caregiver as his or her primary caregiver. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2015)

 

8.60.030 Penalty.
    Any violation of this chapter is unlawful and subject to all criminal, civil, and administrative penalties, remedies, and provisions set forth in Title 1 of this code. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 8.61 NON-MEDICAL MARIJUANA
8.61.010 Applicability.
    This chapter shall apply to non-medical marijuana activity. Laws pertaining to medical marijuana are contained in Chapter 8.60. (Ord. 1526 § 1, 2017)

 

8.61.020 Definitions.
    The definitions in Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time, apply to this chapter and are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1526 § 1, 2017)

 

8.61.030 Non-medical commercial marijuana activity prohibited.
    (a)    Non-medical commercial marijuana activity of all types (including cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products) is prohibited. No person shall operate, manage, conduct, or engage in non-medical commercial marijuana activity.

    (b)    No person shall own, operate, manage, conduct, or work in, whether as an employee or independent contractor, a non-medical commercial marijuana business or facility.

    (c)    The establishment or operation of one or more types of businesses licensed under Division 10 (commencing with Section 26000) of the California Business and Professions Code is prohibited. No person shall establish or operate one or more of the types of businesses licensed under Division 10 (commencing with Section 26000) of the California Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1526 § 1, 2017)

 

8.61.040 Personal cultivation of marijuana.
    (a)    No person shall cultivate non-medical marijuana in any location except within a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located on the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure. The cultivation of non-medical marijuana authorized by this subsection (a) is limited to six live plants. No person shall cultivate more than six live non-medical marijuana plants at any one time.

    (b)    Outdoor planting, cultivating, harvesting, drying, or processing of non-medical marijuana is prohibited. No person shall plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process non-medical marijuana in any outdoor location. (Ord. 1526 § 1, 2017)

 

8.61.050 Penalty.
    Any violation of this chapter is unlawful and subject to all criminal, civil, and administrative penalties, remedies, and provisions set forth in Title 1 of this code. (Ord. 1526 § 1, 2017)

Title 9 (RESERVED)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 10.12 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
Chapter 10.16 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Chapter 10.20 TURNING
Chapter 10.24 SPEED LIMITS AND ZONES
Chapter 10.28 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.32 GRADE SEPARATIONS
Chapter 10.36 RESTRICTED, ARTERIAL AND PRIVATE STREETS
Chapter 10.40 INTERSECTIONS
Chapter 10.44 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
Chapter 10.48 PARKING METERS
Chapter 10.52 LOADING AND UNLOADING
Chapter 10.56 CIVIL CITATION SYSTEM FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS
Chapter 10.60 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.64 BICYCLES
Chapter 10.68 APPEALS
Chapter 10.72 MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES
Chapter 10.76 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Definitions.
    The words and phrases in this chapter when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 415 § 1, 1966)

 

10.04.020 Use of state code definitions.
    Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Ord. 415 § 1.1, 1966)

 

10.04.030 Arterial highway.
    “Arterial highway” means as defined by the city general plan circulation element. (Ord. 415 § 1.2, 1966)

 

10.04.040 Coach.
    “Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. (Ord. 415 § 1.3, 1966)

 

10.04.050 Council.
    “Council” means the council of the city of Fountain Valley. (Ord. 415 § 1.4, 1966)

 

10.04.060 Curb.
    “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction or not so marked; the word “curb” as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. (Ord. 415 § 1.5, 1966)

 

10.04.070 Divisional island.
    “Divisional island” means an island, either raised or delineated by painted lines upon the pavement, located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (Ord. 415 § 1.6, 1966)

 

10.04.080 Grade separation.
    “Grade separation” means every structure by means of which any street passes over or under any stationary rails, tracks or another street. (Ord. 415 § 1.7, 1966)

 

10.04.090 Holidays.
    Within the meaning of this title, “holidays” are: the first day of January, the twelfth day of February, the twenty-second day of February, the thirtieth day of May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, the ninth day of September, the eleventh day of November, the twenty-fifth day of December and Thanksgiving Day. If the first day of January, twelfth day of February, twenty-second day of February, thirtieth day of May, fourth day of July, ninth day of September, eleventh day of November, or the twenty-fifth day of December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. (Ord. 415 § 1.8, 1966)

 

10.04.100 Loading zone.
    “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 415 § 1.9, 1966)

 

10.04.110 Official time standard.
    “Official time standard” means that whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. (Ord. 415 § 1.10, 1966)

 

10.04.120 Parkway.
    “Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Ord. 415 § 1.11, 1966)

 

10.04.130 Parking meter.
    “Parking meter” means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. (Ord. 415 § 1.12, 1966)

 

10.04.140 Passenger loading zone.
    “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 415 § 1.13, 1966)

 

10.04.150 Pedestrian.
    “Pedestrian” means any person afoot. (Ord. 415 § 1.14, 1966)

 

10.04.160 Police department.
    “Police department” means the law enforcement agency responsible for keeping law and order within the city. The police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Ord. 415 § 1.15, 1966)

 

10.04.170 Stand.
    “Stand” means to remain stationary or inactive. (Ord. 415 § 1.16, 1966)

 

10.04.180 Stop.
    “Stop” when required, means complete cessation of movement. (Ord. 415 § 1.17, 1966)

 

10.04.190 Stop or stand.
    “Stop” or “stand” when prohibited means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official traffic control device. (Ord. 415 § 1.18, 1966)

 

10.04.200 Vehicle Code.
    “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 415 § 1.19, 1966)

Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
10.08.010 Traffic division—Establishment by police department.
    There is hereby established by the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of the police department. (Ord. 415 § 2, 1966)

 

10.08.020 Traffic division—Duties.
    It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this title and the traffic ordinances of this city. (Ord. 415 § 2.1, 1966)

 

10.08.025 Traffic division—Non-peace officer personnel.
    The chief of police is authorized to assign any regularly employed personnel of the police department, who are not “peace officers” as that term is defined in the California Penal Code, to duties with the traffic division and with authority to enforce the provisions of Title 10 of this code, including the issuance of citations for violations thereof. (Ord. 749 § 1, 1975)

 

10.08.030 Traffic division—Accident studies.
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 415 § 2.2, 1966)

 

10.08.040 Traffic division—System of filing accident reports.
    The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 415 § 2.3, 1966)

 

10.08.050 Traffic division—Annual traffic safety report.
    The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows:

    (1)    The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;

    (2)    The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police;

    (3)    The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. (Ord. 415 § 2.4, 1966)

 

10.08.060 City traffic engineer.
    The city engineer shall serve ex officio as the city traffic engineer. Whenever the city traffic engineer is authorized to take any action in this chapter, the city engineer shall be the person who is so authorized. The city engineer may designate other qualified personnel to take such action but shall supervise that action. The city traffic engineer need not be a traffic engineer registered as such by the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1231 § 1, 1995; Ord. 737 § 1, 1975; Ord. 415 § 2.5, 1966)

 

10.08.070 City traffic engineer—Powers and duties.
    It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Ord. 415 § 2.6, 1966)

 

10.08.080 Traffic committee—Established.
    There is established an advisory traffic committee, to serve without compensation, consisting of five residents of the city, to be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the city council. The mayor may appoint, with concurrence of the city council, one or more alternate members who shall attend all meetings of the committee and who are authorized to serve and vote in place of any regular member of the committee who is absent or who disqualifies himself from participating on any matter before the committee. The alternate members, if more than one is appointed, shall be designated and serve in the order of their appointment, i.e., first alternate, second alternate. The city engineer, the city traffic engineer, the chief of police and the fire chief, or their designated representatives, shall be ex officio members of the committee to provide staff assistance to the committee. These staff members shall meet with and participate in the discussions of the committee but shall not have a vote. The committee shall serve as advisor to the city manager and a report on the committee activities and actions shall be forwarded to the city manager at regular intervals or as requested by him. (Ord. 764 § 1, 1975; Ord. 725 § 1, 1974; Ord. 575 § 1, 1970; Ord. 512 § 20, 1968; Ord. 415 § 2.7, 1966)

 

10.08.090 Traffic committee—Duties.
    The duties of the traffic committee shall consist of the following:

    (a)    To act in an advisory capacity to the planning commission and city council in the review and the development of systems, facilities, plans, policies, and programs which relate to public transportation and circulation within the city.

    (b)    To stimulate and assist in the preparation and publication of traffic reports.

    (c)    To assist the staff, planning commission, and city council in short and long-range transportation planning within the city including the review of streets and highways master planning and designation of truck routes.

    (d)    To conduct public hearings on traffic related matters.

    (e)    To review and make recommendations to the planning commission regarding site plans and tentative maps with regard to their impact on internal and external circulation matters including public parking facilities for development projects.

    (f)    To review all requests and complaints regarding traffic safety, regulations, control devices, signs and markings, public transit systems, trails, bikeways, and to make recommendations to the city council and/or appropriate city departments pertaining thereto.

    (g)    To initiate, assist with, and/or submit reports or studies for traffic safety, vehicular regulatory conditions, trails, bikeways, and public transit and transportation issues as they affect the city and to make recommendations for corrections, capital improvements, or significant operational changes to the appropriate city departments and the city council.

    (h)    The duties of the traffic committee shall in all cases be considered advisory to the city council and planning commission. The committee shall review the issues presented to it and make a report together with recommendations for action to the city traffic engineer and the city council. (Ord. 1091 § 1, 1988; Ord. 415 § 2.8, 1966)

Chapter 10.12 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
10.12.010 Authority of police and fire department officials.
    Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the designated law enforcement agency are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 415 § 3, 1966)

 

10.12.020 Traffic directing authority restriction.
    No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the designated law enforcement agency or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 415 § 3.1, 1966)

 

10.12.030 Obedience to police or authorized officers.
    No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fare department, or a person authorized by the designated law enforcement agency or by law. (Ord. 415 § 3.2, 1966)

 

10.12.040 Title compliance by persons riding bicycles or animals.
    Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 415 § 3.3, 1966)

 

10.12.050 Obstruction or interference with official.
    No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 415 § 3.4, 1966)

 

10.12.060 Public employee—Regulation compliance.
    The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 415 § 3.5, 1966)

 

10.12.070 Certain vehicles exempted.
    (a)    The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

    (b)    The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.

    (c)    The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. (Ord. 415 § 3.6, 1966)

 

10.12.080 Property damage report.
    (a)    The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall immediately notify the police department and shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city.

    (b)    Every such report shall state the time and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

    (c)    The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection (a) within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. 415 § 3.7, 1966)

 

10.12.090 Removal of vehicles from streets.
    Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed:

    (1)    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours;

    (2)    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal;

    (3)    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal.

    (4)    When used in this section, the term “street” or “highway” includes the total dedicated right-of-way as indicated on the official records either of this city or of the county of Orange, including the sidewalk and parkway portions thereof.

    (5)    When used herein, the term vehicle includes, but shall not be limited to, the definition of the term “vehicle” as used in the California Vehicle Code. In addition thereto, the term “vehicle” includes any item other than a vehicle such as a camper, camper type apparatus for carriage on a vehicle or otherwise, miscellaneous items of refuse, or any other item. (Ord. 415 § 3.8, 1966)

 

10.12.100 Advertising from vehicles.
    No person shall operate or drive any vehicle with a sound-amplifying or loudspeaking device in use upon any street or alley at any time without the express written permission from the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 415 § 12, 1966)

Chapter 10.16 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10.16.010 Driving through funeral procession.
    No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Ord. 415 § 7, 1966)

 

10.16.020 Clinging to moving vehicles.
    No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. 415 § 7.1, 1966)

 

10.16.030 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
    No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.

    For the purpose of this section “commercial vehicle” means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Ord. 415 § 7.2, 1966)

 

10.16.040 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
    No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that said sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city traffic engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. (Ord. 415 § 7.3, 1966)

 

10.16.045 Bicycles on sidewalks.
    (a)    No person shall ride any bicycle upon an public sidewalk except in the direction of traffic in the nearest lane of the paralleling public street.

    (b)    The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to sidewalks on residential streets. (Ord. 1217 § 1, 1994)

 

10.16.050 New pavement and markings.
    No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 415 § 7.4, 1966)

 

10.16.060 Obedience to barriers and signs.
    No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. (Ord. 415 § 7.5, 1966)

 

10.16.070 Entering into intersections restricted.
    No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 415 § 7.6, 1966)

 

10.16.080 Limited access.
    No person shall drive a vehicle into or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 415 § 7.7, 1966)

 

10.16.090 Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment—Permit required.
    No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code without a written permit from the city traffic engineer.

    The city traffic engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle Code, if, in his judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the city that all costs of repair to the streets or to the public property of the city damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the city traffic engineer in his discretion may require. (Ord. 415 § 17, 1966)

 

10.16.100 Flange wheel machinery.
    No person shall operate over the city streets any vehicle, piece of equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges, or other projections on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times. (Ord. 415 § 17.1, 1966)

Chapter 10.20 TURNING
10.20.010 Placement of turn markers.
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or title. (Ord. 415 § 5, 1966)

 

10.20.020 Restricted turn sign placement.
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 415 § 5.1, 1966)

 

10.20.030 Signal-controlled intersections—Right turns.
    (a)    No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section.

    (b)    The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where the traffic engineer determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 415 § 5.2, 1966)

Chapter 10.24 SPEED LIMITS AND ZONES
10.24.010 Changes to prima facie local speed limits.
    It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed permitted by California Vehicle Code Section 22352 as applicable upon the following local streets shall be as set forth in this section on those streets or parts of streets designated in this section when signs are erected giving notice thereof:


Roadway

Segment

Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit

Brookhurst Street

Garfield Avenue to north city limits

45 mph

Bushard Street

Garfield Avenue to north city limits

45 mph

Condor Avenue

Euclid Street to Mt. Washington Street

35 mph

Edinger Avenue

Magnolia Street to Santa Ana River

45 mph

Ellis Avenue

Newland Street to Euclid Street

45 mph

Euclid Street

Ellis Avenue to north city limits

45 mph

Foster Street

Phillips Avenue to Talbert Avenue

25 mph

Garfield Avenue

Newland Street to Ward Street

45 mph

Grace Avenue

Mt. Herrmann Street to Euclid Street

40 mph

Harbor Boulevard

Edinger Avenue to north city limits

45 mph

Harbor Boulevard

Heil Avenue to Edinger Avenue

45 mph

Harbor Boulevard

Santa Ana River to Heil Avenue

45 mph

Heil Avenue

Magnolia Street to Brookhurst Street

45 mph

Heil Avenue

Euclid Street to Harbor Boulevard

45 mph

Lilac Avenue

East of Harbor Boulevard

35 mph

Lilac Avenue

West of Harbor Boulevard

35 mph

Los Jardines East

All areas north and south of Slater Avenue

25 mph

Los Jardines West

All areas north and south of Slater Avenue

25 mph

Magnolia Street

Garfield Avenue to Edinger Avenue

45 mph

Mt. Herrmann Street

Newhope Street to Slater Avenue

35 mph

Mt. Washington Street

Condor Avenue to Talbert Avenue

35 mph

Newhope Street

Euclid Avenue to Edinger Avenue

40 mph

Newland Street

Garfield Avenue to Warner Avenue

45 mph

Phillips Avenue

Brookhurst Street to Foster Street

25 mph

Recreation Circle

Magnolia Street to cul-de-sac

25 mph

San Mateo Street

Slater Avenue to Warner Avenue

30 mph

Slater Avenue

Newland Street to Brookhurst Street

45 mph

Slater Avenue

Brookhurst Street to Euclid Street

40 mph

Slater Avenue

Euclid Street to Santa Ana River

45 mph

Southpark Avenue

Euclid Street to Newhope Street

30 mph

Talbert Avenue

Newland Street to Santa Ana River

45 mph

Ward Street

Edinger Avenue to north city limits

40 mph

Ward Street

Garfield Avenue to Warner Avenue

45 mph

Warner Avenue

Newland Street to Santa Ana River

45 mph

 

 

(Ord. 1522 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1449 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1329 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1325 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1253 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1251 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1193 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1171 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1163 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1073 § 1, 1987; Ord. 701 § 2, 1973)

 

10.24.020 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 415 § 14.1, 1966)

 

10.24.030 Maximum speed limit—Fountain Valley Recreation and Cultural Center roadways.
    (a)    No person shall drive any vehicle upon the roadways of the Fountain Valley Recreation and Cultural Center at a speed greater than fifteen miles per hour.

    (b)    Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars. (Ord. 791 § 1, 1976)

Chapter 10.28 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10.28.010 Installation authority.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.

    (b)    Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

    (c)    The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Ord. 415 § 4, 1966)

 

10.28.020 Signs required for enforcement.
    No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 415 § 4.1, 1966)

 

10.28.030 Obedience to traffic control devices.
    The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted to the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 415 § 4.2, 1966)

 

10.28.040 Installation of traffic signals.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

    (b)    The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works.

    (c)    Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection, street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection. (Ord. 415 § 4.3, 1966)

 

10.28.050 Lane marking.
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Ord. 415 § 4.4, 1966)

 

10.28.060 Distinctive roadway markings.
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 415 § 4.5, 1966)

 

10.28.070 Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue.
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or city ordinance whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or remain. (Ord. 415 § 4.6, 1966)

 

10.28.080 Determination of hours of operation.
    The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Ord. 415 § 4.7, 1966)

 

10.28.090 Unauthorized painting of curbs.
    No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. (Ord. 415 § 4.8, 1966)

Chapter 10.32 GRADE SEPARATIONS
10.32.010 Use by pedestrians.
    No pedestrian shall be in or upon any grade separation, except such grade separations as shall have pedestrian walks specifically designated or constructed thereon, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply, in the event of an emergency, to persons employed to do work or labor upon such grade separation, or to members of the police department when engaged in law enforcement or traffic regulations. (Ord. 415 § 15, 1966)

 

10.32.020 Use by animals.
    No person shall ride or drive any animal, even though tethered or harnessed in or upon any grade separation. (Ord. 415 § 15.1, 1966)

 

10.32.030 Operation of vehicles on grade separations.
    Unless otherwise directed by a member of the police department or other authorized person, vehicles in or upon any grade separation shall at all times stay to the right of the center of all grade separations; slow moving vehicles shall remain as close as possible to the right hand side or curb of the grade separation; and where a grade separation is marked with traffic lanes, vehicles shall cross the markings only when overtaking and passing other vehicles. It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to cross any such marking unless such movement can be made with safety. (Ord. 415 § 15.2, 1966)

 

10.32.040 Stopping, standing or parking on grade separations.
    No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle in or upon any grade separation, except in the event of an emergency, or when necessary to avoid injury or damage to persons or property, or in compliance with the direction of a member of the police department or other authorized person, or with the direction of a sign or signal. (Ord. 415 § 15.3, 1966)

 

10.32.050 Removal of vehicles from grade separations.
    When any vehicle in or on any grade separation is stopped for any reason and is obstructing or may obstruct the flow of traffic, any member of the police department may move such vehicle or have such vehicle moved to the nearest terminus of said grade separation and beyond to a place of safety. The registered owner or owners and the operator of such vehicle shall be responsible for all reasonable charges for the moving services. (Ord. 415 § 15.4, 1966)

Chapter 10.36 RESTRICTED, ARTERIAL AND PRIVATE STREETS
10.36.010 Truck routes—Establishment generally.
    (a)    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “Truck Routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons.

    (b)    When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

    (c)    The provisions of this section shall not apply to: (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or to (2) any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

    (d)    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons. (Ord. 415 § 12.1, 1966)

 

10.36.015 Truck routes—Designated.
    The city council designates certain streets or portions of streets as routes, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons. The city traffic engineer is authorized to designate the following streets as truck routes by use of appropriate signs, where in his opinion, such designation is required. These streets are described as follows:

    (1)    Brookhurst Street from northerly city boundary to southerly city boundary:

    (2)    Edinger Avenue from westerly city boundary to easterly city boundary:

    (3)    Euclid Street from northerly city boundary to Ellis Avenue;

    (4)    Garfield Avenue from westerly city boundary to Brookhurst Street;

    (5)    Harbor Boulevard from northerly city boundary to southerly city boundary;

    (6)    Magnolia Street from northerly city boundary to southerly city boundary;

    (7)    Talbert Avenue from westerly city boundary to easterly city boundary;

    (8)    Warner Avenue from westerly city boundary to easterly city boundary;

    (9)    Slater Avenue from Euclid Street to easterly city boundary;

    (10)  Newhope Street from Talbert Avenue to Warner Avenue. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1984; Ord. 854 § 1, 1978: Res. 5053 § 3, 1969)

 

10.36.020 Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets.
    (a)    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.

    (b)    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are hereby declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. (Ord. 415 § 12.2, 1966)

 

10.36.030 Master arterial plan adopted.
    That master arterial plan adopted by the board of supervisors of the county of Orange, state of California on May 31, 1956, with subsequent amendments, for the county of Orange, state of California, consisting of the general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares is hereby adopted by the city council of Fountain Valley and made a part hereof with the same effect as if fully set forth in this chapter, insofar as said master arterial plan pertains to and covers the city of Fountain Valley. (Ord. 65 § 1, 1961; Ord. 19 §§ 1, 2, 1958)

 

10.36.040 Tract No. 5318—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 5318 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    Slater Avenue (Private) from Euclid Street (Private) to Appalachian Street.

    Appalachian Street from Slater Avenue (Private) to El Amarillo Avenue.

    El Amarillo Avenue from Appalachian Street to Euclid Street (Private).

    Euclid Street (Private) from El Amarillo Avenue to Slater Avenue (Private).

    Pleasant Court from Slater Avenue (Private) to Dead End.

    La Naraja Court from Appalachian Street to Dead End.

    Hood Court from El Amarillo Avenue to Dead End.

    El Paraiso Court from Euclid Street (Private) to Dead End. (Ord. 326 §§ 1 and 3, 1965)

 

10.36.050 Tract No. 5339—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 5339 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    San Jose Street

            Meadowlark Avenue to Whippoorwill Avenue

    Meadowlark Avenue

            Brookhurst Street (private) to San Jose Street

    Whippoorwill Avenue

            Brookhurst Street (private) to San Jose Street

    Brookhurst Street (private)

            Meadowlark Avenue to Whippoorwill Avenue

    Quail Avenue

            Brookhurst Street (private) to Dead End

    Los Caballos Street

            Quail Avenue to Dead End

    Los Caballos Court

            Los Caballos Street to Dead End

    Quail Court

            Quail Avenue to Dead End.

(Ord. 317 §§ 1 and 3, 1965)

 

10.36.060 Tract No. 5356—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 5356 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    Brookhurst Street (private) from San Juan Court to Sparrow Avenue

    Sparrow Avenue from Brookhurst Street (private) to San Marcos Street

    San Marcos Street from Sparrow Avenue to Ellis Avenue (private)

    Ellis Avenue (private) from San Marcos Street to dead end

    San Juan Court from Brookhurst Street (private) to dead end

    San Miguel Court from Brookhurst Street (private) to dead end

    Los Coyotes Court from Brookhurst Street (private) to dead end

    San Pablo Court from San Marcos Street to dead end. (Ord. 327 §§ 1 and 3, 1965)

 

10.36.070 Tract No. 5459—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 5459 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health, and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    Lilac Way

            Sterling Street to 35¢ w/o Robson Court

    Sterling Street

            Edinger Street to Gloxinia Avenue

    Gloxinia Avenue

            Sterling Street to 35¢ e/o Godwin Court

    Bogart Court

            Gloxinia Avenue to Dead End

    Logan Court

            Gloxinia Avenue to Dead End

    Tulip Court

            Sterling Street to Dead End

    Rocky Court

            Lilac Way to Dead End

    Godwin Court

            Gloxinia Avenue to 39¢ w/o Gloxinia (Ord. 311 §§ 1 and 3, 1964)

 

10.36.080 Tract No. 5651—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 5651 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private street hereinafter described is hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained street within the city that is generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connects directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that it is a privately owned and maintained street and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained street is described as follows:

    La Lila Lane (private) (Ord. 413 §§ 1 and 3, 1966)

 

10.36.090 Tract No. 5718—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 5718 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    La Margarita Street

            La Rosa Lane to Los Jardines West

    La Rosa Circle

            La Rosa Lane to Dead End

    La Rosa Lane

            La Margarita Street to La Lima Street

    La Lila Street

            La Rosa Lane to Los Jardines West

    La Lima Street

    La Rosa Lane to Los Jardines West (Ord. 332 §§ 1 and 3, 1965)

 

10.36.100 Tract No. 5774—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 5774 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    Lilac Way

            35′ w/o Robson Court to Adams Court

    Stockdale Street

            Verbina Court to Gloxinia Avenue

    Gloxinia Avenue

            35′ e/o Godwin Court to Stockdale Street

    Robson Court

            Lilac Way to Dead End

    Adams Court

            Lilac Way to Dead End

    Verbina Court

            Harbor Boulevard to Dead End

    Saddle Court

            Gloxinia Avenue to Dead End

    Godwin Court

            39′ s/o Gloxinia to Dead End (Ord. 310 §§ 1 and 3, 1964)

 

10.36.110 Tract No. 6108—State code street control.
    All the private streets within Record Tract No. 6108 shall be controlled through the provisions of the State Vehicle Code.

    Private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    El Plano Avenue (private) from Los Jardines West to Los Modelos Street (private)

    Los Modelos Street (private) from El Plano Avenue (private) to Los Jardines East. (Ord. 394 §§ 1 and 3, 1966)

 

10.36.111 Tract No. 7075—State code street control.
    All the private streets located within Record Tract No. 7075 shall be controlled by the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city of Fountain Valley that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    Cobalt Court

    Pebble Court

    Prell Court

    Rexbon Court

    Onyx Court

    Indies Court

    Hyde Court

    Chere Court

    Mauna Court

    Calera Court

    Poly Court

    Patom Court. (Ord. 733 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.112 Tract No. 7605—State code street control.
    All the private streets located within Record Tract No. 7605 shall be controlled by the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city of Fountain Valley that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    Rhodolite Court

    Royale Court

    Obsidian Court

    Custer Court. (Ord. 733 § 2, 1974)

 

10.36.113 Tract No. 7667—State code street control.
    All the private streets located within Record Tract No. 7667 shall be controlled by the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city of Fountain Valley that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    Rhodolite Court

    Camo Bluff Court.

    Pebble Court (Ord. 733 § 3, 1974)

 

10.36.114 Tract No. 6587—State code street control.
    All the private streets located within Record Tract No. 6587 shall be controlled by the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city of Fountain Valley that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    San Hugo Lane

    La Zana Court. (Ord. 845 § 1, 1978)

 

10.36.115 Tract No. 7117—State code street control.
    All the private streets located within Record Tract No. 7605 shall be controlled by the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The private streets hereinafter described are hereby found and declared to be privately owned and maintained streets within the city of Fountain Valley that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connect directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that they are privately owned and maintained streets and control thereof is required for the public safety, health and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained streets are described as follows:

    San Ysidro Lane

    La Dona Court. (Ord. 845 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.116 Tract No. 12816—State code street control.
    The private street located within Record Tract No. 12816 shall be controlled by the provisions of-the California Vehicle Code. The private street hereinafter described is found and declared to be a privately owned and maintained street within the city that is generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and which so connects directly or indirectly with highways that the public cannot determine that it is a privately owned and maintained street and control thereof is required for the public safety, health, and welfare.

    Said privately owned and maintained street is described as follows:

    Callens Circle. (Ord. 1133 § 1, 1989)

 

10.36.120 State code application to private streets.
    Private streets pursuant to Section 21107.5 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California and the provisions of said Vehicle Code are hereby made applicable to all of the privately owned and maintained streets described in Sections 10.36.040 through 10.36.116. (Ord. 1133 § 2, 1989; Ord. 413 § 4, 1966; Ord. 394 § 4, 1966; Ord. 332 § 4, 1965; Ord. 327 § 4, 1965; Ord. 326 § 4, 1965; Ord. 317 § 4, 1965; Ord. 311 § 4, 1964; Ord. 310 § 4, 1964)

 

10.36.130 Traffic flow signing authority.
    All signing for traffic flow including, but not limited to, parking and speed limits, on the private streets described in Sections 10.36.040 through 10.36.116 shall be under the discretion of the city engineer and traffic engineer. (Ord. 1133 § 3, 1989; Ord. 413 § 2, 1966; Ord. 394 § 2, 1966; Ord. 332 § 2, 1965; Ord. 327 § 2, 1965; Ord. 326 § 2, 1965; Ord. 317 § 2, 1965; Ord. 311 § 2, 1964; Ord. 310 § 2, 1964)

Chapter 10.40 INTERSECTIONS
10.40.010 Visibility obstructions.
    Whenever the city traffic engineer finds that any item obstructs the view of any intersection, or the view of any traffic upon the streets approaching such intersection, he is authorized to remove or reduce in height said obstruction within a reasonable time, after directed by the city traffic engineer to remove said obstruction.

    If the owner or any person having control of the property whereon said obstruction is located does not remove said obstruction within a reasonable time, after directed by the city traffic engineer to remove said obstruction, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The city traffic engineer may then proceed to abate and/or remove the obstruction in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. The owner and/or person having control of the property shall be liable for any cost incurred by the city in abating and/or removing said obstruction. (Ord. 1231 § 2, 1995; Ord. 415 § 16, 1966)

 

10.40.020 Yield intersections designated.
    When authorized “yield” signs are in place, all drivers shall yield to through traffic. The following intersections are designated as yield intersections:

    (1)    BROOKHURST STREET (PRIVATE) and QUAIL AVENUE: Brookhurst Street (private) shall yield to Quail Avenue. (Res. 5053 § 2, 1969)

Chapter 10.44 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
10.44.010 Stop sign erection.
    Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:

    A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required, provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 415 § 6, 1966)

 

10.44.020 Stop at through street or stop sign.
    (a)    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section.

    (b)    The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 415 § 6.1, 1966)

 

10.44.025 Through streets designated.
    The streets or portions of streets, intersections or entrances thereto in this city, hereinafter described in this section, are defined and established as through streets and stop intersections and shall be governed by the provisions of Section 10.44.010.

    (1)    BROOKHURST STREET from Garfield Avenue to the northerly city boundary;

    (2)    BUSHARD STREET from Garfield Avenue to the northerly city boundary, except at Garfield Avenue, Ellis Avenue, Talbert Avenue, Slater Avenue, and Edinger Avenue;

    (3)    EDINGER AVENUE from Magnolia Street to Harbor Boulevard, except at Euclid Street and Newhope Street;

    (4)    ELLIS AVENUE from the westerly city boundary to the easterly boundary, except at Magnolia Street and Bushard Street;

    (5)    EUCLID STREET from Ellis Avenue to the northerly city boundary, except at Talbert Avenue and Edinger Avenue;

    (6)    GARFIELD AVENUE from the westerly city boundary to the easterly city boundary, except at Magnolia Street and Bushard Street;

    (7)    HARBOR BOULEVARD from the southerly city boundary to the northerly city boundary;

    (8)    HEIL AVENUE from the westerly city boundary to the easterly city boundary, except at Magnolia Street, Bushard Street, Brookhurst Street, Euclid Street, Newhope Street and Harbor Boulevard;

    (9)    LILAC AVENUE from Mt. Richardson Street to one thousand three hundred twenty feet east of Harbor Boulevard, except at Harbor Boulevard;

    (10)  LOS ALAMOS STREET from one thousand nine hundred eighty feet south of Slater Avenue to Slater Avenue, except at Slater Avenue;

    (11)  MAGNOLIA STREET from the southerly city boundary to the northerly city boundary, except at Garfield Avenue, Ellis Avenue, Talbert Avenue, and Slater Avenue;

    (12)  NEWHOPE STREET from the easterly city boundary to Edinger Avenue, except at Warner Avenue and Edinger Avenue;

    (13)  NEWLAND STREET from southerly city boundary to the northerly city boundary, except at Garfield Avenue, Ellis Avenue, Talbert Avenue, Slater Avenue, and Warner Avenue;

    (14)  ROSS STREET from the northerly line of El Rancho Avenue to fifty feet southerly of the centerline of Warner Avenue;

    (15)  SLATER AVENUE from the westerly city boundary to the easterly city boundary, except at Newland Street, Magnolia Street, Bushard Street, Ward Street, and Euclid Street;

    (16)  TALBERT AVENUE from the westerly city boundary to the easterly city boundary, except at Magnolia Street and Bushard Street;

    (17)  WARD STREET from the southerly city boundary to the northerly city boundary, except at Garfield Avenue, Ellis Avenue, Talbert Avenue, Warner Avenue, Slater Avenue and Edinger Avenue;

    (18)  WARNER AVENUE from the westerly city boundary to the easterly city boundary. (Ord. 568 § 1, 1970; Res. 5053 § 1, 1969)

 

10.44.030 Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway. (Ord. 415 § 6.2, 1966)

 

10.44.040 Application of provisions.
    (a)    The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking, of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

    (b)    The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 415 § 9, 1966)

 

10.44.050 Stopping or standing in parkways.
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 415 § 9.1, 1966)

 

10.44.060 Maintenance of no stopping zones and no parking areas.
    The city traffic engineer is hereby directed to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this title, and the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

    When said curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 415 § 9.2, 1966)

 

10.44.065 Maintenance of no-parking areas—Private roads—Commercial establishments.
    The city traffic engineer is directed to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, no parking areas on those private roads in the commercial establishments set forth in Section I of Ordinances 774, 795, 834, 846, 861, and 925.

    When said curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle adjacent to any such discernible curb marking or legible sign in violation of any of the provisions of said ordinances or of this title.

    Any person in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility may designate stalls and spaces for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or to disabled veterans, as specified in California Code Section 9105, provided that such designation shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background. (Ord. 953 § 3, 1982; Ord. 925 § 3, 1981; Ord. 861 § 3, 1978; Ord. 846 § 3, 1978; Ord. 834 § 3, 1977; Ord. 795 § 2, 1976; Ord. 744 § 3, 1975)

 

10.44.067 Private parking lots—Speed regulation.
    The city police department is authorized to enforce California Vehicle Code Sections 22350, 23103 and 23109 relating to the basic speed law, reckless driving and speed contests, respectively, and is authorized to enforce all provisions of Division 16.5 of the California Vehicle Code relating to the operation of off-highway vehicles on those premises as set forth in Section I of Ordinance No. 835 if the owner or operator has caused the requisite notice to be posted at the entrance to the parking facility, as described in Section II of Ordinance No. 835. (Ord. 835 § 3, 1977)

 

10.44.068 Vehicle removal from private property.
    The owner or person in lawful possession of private property may cause the removal of a vehicle parked on that property to the nearest public garage by following the procedure set forth in Vehicle Code Section 22658, provided that a sign at least twenty-two inches wide and seventeen inches in height with one-inch black lettering on a white background is displayed in plain view at all entrances to the property prohibiting public parking or otherwise limiting such parking to a specific time limit and including the other information required by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1010 § 1, 1985)

 

10.44.070 No-parking areas.
    No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:

    (1)    Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

    (2)    On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

    (3)    In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, or in any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

    (4)    In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

    (5)    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street, or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking;

    (6)    At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

    (7)    At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

    (8)    Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device;

    (9)    On any street established by resolution as an area restricted exclusively for use by vehicles of physically handicapped persons, whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or to disabled veterans as specified in California Vehicle Code Section 9105, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by blue paint upon the curb surface;

    (10)  In any parking stall or parking area on city-owned or operated parking facilities if that stall or area has been designated by ordinance or resolution as restricted for the exclusive use of vehicles of physically handicapped persons, whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or to disabled veterans, as specified in California Vehicle Code Section 9105; provided that the spaces be indicated by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background. (Ord. 795 § 1, 1976; Ord. 415 § 9.3, 1966)

 

10.44.075 No parking two a.m.—six a.m.
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on any through highway within the city designated below, between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of every day:

    Euclid Street, from the northerly city limits to Talbert Avenue, except the east side from Warner Avenue to Slater Avenue;

    Brookhurst Street, except the east side between Talbert Avenue and Garfield Avenue;

    Magnolia Street;

    Edinger Avenue;

    Warner Avenue, except the south side between Brookhurst Street and Ward Street;

    Talbert Avenue, from westerly city limits to Euclid Street. (Ord. 850 § l, 1978)

 

10.44.076 No parking or standing—Street sweeping.
    (a)    No operator of any motor vehicle, and no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any street in the city that is designated as to days and times for street sweeping, when signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice of the parking prohibition.

    (b)    The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs in all areas of the city advising of the exact days and times during which such parking prohibition shall be in effect. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1978)

 

10.44.078 No parking—Fire lanes.
    No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device, along the edge of any highway, at any curb, or in any location in a publicly or privately owned or operated off-street parking facility, designated as a fire lane by the fire department. The designation shall be indicated by a sign posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from, the designated place clearly stating in letters not less than one inch in height that the place is a fire lane, by outlining or painting the place in red and, in contrasting color, marking the place with the words “FIRE LANE,” which are clearly visible from a vehicle or by a red curb or red paint on the edge of the roadway upon which is clearly marked the words “FIRE LANE.” (Ord. 985 § 1, 1984)

 

10.44.079 Permit parking system.
    Permit parking may be established and installed in accordance with the Permit Parking System City Council Policy, which delineates procedures by which a permit parking district may be established to mitigate parking intrusion from outside sources into residential neighborhoods. Each districts shall be adopted by separate resolution. Once a permit parking system has been established for an area, no person shall park in said area, unless exempted in said system, without a duly authorized permit. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and punished in accordance with Government Code Section 36900. (Ord. 1195 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1026 § 2, 1985)

 

10.44.080 Storage of vehicles on streets.
    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy‑two hours. (Ord. 415 § 9.4, 1966)

 

10.44.090 Parking for demonstration.
    No operator of any vehicle shall park said vehicle, nor shall any person place any item upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or display. (Ord. 415 § 9.5, 1966)

 

10.44.095 Parking for demonstration on property.
    (a)    No person shall park, store or leave standing any motor vehicle for the principal purpose of advertising or selling that motor vehicle on property not zoned for such purpose. It shall be a prima facie violation of this section if a vehicle is parked for more than one hour on property not owned by the registered or legal owner, with a for sale sign or other medium advertising the vehicle for sale, and the person parking the vehicle is not a business invitee, guest or have another immediate destination of premises within three hundred feet of the vehicle.

    (b)    This section shall not prohibit an owner, lessee or other lawful occupant of property from advertising his/her vehicle for sale on that property. (Ord. 1157 § 1, 1990)

 

10.44.100 Repairing or greasing vehicles on streets.
    No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Ord. 415 § 9.6, 1966)

 

10.44.110 Washing or polishing vehicles.
    No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. (Ord. 415 § 9.7, 1966)

 

10.44.120 Parking adjacent to schools.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

    (b)    When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 415 § 9.8, 1966)

 

10.44.130 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

    (b)    When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 415 § 9.9, 1966)

 

10.44.140 Parking on grades.
    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (within any business or residence district) without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 415 § 9.10, 1966)

 

10.44.150 Peddler and vendor restrictions.
    (a)    Except as otherwise provided in this section no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that such vehicles, wagons, or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution, upon order of, or by agreement with a customer.

    (b)    No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart, or vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the traffic committee which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.

    (c)    No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the traffic committee which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand.

    (d)    Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the traffic committee upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 415 § 9.11, 1966)

 

 

10.44.160 Emergency parking signs.
    (a)    Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

    (b)    When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 415 § 9.12, 1966)

 

10.44.170 Display of warning devices when commercial vehicle disabled.
    Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within this city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred feet in advance of, and one hundred feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. (Ord. 415 § 9.13, 1966)

 

10.44.180 Twenty-four minute parking.
    Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays.

    When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. (Ord. 415 § 10, 1966)

 

10.44.190 Thirty minute parking.
    When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period time longer than thirty minutes. (Ord. 415 § 10.1, 1966)

 

10.44.200 One hour parking.
    When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. (Ord. 415 § 10.2, 1966)

 

10.44.210 Two hour parking.
    When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. (Ord. 415 § 10.3, 1966)

 

10.44.220 Diagonal parking.
    On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except:

    (1)    At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space;

    (2)    With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb. (Ord. 415 § 10.4, 1966)

 

10.44.230 Parking space markings.
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

    When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 415 § 10.5, 1966)

 

10.44.240 No stopping or standing zones.
    The city traffic engineer shall designate established zones by placing. and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping or standing of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping or standing is prohibited.

    During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or stand said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping or standing zones. (Ord. 415 § 10.6, 1966)

 

10.44.250 No parking of commercial and other large vehicles on all streets.
    (a)    Prohibition. No persons shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in excess of eighty-four inches width (excluding mirrors), or in excess of twenty-two feet in length or in excess of ten thousand pounds in weight on any city street. The registered owner of the vehicle and any other person having control of the vehicle shall be guilty of the offense if aware that the vehicle had been so parked and the person parking had the express or implied permission to operate the vehicle.

    (b)    Exception—Loading or Unloading. The prohibition provided in subsection (a) shall not apply when a vehicle is making a delivery or pick up of goods, wares, merchandise, supplies or materials or if moving items to or from a location, including when construction activities are occurring.

    (c)    Exception—Public Transportation Passenger Buses. The provisions of subsection (a) shall also not apply to public transportation passenger buses.

    (d)    Exception—Emergency Services. The prohibitions of subsection (a) do not apply to emergency vehicles, including ambulance or similar medical transportation services.

    (e)    Exception—Police Permit Parking. The prohibitions of subsection (a) shall not apply to parking authorized by a permit as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 1414 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2003; Ord. 597 § 1, 1970; Ord. 415 § 10.7, 1966)

 

10.44.260 Restricted parking of trailers.
    (a)    No person shall stop, stand or park any trailer. (as defined in the California Vehicle Code Sections 242, 630, 635 and 636) on any city street. The owner of the trailer or other person having control of the trailer shall also be guilty of the offense if aware that the trailer had been so parked and the person parking the trailer had the express or implied permission to utilize the trailer.

    (b)    Notwithstanding the above, parking of trailers, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be allowed for the purposes of loading or unloading or other appropriate short term use provided that one of the following permits has been issued in advance by the police department:

    (1)    A permit for loading, unloading, or other appropriate short term use for a thirty-six hour period, providing no more than eight such periods are allowed in a calendar month. Such permits may be only issued to a resident of the city and the resident must prove they are the registered owner of the trailer. In residential zones, such parking shall be limited to the area in front of the residence from which the loading or unloading will occur, or in reasonable proximity thereto if the front of the residence is not available for parking; or

    (2)    Where there are multiple registered owners of a trailer or a resident, owns multiple trailers, only eight permits per residence may be issued in any combination per month;

    (3)    A permit for visitor parking in a residential zone may be issued for a period of twenty-four hours, providing no more than three such periods are allowed per month per residence. Such permits may only be issued to persons visiting a resident within the city and such visitor must provide proof that the registered owner of the trailer resides outside the city. Such parking shall be limited to the area in front of the host residence, or in reasonable proximity thereto if the front of the hosting residence is not available for parking;

    (4)    A permit may be issued to park a commercial truck trailer where the person responsible for the trailer can prove the parking of the trailer is for a commercial or other type business in the city. However, no permit will be issued for a commercial vehicle trailer to park during the hours of darkness on any street;

    (5)    No permit will be issued to allow for a commercial truck trailer to park on a residential street;

    (6)    The issuance of a parking permit does not alleviate the responsible person or registered owner from other parking laws;

    (7)    A permit may only be extended for one additional thirty-six hour period. After the second thirty-six-hour permit expires, an applicant must wait thirty-six hours before applying for an additional permit;

    (8)    A permit may be granted if any person proves that a medical necessity requires street parking;

    (9)    The details of the permit system shall be provided in an implementing ordinance. (Ord. 1413 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1200 § 1, 1993; Ord. 700 § 1, 1973)

 

10.44.261 Human habitation on public streets or property.
    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle, trailer, boat, camper or motor home as defined in the California Vehicle Code, shall utilize or allow others to utilize the vehicle for human habitation except in an approved trailer park or court. (Ord. 1365 § 4, 2005)

 

10.44.265 Parking of certain vehicles prohibited.
    (a)    No person shall stop, stand or park any recreational vehicle (as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18010 or successor statute) in excess of twenty-two feet in length, a width of eighty-four inches (excluding mirrors) or ten thousand pounds in weight on any street in the city having a width of forty feet or less, curb to curb, or cul-de-sac thereof. The registered owner of the vehicle or other person having control of the vehicle shall also be guilty of the offense if aware that the vehicle had been so parked and the person parking had the express or implied permission to operate the vehicle.

    (b)    Notwithstanding the above, parking of recreational vehicles, as defined in (a) above, shall be allowed for the purposes of loading or unloading or other appropriate short term use provided that one of the following permits have been issued in advance by the police department:

    (1)    A permit for loading, unloading, or other appropriate short term use for a thirty-six hour period, providing no more than eight such periods are allowed in a calendar month. Such parking shall be limited to the area in front of the residence from which the loading or unloading will occur, or in reasonable proximity thereto if the front of the residence is not available for parking, or

    (2)    A permit for visitor parking for a period of twenty-four hours, providing no more than three such periods are allowed per month per residence. Such permits may only be issued to persons visiting a resident within the city and such visitor must provide proof that the driver of the recreational vehicle resides outside the city. Such parking shall be limited to the area in front of the host residence, or in reasonable proximity thereto if the front of the hosting residence is not available for parking.

    (3)    A permit may be granted if any person proves that a medical necessity requires street parking.

    (4)    The details of the permit system shall be provided in an implementing ordinance. (Ord. 1343 § 1, 2002)

 

10.44.270 No parking — Lilac Avenue.
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in excess of eighteen feet in length or over eight feet in width on Lilac Avenue from Richardson Street to Harbor Boulevard. Any such vehicle parked or left standing in said prohibited area may be removed. Adequate notice of these provisions shall be provided by signs or other markings. (Ord. 1218 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 10.48 PARKING METERS
10.48.010 Zones.
    The streets or portions of streets hereinafter described in Chapter 10.24 are hereby defined and established as parking meter zones within which the parking of vehicles shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of parking meters. (Ord. 415 § 13, 1966)

 

10.48.020 Manner of installation.
    The city traffic engineer shall cause parking meters to be installed and maintained in all parking meter zones.

    Parking meters shall be installed upon the curb or sidewalk and immediately adjacent to each parking space. Each meter shall be placed in such manner as to show or display by a sign or signal that the parking space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use.

    Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal parkings for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time as indicated on the meter. Each parking meter shall indicate the limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent to the parking meter, and shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a said meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of said legal parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. (Ord. 415 § 13.1, 1966)

 

10.48.030 Time of operation.
    The provisions of this title relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. on every day except Sundays and holidays. (Ord. 415 § 13.2, 1966)

 

10.48.040 Operational procedure to be followed.
    Immediately after occupancy of a parking meter space, the operator of a vehicle shall deposit a coin of the United States in said parking meter and if necessary turn a crank, knob, or handle in accordance with the instructions posted on the face of the parking meter. (Ord. 415 § 13.3, 1966)

 

10.48.050 Fees.
    The parking meter fees for the parking meter zones herein established shall be as follows:

    (1)    Where a parking meter indicates a limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent thereto to be twenty-four minutes or less, one hour or two hours, the parking meter fee shall be set forth by resolution of the city council.

    (2)    Where a parking meter indicates a limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent thereto to be thirty minutes, the parking meter fee shall be set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1254 § 1, 1996; Ord. 415 § 13.4, 1966)

 

10.48.060 Time expiration.
    No operator of any vehicle shall permit said vehicle to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking. (Ord. 415 § 13.5, 1966)

 

10.48.070 Time extension beyond limit.
    No person shall follow the operational procedure or any part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which said parking meter is placed. (Ord. 415 § 13.6, 1966)

 

10.48.080 Improper use of meter.
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States or deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. (Ord. 415 § 13.7, 1966)

 

10.48.090 Unauthorized coin deposit.
    No person, other than the owner or operator of a vehicle, shall deposit any coin in any parking meter without the knowledge or consent of said owner or operator of the vehicle using the parking space immediately adjacent to said meter. (Ord. 415 § 13.8, 1966)

 

10.48.100 Use of meters and standards restricted.
    No person shall attach anything to or allow a bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a parking meter standard. (Ord. 415 § 13.9, 1966)

 

10.48.110 Rule of evidence.
    The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this title. (Ord. 415 § 13.10, 1966)

 

10.48.120 Use of deposited moneys.
    All moneys collected from parking meters in this city shall be placed in a special fund, which fund shall be devoted exclusively to the following purposes:

    (1)    For the purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of parking meters in this city and for the payment of any and all expenses relating or incidental thereto;

    (2)    For the purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating, and maintaining of off-street parking facilities in this city;

    (3)    For the installation, and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals;

    (4)    For the painting and marking of streets and curbs required for the direction of traffic and parking of motor vehicles;

    (5)    For the proper regulation, control and inspection of parking and traffic upon the public streets;

    (6)    To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of and interest on off-street parking revenue bonds issued by this city, or any parking district organized within this city. (Ord. 415 § 13.11, 1966)

 

10.48.130 Chapter application.
    No section of this chapter shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other provision of this title. (Ord. 415 § 13.12, 1966)

Chapter 10.52 LOADING AND UNLOADING
10.52.010 Authority to establish loading zones—Designation.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark         loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

    (1)    At any place in the central traffic district or any business district;

    (2)    Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

    (b)    In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

    (c)    Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

    (d)    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. (Ord. 415 § 11, 1966)

 

10.52.020 Meanings of curb markings.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:

    (1)    Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

    (2)    Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes.

    (3)    White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:

    A.    When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times;

    B.     When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed.

    (4)    When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this title has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 415 § 11.1, 1966)

 

10.52.030 Effect of permission to load or unload.
    (a)    Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

    (b)    The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

    (c)    Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.

    (d)    Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (Ord. 415 § 11.2, 1966)

 

10.52.040 Standing for loading or unloading only.
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.52.030. (Ord. 415 § 11.3, 1966)

 

10.52.050 Standing in passenger loading zone.
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.52.030. (Ord. 415 § 11.4, 1966)

 

10.52.060 Standing in any alley.
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Ord. 415 § 11.5, 1966)

 

10.52.070 Bus and coach zone establishment.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.

    (b)    Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Ord. 415 § 11.6, 1966)

Chapter 10.56 CIVIL CITATION SYSTEM FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS
10.56.010 Civil administrative procedures adopted.
    The civil penalties and administrative procedures set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 40200 et seq., are hereby adopted and parking violations of this code are subject to those civil penalties and procedures. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

10.56.020 Fines and penalties.
    The fines and penalties for parking offenses shall be established in a separate resolution. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

10.56.030 Collection of fines and administration of the system.
    The city council may award a contract to a private vendor for the collection of fines and the administration of the civil citation system. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

10.56.040 Procedures.
    The city council shall establish written procedures for the processing of civil citations and for conduct of contested hearings that shall ensure an independent, objective, fair and impartial review of contested parking violations. Such procedures shall be established in a council policy. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

10.56.050 Hearing officers.
    The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint or contract with qualified examiners or administrative hearing providers to conduct administrative hearings. The examiner shall not be employed, managed or controlled by a person whose primary duties are parking enforcement, parking citation, processing, collection or issuance and shall be separate and independent of the processing functions. A hearing officer’s employment shall not be directly or indirectly linked to the amount of fines collected. Examiners shall have the requisite qualifications as stated in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

10.56.060 Oversight.
    An annual review of the contractor providing these services shall be made by the city manager, which shall include a review of complaints made by motorists regarding the contractor. Procedures shall be established in the council policy for said review and the council shall be provided with a summary of the review upon completion. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 10.60 PEDESTRIANS
10.60.010 Traffic engineer to establish marked crosswalks.
    (a)    The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway.

    (b)    Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block.

    (c)    The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk as so indicated. (Ord. 415 § 8, 1966)

 

10.60.020 When pedestrians must use crosswalks.
    No pedestrian shall cross an arterial highway within four hundred feet of a crosswalk other than by a crosswalk. (Ord. 415 § 8.1, 1966)

Chapter 10.64 BICYCLES
10.64.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings:

    (a)    “Bicycle” means and includes any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen inches.

    (b)    “Bicycle license receipt” means and includes that ownership card issued by the licensing agency or agent of the city upon receipt of the designated license fee.

    (c)    “Bicycle plate” means and includes the license tag or decal designated by the state, in accordance with Section 39001 of the California Vehicle Code, to be permanently affixed to the bicycle and which bears a unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state.

    (d)    “Licensing agency or agent” means and includes that party or parties designated by the city council as the official licensing agency or agent for bicycles in the city. For purposes of this chapter, the police department shall be deemed the licensing agency. The chief of police shall be given the authority to recommend for appointment by the city council any person or persons to assist the licensing agency in the capacity of bicycle licensing agents. The licensing agency or agent shall license bicycles for persons residing in the city only. All other bicycle license applicants shall be referred to their respective city or jurisdiction of residency. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.020 Bicycle licensing required.
    No person residing in the city shall ride or propel any bicycle upon a public street, sidewalk, alley, bicycle lane, path or any public property, or have in his possession any bicycle which has not been licensed and for which the appropriate license fee has not been paid or which does not bear a bicycle plate as required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.030 License receipt/bicycle plate—Issuance.
    At the time that any person licenses a bicycle and pays the appropriate license fee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the licensing agency or agent shall provide said person with a license receipt bearing the owner’s name, address, telephone number, bicycle plate number, the bicycle manufacturer, type and frame number, and any other descriptive material concerning the bicycle deemed necessary by the licensing agency, together with information for the transfer of ownership of the bicycle. In addition, also at the time of licensing, the bicycle owner shall be issued his permanent bicycle plate bearing the unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the State Department of Motor Vehicles. The bicycle license shall remain in effect for the period designated by the Department of Motor Vehicles in accordance with Section 39001 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.040 Sale or transfer of bicycle.
    Whenever any person sells, trades, disposes of or transfers any bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he shall endorse upon the license receipt previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of same, setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the transferee, the date of transfer, and the signature of the transferor, and he shall deliver such license receipt, so endorsed, to the licensing agency at the time of transfer. The transferee shall, within ten days after such transfer, apply to the licensing agency for a transfer of the license receipt. A fee shall be charged for the transfer of ownership, in accordance with a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.050 Change of address of bicycle licensee.
    Whenever any bicycle licensee changes his place of residence, he shall notify the licensing agency of such change of address within ten days. There shall be no charge for said change of address. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.060 Lost or stolen license receipt/bicycle plate—Report/replacement.
    In the event that any license receipt issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is lost or stolen, the licensee of such bicycle shall immediately notify the licensing agency, and within ten days after such notification shall apply to the licensing agency for a duplicate license receipt, whereupon the licensing agency shall issue to such licensee a duplicate license receipt, upon payment to the licensing agency of the fee set forth in the schedule of fees, etc.

    In the event that any bicycle plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is lost or stolen, the licensee shall immediately notify the licensing agency of such loss, and shall within ten days apply to the licensing agency for a new bicycle plate, whereupon the licensing agency shall issue to such licensee a new bicycle plate, upon payment to the licensing agency of the fee set forth in the schedule of fees, etc. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.070 Fees.
    The fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be set forth in a resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.080 Tampering with license receipt/bicycle plate—Prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate or alter any license receipt issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or in any way alter or tamper with any bicycle plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.090 Bicycle retailer—Weekly bicycle sales reports required.
    Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling or trading bicycles at retail within the city is required to make a weekly report to the licensing agency giving the name, address and telephone number of all persons either buying, selling or trading bicycles and the bicycle manufacturer, type, frame number and bicycle plate number, model and color, if any. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.100 Bicycles in violation of chapter—Impounding.
    The licensing agency shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.110 Violation—Penalty.
    The violation of any of the provisions of this .chapter is an infraction and shall be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed five dollars. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

 

10.64.120 Enforcement.
    The chief of police and his designated representatives shall enforce and carry out the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the provisions included in the California Vehicle Code and all other laws of the state. (Ord. 756 § 2, 1975)

Chapter 10.68 APPEALS
10.68.010 Procedure.
    Any person denied a permit or aggrieved by any direction, order or decision of the traffic committee or city traffic engineer may appeal to the city council. Such appeal must be in writing and filed with the city clerk. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regular council meeting or as soon thereafter as possible. (Ord. 415 § 18, 1966)

Chapter 10.72 MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES
10.72.010 Scope.
    This chapter is designed to regulate the operation of registered and unregistered motorcycles and motor driven cycles by all persons, whether they possess a valid California motor vehicle operators license or not, upon unimproved private property and upon all public property except highways, in the city. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

 

10.72.020 Definitions.
    (a)    Motorcycle. A “motorcycle” is any motor vehicle other than a tractor having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and weighing less than one thousand five hundred pounds.

    (b)    Motor-driven cycle. A “motor-driven cycle” is any motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five horsepower, and every bicycle with motor attached.

    (c)    Highway. “Highway” is a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes street.

    (d)    Unimproved private property. “Unimproved private property” means any parcel of land which either contains no structures or which is not surfaced with cement, concrete, asphaltic concrete, or other similar material, or which does not have a hard surface made up of a mixture of rock, sand or gravel bound together with a chemical or mineral substance other than natural soil. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

 

10.72.030 Prohibited operations.
    (a)    No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle other than a publicly owned motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, upon any public sidewalk, walkway, parkway or in any public park or recreational area or upon any other publicly owned property, except highways, within the city. This shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle having a valid California vehicle registration by any person possessing a valid California operator’s license upon the public highways in the city.

    (b)    No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, other than a publicly owned motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, upon any unimproved parcel of real property within the city, except as set forth in Section 10.72.040. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

 

10.72.040 Exceptions.
    Any person desiring to operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, and any owner of private property desiring to allow a person or persons to operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on his private property may do so upon first obtaining a permit from the chief of police of the city. Permits shall be issued upon his determination that: (a) the owner or owners of said real property concerned, or the person or persons in lawful possession thereof, have consented in writing to the proposed operation; and (b) that the city fire marshal has certified that such proposed operation will not create any undue fire hazard by reason of the nature of the vehicle and its proposed operation or by reason of the ‘nature of the property concerned; and (c) that such operation is of sufficient distance from occupied residences, churches, assembly halls or schools, as to likely not constitute a noise, dust or fumes nuisance. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

 

10.72.050 Operation by permit.
    The operation of any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on unimproved private property by authority of a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.72.040, shall be limited to the hours commencing one-half hour before sunrise and ending one-half hour after sunset. The operation of said vehicles shall not be permitted nearer than two hundred yards to any residential structure, church, assembly hall or school. Each permit so issued shall specify the effective date or dates of operation for which the permit is valid and shall further specify the area or areas of permitted operation. The permit shall be displayed on the vehicle at all times and shall be presented to any peace officer on request. The permit is not, and shall so state on its face, an expression by the city that such proposed operation can be done with safety to the operator or other persons or property, all of which said risks are assumed by the permittee or property owner. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

 

10.72.060 Appeal.
    Any person whose application for a permit is denied may appeal such decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days after notification by the chief of police that the permit has been denied. The city council shall thereupon conduct a hearing on the appeal within thirty days from the date of filing said notice of appeal with the city clerk. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive upon all persons concerned. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

 

10.72.070 Violations—Penalties.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars but not exceeding one hundred dollars, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty days, or by both said fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

 

10.72.080 Separability.
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified herein, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 578 § 1, 1970)

Chapter 10.76 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
10.76.010 Purpose.
    In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council of the city of Fountain Valley hereby makes the following findings and declarations:

    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.020 Definitions.
    (a)    VEHICLE. “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

    (b)    HIGHWAY. “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

    (c)    PUBLIC PROPERTY. “Public property” does not include “highway.”

    (d)    OWNER OF THE LAND. “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle or parts thereof is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

    (e)    OWNER OF THE VEHICLE. “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.030 Exemptions.
    This chapter shall not apply to:

    (a)    A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

    (b)    A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

    Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California and this chapter. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.040 Scope.
    This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.050 Enforcement.
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.060 Alternate enforcement.
    When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.070 Administrative costs.
    The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.080 Abatement and removal.
    Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.090 Notice of intention to abate.
    A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

 

“NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

(Name and address of owner of the land)

 

    As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at __________________, you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Section 10.76.050 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ________________, license number _________________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.76 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code.

    You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Fountain Valley and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land, on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

    As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Clerk within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

    Notice Mailed _______________

                                    (date)

            s/________________________

                        (locally designated officer)”

 

“NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle-notice should be given to both if different)

    As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle — make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Section 10.76.050 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.76 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code.

    You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice.

    As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Clerk within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

    Notice Mailed_______________

                                    (date)

            s/________________________

            (locally designated officer)”

(Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.100 Public hearings—Request.
    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the city clerk within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

    If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.110 Public hearings—City council.
    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city council which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.

    The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

    If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city council shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

    If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. The city council may render its decision at the close of the hearing, but in no event later than five days after its hearing. The decision shall be delivered to any interested party in writing. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.120 Order for removal.
    Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.76.110, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.130 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
    Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.140 Administrative costs—Lien.
    If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.76.110 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.150 Misdemeanor.
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of five days unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. (Ord. 642, 1971)

 

10.76.160 Refusal to abate.
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. (Ord. 642, 1971)

Title 11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 11.04 STREETS NOT YET DEDICATED
Chapter 11.06 ELECTRICAL FRANCHISE
Chapter 11.07 GAS FRANCHISE
Chapter 11.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENTS
Chapter 11.12 NEWS RACKS

Chapter 11.04 STREETS NOT YET DEDICATED
11.04.010 Home occupation before development acceptance.
    The city council does hereby determine that subdividers and developers who are building homes within the city have allowed people to occupy said homes before the entire tract or development has been completed and so accepted by the city. (Ord. 304 § 1, 1964)

 

11.04.020 Hazardous maintenance of streets.
    The city council recognizes that streets and roadways within subdivisions or developments are many times maintained in such a condition as to be a nuisance or hazardous to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 304 § 2, 1964)

 

11.04.030 Street inspection.
    The city engineer is hereby directed to inspect all such streets and roadways within any such development occupied by people to determine if such streets or roadways are a nuisance or hazardous to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 304 § 3, 1964)

 

11.04.040 Notification of hazard.
    In the event the city engineer determines that any such streets or roadways are such a nuisance or hazard, he shall notify the developer or subdivider thereof. (Ord. 304 § 4, 1964)

 

11.04.050 Correction of condition.
    The nuisance or hazardous condition shall thereafter be corrected to the satisfaction of the city engineer within forty-eight hours after notification. (Ord. 304 § 5, 1964)

 

11.04.060 Order by engineer to halt work.
    Should the nuisance or hazardous condition be not so corrected, the city engineer may in his discretion order all work within the tract or development stopped until the corrections are properly made. (Ord. 304 § 6, 1964)

 

11.04.070 Abatement by city.
    The city engineer may in his discretion, should the nuisance or hazardous condition be not so corrected, order at city expense the work necessary to abate the nuisance or alleviate the hazardous condition, the cost of which shall thereafter be charged to the developer or subdivider and paid before any further use and occupancy permits are issued by the city. (Ord. 304 § 7, 1964)

Chapter 11.06 ELECTRICAL FRANCHISE
11.06.010 Electrical franchise granted in city streets.
    Pursuant to the Franchise Act of 1937, the city has entered into a franchise agreement with the Southern California Edison Company. Said franchise was granted pursuant to uncodified Ordinance No. 17 adopted on June 3, 1958. This chapter does not supercede uncodified Ordinance No. 17 but incorporates the provisions of Ordinance No. 17 and adds other provisions as authorized pursuant to the Franchise Act of 1937, Public Utilities Code Sections 6201 through 6302 so that a ready reference is available. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.020 Terms and conditions.
    The terms and conditions of said franchise are those set forth in the Act, incorporated in the agreement and as further provided in this chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, in the event of a conflict, between this chapter and uncodified Ordinance No. 17, the terms of uncodified Ordinance No. 17 shall control. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.030 Definitions.
    Whenever in this section the words or phrases hereinafter in this chapter are used, it is intended that they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein they are used shall clearly import a different meaning):

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

    “Construct and use” means to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace or relocate.

    “Grantee” means the corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this chapter is granted and its lawful successors or assigns.

    “Poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, cables, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators, conduits, ducts, vaults, manholes, meters, cut-outs, switches, appurtenances and any other property located or to be located in, along, across, upon, over or under the streets of said city, and used or useful, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of transmitting or distributing electricity.

    “Streets” means the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within said city. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.040 Nature of the franchise.
    The franchise shall be to use and to construct and use, for transmitting and distributing electricity for any and all purposes, poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances, including communication circuits, necessary or proper therefor, in, along, across, upon, over and under the streets within the city of Fountain Valley, is granted to Southern California Edison Company, its lawful successors and assigns, upon the terms and conditions set forth in the Franchise Act of 1937. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.050 Term.
    Said franchise shall be indeterminate, that is to say, said franchise shall endure in full force and effect until, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, the same shall be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by the grantee, or until the state or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of said franchise and situate within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until said franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the grantee. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.060 Franchise payment.
    The grantee of said franchise, during the life thereof, will pay to said city two percent of the gross annual receipts of said grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts derived by grantee from the sale of electricity within the limits of said city. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.070 Verification of gross receipts.
    The grantee shall file with the city clerk of said city, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of this franchise, and within three months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, a verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of said grantee derived during the preceding calendar year, or said fractional calendar year, from the sale of electricity within the limits of said city. The grantee shall pay to said city within fifteen days after the time for filing said statement, in lawful money of the United States, the aforesaid percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, covered by said statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file said verified statement, or to pay said percentage at the times or in the manner hereinbefore provided, shall constitute grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of grantee hereunder. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.080 Ordinance No. 17—Other matters.
    The original processing dates of the franchise and related matters, including acceptance, are set forth in uncodified Ordinance No. 17. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.090 Construction duties.
    In accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 6294, the grantee of a franchise under this chapter shall construct, install and maintain all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, and appurtenances in accordance and in conformity with all of the ordinances and rules adopted by the legislative body of the municipality in the exercise of its police powers and not in conflict with the paramount authority of the state, and, as to state highways, subject to the laws relating to the location and maintenance of such facilities therein. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.100 Indemnification.
    In accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 6296, the grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the municipality and its officers from all liability for damages proximately resulting from any operations under the franchise. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.110 Relocation.
    In accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 6297, the grantee shall remove or relocate without expense to the municipality any facilities installed, used, and maintained under the franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street, way, alley, or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct, by the municipality. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

 

11.06.120 Payment for repairs to public property.
    In accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 6295, the grantee shall pay to the municipality on demand the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any of the operations of the grantee under the franchise. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 11.07 GAS FRANCHISE
11.07.010 Gas franchise granted in city streets.
    Pursuant to the Franchise Act of 1937, the city has entered into a franchise agreement with the Southern California Gas Company. Said franchise was originally granted pursuant to uncodified Ordinance No. 308 adopted on October 19, 1964 and transferred to Southern California Gas Company on September 1, 1970. This chapter incorporates the provisions of that ordinance and adds other provisions as city is authorized to provide pursuant to the Franchise Act of 1937, Public Utilities Code Sections 6201 through 6302. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.020 Terms and conditions.
    The terms and conditions of said franchise are those set forth in the Act, as incorporated in the agreement and as further provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.030 Definitions.
    The following definitions, taken from Ordinance No. 308, shall apply:

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated or reincorporated form.

    “Engineer” means the city engineer of the city.

    “Gas” means natural or manufactured gas, or a mixture of natural and manufactured gas.

    “Grantee” means the corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this chapter is granted and its lawful successors or assigns.

    “Lay and use” means to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace, or remove.

    “Pipes and appurtenances” means pipe, pipeline, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, appliance, attachment, appurtenance and any other property located or to be located in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of the city, and used or useful in transmitting and distributing gas.

    “Streets” means the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within said city. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.040 Nature of the franchise and term.
    That the right, privilege and franchise, subject to each and all of the terms and conditions contained in this chapter, and pursuant to the provisions of Division 3, Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California, known as the Franchise Act of 1937, be and the same is granted to Southern California Gas Company of California, a corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the state of California, herein referred to as the “grantee,” to law and use pipes and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing gas for any and all purposes, under, along, across or upon the streets, of the city, for an indeterminate term or period from and after the effective date hereof, that is to say, this franchise shall endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by its possessor, or under the state of California or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of this franchise, and situate within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until this franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its term by the possessor thereof. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.050 Franchise payment.
    The grantee shall pay to the city at the times hereinafter specified, in lawful money of the United States, a sum annually which shall be equivalent to two percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of the grantee derived from the sale of gas within the limits of the city under this franchise. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.060 Verification of gross receipts.
    The grantee of this franchise shall file with the clerk of the city within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the grant of this franchise, and within three months after the expiration of each and every calendar year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of the grantee, its successors or assigns, during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of the utility service within the city for which this franchise is granted. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city within fifteen days after the time for filing such statement, in lawful money of the United States, the specified percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay said percentage, at the times or in the manner hereinbefore provided, shall be grounds for the declaration of forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights thereunder. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.070 Integration/abandonment.
    This grant is made in lieu of all other franchises, rights, or privileges owned by the grantee, or by any successor of the grantee to any rights under this franchise, for transmitting and distributing gas within the limits of the city, as said limits now or may hereafter exist, and the acceptance of the franchise hereby granted shall operate as an abandonment of all such franchises, rights and privileges within the limits of this city, as such limits now or may hereafter exist, in lieu of which this franchise is granted. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.080 Effect of continuing agreement.
    The franchise granted hereunder shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee thereof with the clerk of the city. When so filed, such acceptance shall constitute a continuing agreement of the grantee that if and when the city shall thereafter annex or consolidate with, additional territory, any and all franchise rights and privileges owned by the grantee therein shall likewise be deemed to be abandoned within the limits of such territory. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.090 Condemnation.
    The franchise granted hereunder shall not in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee hereof either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of eminent domain in respect to the grantee or any public utility. Nor shall this franchise ever be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character in excess of the cost to the grantee of the necessary publication and any other sum paid by it to the city therefor at the time of the acquisition thereof. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.100 Duties of the franchisee.
    The grantee of this franchise shall:

    (a)    Construct, install and maintain all pipes and appurtenances in accordance with and in conformity with all of the ordinances, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted by the legislative body of this city in the exercise of its police powers and not in conflict with the paramount authority of the state of California, and, as to state highways, subject to the provisions of general laws relating to the location and maintenance of such facilities;

    (b)    Pay to the city, on demand, the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any operations of the grantee under this franchise;

    (c)    Indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers from any and all liability for damages proximately resulting from any operations under this franchise; and be liable to the city for all damages proximately resulting from the failure of said grantee well and faithfully to observe and perform each and every provision of this franchise and each and every provision of Division 3, Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California;

    (d)    Remove or relocate, without expense to the city, any facilities installed, used and maintained under this franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct by the city;

    (e)    File with the legislative body of the city within thirty days after any sale, transfer, assignment or lease of this franchise, or any part thereof, or of any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the same, certified thereto by the grantee or its duly authorized officers. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.110 City engineer approval required.
    The engineer shall have power to give the grantee such directions for the location of any pipes and appurtenances as may be reasonably necessary to avoid sewers, water pipes, conduits or other structures lawfully in or under the streets, and before the work of constructing any pipes and appurtenances is commenced, the grantee shall file with said engineer plans showing the location thereof, which shall be subject to the approval of said engineer (such approval not to be unreasonably withheld), and all such construction shall be subject to the inspection of said engineer and done to his/her reasonable satisfaction. All street coverings or openings of traps, vaults, and manholes shall at all times be kept flush with the surface of the streets; provided, however, that vents for underground traps, vaults and manholes may extend above the surface of the streets when said vents are located in parkways, between the curb and the property line. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.120 Tunneling required.
    Where it is necessary to law any underground pipes through, under or across any portion of a paved or macadamized street, the same, where practicable and economically reasonable shall be done by a tunnel or bore, so as not to disturb the foundation of such paved or macadamized street; and in the event that the same cannot be so done, such work shall be done under a permit to be granted by the engineer upon application therefor. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.130 Damage and repairs.
    If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defects in any of the pipes and appurtenances maintained or constructed under this grant, or by reason of any other cause arising from the operation or existence of any pipes and appurtenances constructed or maintained under this grant, said grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, immediately repair any such damage and restore such street, or portion of street, to as good a condition as existed before such defect or other cause of damage occurred, such work to be done under the direction of the engineer, and to his/her reasonable satisfaction. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.140 Provisions for forfeiture.
    (a)    If the grantee of this franchise shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions or conditions hereof, and shall not, within ten days after written demand for compliance, begin the work of compliance, or after such beginning shall not prosecute the same with due diligence to completion, then the city, by its legislative body, may declare this franchise forfeited.

    (b)    The city may sue in its own name for the forfeiture of this franchise, in the event of noncompliance by the grantee, its successors or assigns, with any of the conditions thereof. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

 

11.07.150 Franchise Act supplements.
    To the extent any provision herein is not specifically provided for, the Franchise Act of 1937 shall supplement this franchise ordinance as the same is set forth in Public Utilities Code Sections 6201 through 6302 or as subsequently amended. (Ord. 1384 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 11.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENTS
11.08.010 Encroachments prohibited.
    No person shall construct, place, affix or occupy any portion of the city’s street right-of-way, including the sidewalk and those portions that are unpaved but which consist of parkways or underground utility easements, with any appurtenance, fixture, structure or object, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 1176 § 1, 1992)

 

11.08.020 Encroachment permit.
    Notwithstanding Section 11.08.010, encroachments shall be allowed pursuant to permit if the director of public works:

    (1)    Determines that such an encroachment is reasonably necessary; and

    (2)    Issues an encroachment permit and determines that the public safety will not be jeopardized thereby, and if the applicant provides sufficient insurance or other assurances in case of liability arising from the encroachment. (Ord. 1393 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1176 § 1, 1992)

 

11.08.030 Specific encroachments that require a permit.
    An encroachment permit shall specifically be required for the following uses:

    (1)    Excavations in city streets or other construction activity requiring closure of part or all of the right-of-way;

    (2)    Bus benches;

    (3)    News racks;

    (4)    Priority mail drop-off boxes;

    (5)    Wireless telecommunication facilities in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1523 § 9, 2017; Ord. 1176 § 1, 1992)

 

11.08.035 Trenching in the right-of-way.
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, and unless federal or state law preempts the city in enforcing this section, no trenching can occur in the rights-of-way without compliance with this section. “Trenching” shall be defined as any excavation in excess of three feet in length that is in the public right-of-way. All such trenching must be done subject to an encroachment permit. An encroachment permit shall be issued only if the following criteria are met:

    (1)    The street has not been resurfaced within the last five years, or there is a compelling reason why the excavation must be made;

    (2)    All repairs are performed in accordance with city standards, which provide for resurfacing across the full width of the street lanes affected by the excavation;

    (3)    All appropriate safety measures are taken, including but not limited to, those set forth in the encroachment permit;

    (4)    Appropriate security is posted in a form approved by the city attorney to ensure the resurfacing for a one year period, after which the security will be exonerated. (Ord. 1314 § 1, 2001)

 

11.08.040 Exemptions.
    The following uses are exempted from the requirements of this chapter:

    (1)    City-owned or controlled appurtenances, including, but not limited to, fire hydrants, water valves, and traffic signal and lighting equipment;

    (2)    United States mail regular drop-off and collection boxes;

    (3)    Any appurtenance exempt by law from the city’s authority. (Ord. 1393 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1176 § 1, 1992)

 

11.08.045 Limited exemptions for franchisees and certain public entities.
    The following uses shall obtain an encroachment permit before doing work within the right-of-way but shall have a limited exemption from this chapter as follows:

    (1)    The gas franchisee shall have the rights set forth in its franchise, more particularly described in Chapter 11.07 of this code;

    (2)    The electrical franchisee shall have the rights set forth in its franchise, more particularly described in Chapter 11.06 of this code;

    (3)    A sanitation district, which has certain rights provided in Health and Safety Code Sections 4759 and 4759.1;

    (4)    A sanitary district, which has certain rights provided by Health and Safety Code Section 6518;

    (5)    The Orange County Water District, which has certain rights provided in Orange County Water District Act, Sections 5683, and 39;

    (6)    The rights of other government entities who have a right to maintain appurtenances within city’s rights-of-way in coordination with the city;

    (7)    Cable television franchisees. (Ord. 1393 § 3, 2007)

 

11.08.050 Specific prohibitions.
    The following appurtenances shall not be allowed in the public right-of-way:

    (1)    Basketball poles, tetherball poles and similar structures in the parkway or other right-of-way;

    (2)    Planter boxes, fences or other structures which unreasonably obstruct access, sight distance, or the right of free travel;

    (3)    Signs, as are more specifically prohibited in Chapter 18.28 of this code. (Ord. 1176 § 1, 1992)

 

11.08.060 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person, firm or corporation constructing, placing, affixing or occupying any portion of the city’s street right-of-way in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months in the County Jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that such a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 1176 § 1, 1992)

 

11.08.070 Violation—Nuisance—Abatement.
    Any fixture, structure, appurtenance or object constructed, placed, affixed or occupying the city’s right-of-way area in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in Government Code Section 38775. (Ord. 1176 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 11.12 NEWS RACKS
11.12.010 Purpose.
    As is more specifically stated in the recitals to the ordinance that adopted this chapter, the purpose of this chapter is to allow freedom of speech and of the press while protecting public safety and aesthetics. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Abandoned news rack” means any news rack which remains empty for thirty business days, except that a news rack remaining empty due to labor strike or any temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution or publication by the newspaper or other publication sold or distributed from that news rack shall not be deemed abandoned.

    “Director of public works” means the director of public works of this city or his/her designees.

    “News rack” means any self service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale or distribution, with or without charge, of newspapers or news periodicals.

    “Parkway” means any area between a sidewalk and a curb.

    “Public right-of-way” means and includes those areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes including, but not limited to, roadways, median strips, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.

    “Roadway” means that portion of a public right-of-way improved, designed and ordinarily used for vehicular traffic including drainage gutters and curbs a minimum of six inches in horizontal width.

    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a public right-of-way provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.030 General placement of news racks.
    No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack or other structure which projects onto, into or over any part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street or the parkway.

    No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public transportation purposes, or other governmental use, or when such news rack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such location, or when such news rack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.

    Any news rack shall be located so as to maximize public convenience, health, safety and welfare, both as to accessibility to the news racks and the use of the public right-of-way as a thoroughfare, and the aesthetic appearance of the area.

    Any news rack which, in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk shall comply with the following standards:

    (1)    News racks shall only be placed near either edge of a sidewalk. News racks placed near the edge shall be at least eighteen inches from the edge, where parking is not permitted and thirty-six inches where parking is permitted. News racks shall face inward (towards the center of the sidewalk) from the edge of the sidewalk irrespective of which side of the sidewalk is used.

    (2)    No news rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the news rack or to any permanently affixed object, except that a news rack shall be bolted to the sidewalk.

    (3)    No news rack shall exceed four feet in height, or two feet in thickness.

    (4)    No news rack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

    (A)   Within twenty feet of any marked crosswalk;

    (B)   Within twenty feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

    (C)   Within fifteen feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or other emergency facility;

    (D)   Within twenty feet of any driveway;

    (E)   Within five feet ahead of and twenty-five feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

    (F)    Within ten feet of any bus bench or shelter;

    (G)   Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes;

    (H)   In a grouping of more than four, with a minimum of three feet between groupings;

    (I)    Within one hundred feet of any other such news rack on the same side of the street within the same block containing the same edition of the same publication;

    (J)    At any location whereby the clear space for the passage way of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet;

    (K)   Within three feet of any area improved with lawns, flowers, shrubs or trees;

    (L)   In any parkway or planted area.

    (5)    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if the director of public works, finds that the location of a news rack in accordance with the standards set forth herein, will create or allow a condition prohibited by this section, or will otherwise endanger the public peace, health, safety or welfare, or be contrary to the purposes and intent of this chapter, he or she may prohibit the location of such news rack in accordance with such standards and/or may allow the location of such a news rack in a manner deviating from, or at variance with the standards provided herein, subject to such terms, conditions and regulations as he/she deems necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety or welfare, and to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter.

    Such finding may be made by the director of public works, at any time. If such finding is made prior to the issuance of a permit, the finding of the director of public works shall be made a part of the permit at the time of issuance.

    (6)    Installation and Maintenance.

    (A)   News rack Enclosures. The city may, at its option, construct enclosures to house news racks, in lieu of or in addition to existing news rack structures.

    (B)   Identifying Information. Each news rack installed, used or maintained pursuant to this chapter shall be identified with the name, address, telephone number and facsimile number of the owner or its representative in a manner so as to be clearly visible.

    (C)   Use for Advertising is Prohibited. No news rack shall be used for commercial advertising, signs or publicity purposes, other than to state the name of the newspaper or periodical on the dispensing side of the news rack and an identification of the name, address, telephone number and facsimile number of the owner or its representatives. No other words, writing, pictures or other graphics shall be on the sides, back or top of any news racks and all other signage is prohibited.

    (D)   Working Condition. Each news rack shall be maintained in good operating condition by its owner and shall be maintained so as not to become mechanically inoperable or have cracked or broken coverings or casings. Each machine shall be painted or covered with a protective coating so as to keep it free from rust.

    (7)    News rack Location Limitation in Specified Locations.

    Number Permitted. No more than eight news racks shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of two hundred feet in any direction within the same block of the same street. No more than sixteen news racks shall be allowed on any one block. As used herein, “block” means one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets.

    The number of news racks permitted on any public right-of-way within a space of two hundred feet in any direction within the same block of the same street may be increased to twelve and the number of news racks allowed in any one block may be increased to twenty-four by resolution of the city council upon a finding that the increase is necessary because of the high demand for newspapers at the specified location. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.035 News rack design.
    News racks shall be of a traditional box design. News racks shall not be used which are shaped like other objects, including but not limited to cars, trucks or homes. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.040 Encroachment permit required.
    No person shall place or maintain any news rack on any sidewalk without an encroachment permit issued pursuant to Chapter 11.08. Notwithstanding the requirements of said chapter, such a permit need only be obtained within five days of the placement of such a news rack. Such permits may cover multiple locations and said locations may be changed from time to time on the permit if the locations are in compliance with this chapter and the changes processed in a timely manner with the director of public works or his designee. Permittee may be required to affix display and an encroachment permit decal. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.045 Removal.
    In the event of removal of a news rack, the owner shall be required to restore the site to its original condition, leaving no hole or projection. Sidewalk sections shall be replaced from scoremark to scoremark unless the director of public works determines that a lesser repair may be satisfactorily performed to ensure the public safety and sidewalk maintenance. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.050 Entitlements.
    In allocating locations, the applicants shall be entitled to the location on a first-placed basis. No rights shall exist to any spot abandoned, and staff may award the right to an abandoned spot by seniority on a waiting list or by lottery or other chance drawing. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.060 Abatement of violation.
    (a)    A news rack in violation of this chapter may be removed by a designated public works or code enforcement employee of the city, if it is impossible to remedy the violation and such violation poses a danger to health and safety, pedestrians or vehicular traffic.

    (b)    Before any news rack is removed, the owner shall be notified by posting and mailing, where feasible, to the address for such party stated on the encroachment permit and giving ten calendar days to remedy the violation and/or contest removal. If no identification is shown on the news rack and no encroachment permit has been obtained, posting of the notice on the news rack alone shall be sufficient. Both forms of notice shall state the place to request a hearing to contest removal of the news rack.

    (c)    Any person notified under subsection (b) of this section may submit a written request for a hearing before the public works director, which hearing shall not be held less than ten business days after the request was made. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. Any action by the city with respect to the alleged violation shall be stayed pending the public works director’s decision following the hearing, which decision shall be rendered no later than ten business days after the hearing. The public works director may give oral notice of the decision at the close of the hearing, but shall also give written notice of all decisions.

    (d)    The city may remove a news rack if the person responsible for such news rack has:

    (1)    Neither requested a hearing before the public works director nor remedied the violation within ten business days following the date of notice; or

    (2)    Failed to remedy the violation within ten business days after receiving a copy of the written decision that the news rack was installed or maintained in violation of this chapter, following a hearing as conducted pursuant to this section.

    (e)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, prior notice of removal is not required where the news rack poses a danger to pedestrians or vehicles, provided notice of the removal and opportunity to contest is given the owner within ten calendar days of the removal.

    (f)    Removed or impounded news racks shall be retained and may be recovered by their owner within thirty business days of their removal. News racks removed or impounded by the city shall be retained at the city’s corporation yard. News racks which are not claimed within thirty business days shall be deemed permanently abandoned and shall be disposed of.

    (g)    The person responsible for such news rack shall pay an impound fee covering the actual cost to the city of removal, transporting, storing and disposing of such news rack, and restoration of the site.

    (h)    Abatement hereunder is a cumulative remedy and does not constitute a defense to misdemeanor citation proceedings which may be employed simultaneously pursuant to the general provisions of this code. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

 

11.12.070 Violations.
    In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any person, firm or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1998)

Title 12 PUBLIC PROPERTY*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1560. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 12.04 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 12.08 PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Chapter 12.12 DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY

Chapter 12.04 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS
12.04.010 Definitions.
    “Director of public works” as used in this chapter means the director of public works of the city or his authorized representative. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 1, 1965)

 

12.04.020 Responsibility.
    The planting and maintenance of all trees in or upon any street, parkway or public right-of-way area in the city, and the pruning, trimming and removal of the same, shall be at all times subject to the authority and control of the director of public works, subject to the authority and control of the city council. The director of public works may authorize the removal or pruning by the city, or by any other person as herein provided, of any tree or shrub in or upon any street, parkway or public place which interferes with the construction of any driveway, sidewalk, curb or other construction work, or the maintenance thereof, or any tree or shrub which is dead or which creates a hazard to the public safety or which does not conform to the type or variety designated for the particular place in which the same is situated. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 2, 1965)

 

12.04.030 Designation of type or variety—Appeal.
    The director of public works shall maintain a master list of trees approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the director of public works for planting in streets and parkways throughout the city and indicating rules and regulations governing the planting, location, spacing and maintenance of the various varieties of trees on the list. The director of public works shall designate the kind and variety of trees or shrubs to be planted upon any street, parkway or public place of the city and the location, spacing and planting procedure to be followed. No person shall plant or install any tree or shrub upon any portion of any street, parkway or other public place which does not conform to the type, variety, location and spacing designated by the director of public works for such portion of such street, parkway or public place; provided, however, that owners of property fronting upon any street for which a type or variety of tree or shrub has not been designated by the director of public works, or who are dissatisfied with that which has been designated, may petition to the public works director to designate such type and variety or to change the designation, and if they are dissatisfied with the action of the director of public works, may appeal to the city manager who shall have the power to designate or change the designation of the type or variety of tree or shrub for such street or portion thereof. Any action of the director of public works or of the city manager may be set aside, changed or altered by the city council. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 3, 1965)

 

12.04.040 Injuring or interfering with tree.
    No person shall cut, trim, plant, prune, remove, injure or interfere with any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, parkway or public place of the city without prior permission and approval therefor from the director of public works. The director of public works is authorized to grant such permission at his discretion, and may grant the same, subject to the condition that any removed tree be replaced by a tree of the type designated for the street and meeting the specifications of the director of public works and/or such other conditions as may be appropriate in the circumstances. No such permission shall be valid for a longer period than thirty days after its date of issuance. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 4, 1965)

 

12.04.050 Request for permit.
    Any person maintaining any overhead wires or any pipes or underground conduits along or across any street, parkway or public place of the city, or owning any property abutting upon any street, parkway or public place of the city, or proposing to erect, repair, alter or remove any building or structure, desiring to have any tree, shrub or plant cut, trimmed, pruned or removed may file with the director of public works a written request for a permit for such work to be done and it shall be within the discretion of the director of public works to require a written agreement upon the part of the petitioner to pay the costs thereof and to do such work in the way stipulated by the director of public works before the issuance of any permit hereunder. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 5, 1965)

 

12.04.060 Interfering with director of public works.
    No person shall interfere with the director of public works or persons acting under his authority while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, trimming, spraying, treating or removing any tree, shrub or plant in any street, parkway or public place of the city, or in the removing of any substance or plant material from about the trunk or roots of any tree, shrub or plant in any such street, parkway or public place. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 6, 1965)

 

12.04.070 Harmful liquids and pavement.
    No person shall cause, authorize or permit any brine, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil about the base of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, parkway or public place of the city, or onto any sidewalk, road or pavement within the city at a point from which such substance may flow, drip or seep into such soil, injure such tree, shrub or plant, or to otherwise harm or kill any such tree, shrub or plant. No person, without the written approval of the director of public works shall place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance so that it substantially impedes the free access of water or air to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, parkway or public place of the city. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 7, 1965)

 

12.04.080 Attaching foreign materials or substances.
    No person, without the written permission of the director of public works, shall place, apply, attach or keep attached to any tree, shrub or plant in any street, parkway or public place of the city, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign, paint or any other substance, structure, thing or device of any kind or nature whatsoever which is injurious to the tree, shrub or plant, or which is a public nuisance. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 8, 1965)

 

12.04.090 Protection during construction work.
    During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure in the city, no person in charge of such work shall leave any tree, shrub or plant in any street, parkway or public place of the city in the vicinity of such building or structure without such good and sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to the tree, shrub or plant arising out of or by reason of the erection, repair, alteration or removal. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 385 § 9, 1965)

 

12.04.100 Preventing encroachment or hazard.
    No person owning or controlling property abutting upon any public street or public place in the city, upon which are located hedges, trees, shrubs or plants, shall permit the plantings to encroach upon the sidewalk, curb or street or the branches thereof to overhang the sidewalk, curb or street in such a manner as to impede or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, drainage flow, or maintenance thereof, or to create a hazardous condition, and he shall keep the plantings trimmed as the public convenience shall require.

    If any such hedge, tree, shrub or plant is hazardous to the traveling public or impedes the progress or the vision of the public on any such street or public place, or the maintenance thereof, the city may order the same or such part or parts thereof as are hazardous or impair or impede normal use, to be trimmed or removed so as to remedy such condition. If such tree, hedge, shrub or plant standing on any private property is cut down or removed or trimmed to remove the condition within ten days after notice in writing of the order is given by the city to the owner, occupant or agent of the property upon which such described condition exists, the same shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 10, 1965)

 

12.04.110 Appeal to city manager.
    If any person is dissatisfied with any determination of the director of public works made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he or she may appeal in writing to the city manager within twenty days after mailing by the director of public works of written notice of such determination. The city manager shall hold a public hearing within thirty days after receipt of such written appeal, giving to the appellant at least ten days’ written notice of the date of such hearing, by first class mail. At such hearing, the appellant shall have the right to be heard and to present witnesses in his or her behalf. The city manager shall make his or her determination and shall mail written notice thereof to the appellant within thirty days of the date of the hearing. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 11, 1965)

 

12.04.120 Appeal to city council.
    If any person is dissatisfied with any determination of the city manager made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he or she may appeal in writing to the city council within twenty days after mailing by the city manager of written notice of such determination. The city council shall hold a public hearing within twenty-one days after its receipt of such written appeal, giving to the appellant at least ten days’ written notice of the date of such hearing, by first class mail. At such hearing, the appellant shall have the right to be heard and to present witnesses in his or her behalf. The city council shall make its determination and shall mail written notice thereof to the appellant within twenty-one days of the date of the hearing. The decision and determination of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 903 § 1, 1980; Ord. 358 § 12, 1965)

Chapter 12.08 PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1560. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


12.08.010 Applicability.
    It is the intention of the city council in enacting this chapter that all persons using the city’s public parks or public park facilities comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.015 Community services manager.
    When a provision of this code refers to recreation manager, it shall mean community services manager. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

12.08.020 Authorized activity defined.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase “authorized activity” means an activity which has been approved by the recreation manager or authorized subordinate for a certain place and time within any park. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.030 Park defined.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the word “park” includes all recreational and other public land owned, operated, managed or controlled by the city of Fountain Valley and includes all buildings, parking lots and improvements thereon. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.040 Littering prohibited.
    No person shall deposit, discharge or otherwise dispose of any paper, ashes, dirt, bottles, broken glass, cans, trash, litter, animal carcass, rubbish, debris or any substance, matter or thing, in or on the grounds of a park except in the proper receptacles where these are provided. If receptacles are not provided, all such material shall be removed from the park upon the completion of park use. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.050 Unauthorized disposal prohibited.
    No person shall bring into any park any paper, ashes, dirt, bottles, broken glass, cans, trash, litter, animal carcass, rubbish, debris or any substance, matter or thing for the purposes of disposal if the material was accumulated outside of the park for dumping in the park. Nothing contained herein is meant to restrict park users from disposing of their normal trash in the proper receptacles when that trash was generated through park use. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.060 Games and activities.
    (a)    No person shall engage in the playing of any activity which endangers the health, safety or welfare of the participant or any other person. The following activities are specifically prohibited:

    (1)    Transporting, possessing or discharging any firearm, air gun, BB gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, crossbow, spear, fireworks, firecracker, rocket or explosives of any kind;

    (2)    Lighting or maintaining any fire unless such fire is lighted and maintained in a stove, barbecue grill, or similar device;

    (3)    Erecting or maintaining any barrier, string, wire, rope, or chain or other device of obstruction across any path, trail or area where the public may be expected to make contact with such obstruction.

    (b)    No person shall engage in any of the following activities unless a permit is obtained beforehand from the recreation manager:

    (1)    Golfing, boxing, wrestling or the martial arts;

    (2)    The flying of model airplanes, helicopters, rockets or any other self-propelled craft or the launching of any hot air or gas balloon.

    (c)    No person shall engage in the following activities except in areas clearly designated for such use:

    (1)    Baseball, football, field hockey, rugby, cricket or soccer. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.065 Skateboarding prohibited in civic center.
    No person shall ride or otherwise propel a skateboard or use rollerskates or rollerblades in the area known as the “civic center.” For the purposes of this section, the civic center shall be defined to mean that area bounded on the north by Slater Avenue, to the east by Los Alamos Street, and to the west and south by the city’s property boundary line. The city shall post the property appropriately to warn persons that such activity is prohibited. (Ord. 1280 § 1, 1998)

 

12.08.070 Glass beverage containers prohibited.
    No person shall possess any glass beverage container such as a bottle, glass, mug or stein for carrying or containing any liquid for drinking purposes in any park. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.080 Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
    No person shall consume any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes, in any park. The community center and the social hall in the recreation center, and area adjacent or in reasonable proximity thereto, shall be exempted from this prohibition if a permit has been issued by the community services manager. Said permit shall contain an approved site plan which will designate the areas in which alcoholic beverages will be permitted and which will contain adequate security measures to prevent the use of alcoholic beverages outside of those areas. (Ord. 1216 § 1, 1994; Ord. 962 § 1, 1983; Ord. 937 § 1, 1982; Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.085 Use of tobacco products prohibited.
    The use of tobacco products, including, but not limited to, smoking, chewing and sniffing such products, is prohibited and unlawful in all city parks and recreation facilities when appropriate signs have been posted warning of the prohibition. (Ord. 1398 § 1, 2007)

 

12.08.090 Camping prohibited.
    Camping in public parks is prohibited except when done in specially designated areas and then only with the written permission of the recreation manager. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.100 Vehicle operation and parking.
    No person shall operate, drive, or ride any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized bicycle, go-cart or any other motor vehicle or any other vehicle at any time in any park except in designated areas. The provisions of this section shall not apply to city vehicles nor to authorized commercial delivery vehicles. No person shall ride or use a bicycle, skateboard or roller skates upon any tennis, handball, basketball, shuffleboard or multipurpose court.

    No person shall park or leave standing and unattended any vehicle in any area other than those designated for parking. No person may leave a vehicle parked in any park between ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day unless that person is attending an authorized activity. Vehicles left unattended between those hours or in undesignated areas may be towed away and stored by the city and the removal and storage costs shall be charged to and paid by the owner prior to release. The city traffic engineer is directed to post the appropriate signs in accor-dance with the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.110 Public restrooms.
    No person shall enter any public restroom unless it is the one designated for his or her sex. The foregoing provision shall not apply to children of tender years who are accompanied by a parent or guardian. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.120 Curfew.
    No person shall be in any city park after its posted closing time or closing event. City park closing times or closing events shall be set forth via separate council resolution. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply if written approval is obtained beforehand from the community services department. (Ord. 1550 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1433 § 1, 2009; Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.130 Group use.
    The recreation manager may issue permits allowing a group or an individual to utilize an area of a park to the exclusion of others for special occasions if he or she determines that it is in the best interests of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and of the other park users. If such a permit has been issued, the exclusive use area shall be clearly designated and no unauthorized person shall thereafter enter that area during the period covered by the permit. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.140 Advertising and signs.
    No person shall place, cause to be placed or maintain any sign, card, banner, poster, advertising or notice of any kind in any park or upon any fixture located within any park, except that the city and its authorized concessionaires and lessees shall be exempt from this prohibition. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.150 Amplifying systems.
    No person shall play or utilize within any park any sound-amplifying system unless written approval of the recreation manager is obtained beforehand. The foregoing shall not apply to regular portable or vehicle radio use within a park. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.165 First Amendment activities.
    Notwithstanding anything else in this chapter, the community services manager shall have the authority to designate areas for First Amendment activities, including, but not limited to, petition signing which may involve the use of tables, small demonstrations not meeting the definition of a special event, and other distribution of materials that would interfere with the use of the park and other public land and facilities covered by this chapter. Any such designation shall be consistent with constitutional requirements that the area be appropriate to convey the message and any restrictions limiting the area shall be based on the need to regulate the persons competing to use such areas. The content of the message shall not be a criterion and the restrictions shall be narrowly tailored to achieve the purposes intended and such rationale shall be documented along with the facts that supported the documentation and any alternative areas for the communication that might be available. (Ord. 1457 § 3, 2010)

 

12.08.170 Permit approvals.
    For any permit or permission for which the approval of the recreation manager must be obtained, the recreation manager shall determine whether or not the permit should issue taking into consideration:

    (1)    The health, safety and welfare of other park users and the public in general; and

    (2)    The needs of other park users for access to the facilities. No fee shall be charged for the permit or permission. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

 

12.08.180 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1982)

Chapter 12.12 DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY
12.12.010 Recovery of damages.
    The city staff is empowered and directed to take all practical and reasonable steps to recover civil damages for any negligent, wilful, or unlawful damaging or taking of property of the city, including the institution of appropriate legal action. (Ord. 951 § 1, 1982)

 

12.12.020 Negligent spills onto public streets.
    For the purposes of Section 12.12.010, damage to public property shall include, but not be limited to, the spilling of any material onto any street or other public property which requires the city to use its crews or to expend sums of money for labor to remove and dispose of such materials from the public streets or other public places, and the cost of such removal and disposal shall constitute civil damages to the city which may be recovered by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.6 and pursuant to Section 12.12.010 of this code. (Ord. 951 § 1, 1982)

Title 13 PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 13.04 CONTROL OF CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 13.08 THOROUGHFARE REGULATIONS
Chapter 13.12 EXCAVATIONS, FILLS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
Chapter 13.16 IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 13.20 BUILDING MATERIAL IN STREETS
Chapter 13.24 STRUCTURES IN STREETS
Chapter 13.28 WATER COURSES AND WATER IN STREETS
Chapter 13.32 OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZE LOADS
Chapter 13.36 DRAINAGE PLAN
Chapter 13.40 UNDERGROUND WIRING

Chapter 13.04 CONTROL OF CONSTRUCTION
13.04.010 Standards.
    The plans prepared by the office of the city engineer, and as said plans may be added to or amended, shall be the standard for public works construction within the city. All public works construction within the city shall conform to said standard plans. (Ord. 78 § 4, 1962)

 

13.04.020 Filing of standard plans.
    Three bound copies of said standard plans have been filed with the city clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 78 § 3, 1962)

Chapter 13.08 THOROUGHFARE REGULATIONS
13.08.010 Definitions.
    Unless the provisions or context of this title otherwise require:

    (1)    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley, California.

    (2)    “Drainage facilities” means any public storm channel, pipe, flume or ditch.

    (3)    “Engineer” means the public works director-city engineer of Fountain Valley, the street superintendent of Fountain Valley or their authorized representative.

    (4)    “Excavation” means any opening in the surface of a public highway made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the public place.

    (5)    “Highway” means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the incorporated territory of the city of Fountain Valley, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for purpose of travel.

    (6)    “Obstructing property” means and includes any property, rail, tie, wire, pipe pole, conduit, sign, or any device, fixture, appliance or structure appurtenant thereto, installed, affixed or located in, upon, over or under any public street in this city.

    (7)    “Paving” means the impervious asphaltic or concrete surfacing applied in the public right-of-way for the purpose of providing a smooth traveled way for vehicular traffic.

    (8)    “Person” includes any individual, firm copartnership, joint adventure, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, this state, any county and all departments and bureaus thereof except the street department of this city, municipality, district or other political subdivisions thereof, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

    (9)    “Public agency” means and includes the United States or any department or agency thereof, the state of California or any department or agency thereof, county, municipal corporation or public district. (Ord. 117 § 1.01, 1962)

 

13.08.020 Standards and specifications.
    All work performed in conjunction with this title shall comply with standards and specifications adopted by the city. (Ord. 117 § 2.01, 1962)

 

13.08.030 Time for filing applications.
    Applications for permits hereunder shall be filed not less than forty-eight hours before the work is proposed to be done, of which sixteen hours are to be normal working hours of the city. (Ord. 117 § 2.02, 1962)

 

13.08.040 Plat must be filed.
    The application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location, dimension, nature of the proposed street activity, and any other detail which the engineer may require. (Ord. 117 § 2.03, 1962)

 

13.08.050 Proof of right to use highway.
    Each applicant for a permit shall submit to the engineer satisfactory proof of the applicant’s right to use the highway for the purpose set forth in the application. (Ord. 117 § 2.04, 1962)

 

13.08.060 Modification of application.
    The engineer may require such changes in the application respecting the location dimensions, character or number of the proposed excavations, fills or obstructions as in the engineer’s opinion may be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. (Ord. 117 § 2.05, 1962)

 

13.08.070 Computation of fees in certain cases.
    Whenever in this title any fees are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation thereof is specified, such cost shall be the actual cost, including the proportionate part of the salaries, wages or other compensation of any deputy or employees, plus the cost of overhead. (Ord. 1254 § 2, 1996; Ord. 117 § 2.06, 1962)

 

13.08.080 Exemption of public agencies from deposits.
    If the United States, this state, this or any other city, any municipal corporation, school district or other public body files with the city engineer a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which they may become liable to the city hereunder, then no deposit for costs shall be required from such persons. No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Section 6103 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 117 § 2.07, 1962)

 

13.08.090 Issuance of permit.
    If the applicant for a permit hereunder complies in all respects with this title and with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations or ordinances of the city or of any other public agency and pays the fees and deposits required by this title, the engineer may approve the application and issue the permit. (Ord. 117 § 2.08, 1962)

 

13.08.100 Deductions from deposit—Payment of balance to permittee.
    The city shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee:

    (1)    The permit issuance fee if it has not otherwise been paid;

    (2)    The cost to the city of refilling any excavation, removing any obstruction or the placing or replacing of any safety devices;

    (3)    The cost to the city of resurfacing or repairing the highway calculated pursuant to the provisions of Sections 13.12.110 or 13.16.070.

    (4)    The cost of the city of any additional repairs or emergency service such as installing safety devices as provided in Section 13.08.200.

    (5)    The cost of any inspection by the engineer made necessary by the failure of the permittee to comply with any provision of this title or the terms or conditions of the permit.

    (6)    The cost of surveys to re-establish survey monuments destroyed during construction. The cost of all materials utilized in re-establishing sand survey monuments.

    (7)    The cost of signs and labor to replace street name or traffic signs removed or damaged by construction.

    After making the deductions specified above, the city shall, unless the deductions are made from a general deposit, refund any balance to the applicant in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. The balance remaining in the general deposit shall be retained by the public works department and applied to issuance fees and costs in connection with any future excavations, fills, or obstructions pursuant to a permit issued hereunder unless a written demand for the balance be made by the depositor, in which event any balance therein shall be refunded in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. (Ord. 117 § 2.09, 1962)

 

13.08.110 Permittee to pay deficiency.
    If any deposit is insufficient to pay all fees and costs herein provided, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the city an amount equal to the deficiency. (Ord. 117 §2.10, 1962)

 

13.08.120 Failure to pay costs of deficiency.
    If a permittee, upon demand, fails to pay any deficiency as provided in Section 13.08.110 or fails to pay any other costs due the city hereunder for which no deposit has been made, the city may recover the same by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency or cost is paid in full, a permit hereunder shall not thereafter be issued to such permittee. (Ord. 117 § 2.11, 1962)

 

13.08.130 Emergency permits.
    Nothing in this title prohibits any person from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the city are closed, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor, within twenty-four hours after the offices of the public works department are first opened, subsequent to the making of such excavation, and that if the person making such an excavation notifies the city law enforcement agency prior to making such excavation. (Ord. 117 § 2.12, 1962)

 

13.08.140 Depth of structures.
    No person shall, without written permission of the engineer, install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts, and catch basins at a distance less than:

    (1)    STREETS Thirty inches below the design finished surface of the roadway.

    If said finished surface elevation is not established, then the depth shall be at a minimum of thirty-six inches below the surface of the outermost edge of the traveled portion of the street.

    (2)    PARKWAY A. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be sixteen inches below established gutter grade when said substructure parallels the parkway.

    B.     The minimum depth of any substructure shall be twelve inches below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at right angles to the parkway.

    (3)    OTHER PUBLIC PLACES The minimum depth of any substructure in any other public place shall be twelve inches below the surface; provided, however, that the engineer may permit a lesser depth in special cases.

    Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain said specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of grade in the surface unless the grade in said substructure interferes with the maintenance of, or travel on, a public street. (Ord. 117 § 2.13, 1962)

 

13.08.150 Clearance for vital structures.
    All excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital equipment as designated by the public works department. (Ord. 117 § 2.14, 1962)

 

13.08.160 Abandonment of substructures.
    Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of a service line designed to serve a single property owner, the person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein, shall within thirty days after such abandonment file with the city engineer a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes in the way, of an installation of the city or any other public body, which installation is pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove such abandoned substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the course of excavation for construction of the facility by the city or any other public body. (Ord. 117 § 2.15, 1962)

 

13.08.170 Relocation and protection of utilities.
    The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the public works department and the owner of the utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. (Ord. 117 § 2.16, 1962)

 

13.08.180 Preservation of monuments.
    Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a permanent survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the engineer so to do. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of this monument by the public works department. A contractor disturbing any monument or bench mark during construction activity shall forfeit an additional one hundred dollars out of the deposit on hand or shall pay one hundred dollars toward the resetting thereof upon demand by the city. (Ord. 117 § 2.17, 1962)

 

13.08.190 Liability of city.
    This title shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any work for which a permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder the issuance of any permit or the approval of any work. (Ord. 117 § 2.18, 1962)

 

13.08.200 Accident prevention.
    (a)    Precaution shall be exercised at all times for the protection of persons and property. The safety provisions of applicable laws and building and construction codes shall be observed. The engineer may specify as a condition of the issuance of the permit, the safety devices or measures to be used by the permittee. Failure of the engineer to so specify the devices or measures to be used shall not relieve the permittee of his obligation hereunder.

    (b)    The contractor shall take all necessary measures to protect the work and prevent accidents during construction. The contractor shall provide and maintain sufficient night lights, signs, barricades, flagmen, temporary sidewalks and surfacing, appropriate temporary bridges, danger signals, watchmen and other appliances and safeguards which are necessary to properly safeguard life and property. “No Parking” signs shall not be placed without proper authority.

    (c)    Removing or relocating existing traffic signs: No traffic regulating, warning, directional or street name signs shall be removed from the area of the work or relocated therein unless so indicated on the plans or unless so ordered by the engineer. Signs shall be removed and replaced as directed by the engineer.

    (d)    The contractor shall provide necessary access to adjoining property.

    (e)    Fire hydrants shall be left clear for hose connections at all times.

    (f)    The contractor shall remove surplus materials that are in excess of requirements for, or will not be used in the backfill, immediately after an excavation has been made.

    (g)    All trenches across intersections shall be provided with temporary bridges to allow not less than one lane of. traffic to flow in each direction. The length of trench to be bridged shall be as specified in the specifications or as directed by the engineer with the cooperation of the police department.

    (h)    For business areas and in other areas where traffic is heavy, in order to provide a maximum amount of street area for use of vehicles and pedestrians, compliance with any or all of the following conditions may be required:

    (1)    Remove all excavated materials from the site immediately;

    (2)    Store excavated materials in approved boxes or bins placed as not to obstruct traffic or create a hazard;

    (3)    Construction materials shall be stored off the site and shall not be brought into the street prior to the time needed on the job;

    (4)    Construction equipment shall be placed in the street in a manner to least obstruct traffic, and shall not be stored in the street when not in use;

    (5)    Work only during off-peak traffic hours. (Ord. 117 § 2.19, 1962)

Chapter 13.12 EXCAVATIONS, FILLS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
13.12.010 Permit—Required.
    A person who digs up, plows up, removes or breaks the earth, soil, stone, pavement or other surface of, or otherwise injures any highway or drainage facility or makes or causes to be made any excavation, or constructs, places upon, maintains, or leaves any material or any obstruction or impediment to travel in or upon a highway or obstructs the flow in a drainage facility or installs or maintains or causes to be installed or maintained any tank, pipes, conduit, duct, tunnel, or any other installation of any nature across, upon, in, or under any highway unless he shall have first obtained a permit hereunder so to do shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 117 § 3, 1962)

 

13.12.020 Permit—Application.
    Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be filed with the public works department upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by the department. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state:

    (1)    The name and address of the applicant;

    (2)    The location, purpose, extent and nature of the proposed excavation, fill or obstruction;

    (3)    The time during which it is estimated that the excavation, fill or obstruction will exist;

    (4)    That the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and save the city, its authorized agents, officers, representatives and employees, harmless from and against any and all penalties, liabilities or annoyances or loss resulting from claims or court action arising out of any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as approximate result of any work undertaken under the permit granted pursuant to the application;

    (5)    That the applicant agrees that if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other installation of any nature or kind placed in the excavation, fill or obstruction for which the permit is issued which shall at any time in the future interfere with the use, repair, improvement, widening or change of grade of the highway, or drainage facilities the applicant, or the applicant’s successors or assigns, within ten days after the receipt of a written notice from the city engineer to do so, will at the applicant’s own expense either remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other installation, or, subject to the approval of the city engineer, relocate them to a site which may be designated by the city engineer;

    (6)    Any additional information which the engineer may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. (Ord. 117 § 3.01, 1962)

 

13.12.030 Resurfacing obligations.
    The city may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter, require the applicant to do the resurfacing or repair or elect to do the resurfacing or repair of any highway surface or drainage facility removed or damaged by the proposed excavation or obstruction pursuant to a permit hereunder. (Ord. 117 § 3.02, 1962)

 

13.12.040 Issuance fee.
    Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an issuance fee, which shall be set by a resolution of the city council, no part of which shall be returned to the applicant regardless of the action taken on the application. The inspection charge for an excavation permit for the installation of a pipeline or conduit where the performance of the work is such that the trenching can be accomplished with a trenching machine shall be based upon a charge per linear foot. In all cases the decision of the engineer shall be final in the method of determination of the charges. For such permits the charge for inspection shall be set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1254 § 3, 1996; Ord. 947 § 1, 1982; Ord. 117 § 3.03, 1962)

 

13.12.045 Annual public utility permits.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 13.12.010, 13.12.020 and 13.12.040, an annual public utility excavation and construction permit may be issued for emergency and routine small projects. For purposes of this section the phrase “routine small projects” means any excavation work requiring less than twenty-five square feet of excavation. The fee for the permit shall be determined by the director of public works based on cost to the city and shall be set forth by resolution of the city council. The permit shall be issued on a form approved by the director of public works which will provide that the applicant agrees to indemnify the city from all loss or liability arising out of work done pursuant to such permit. (Ord. 947 § 2, 1982)

 

13.12.050 Special deposit of cost required.
    (a)    Unless the engineer has authorized the applicant to perform the resurfacing or repair of the surface of any highway or drainage facility which may be removed in part or damaged by the proposed excavation, fill or obstruction, each applicant shall, in addition to the issuance fee, deposit with the city engineer the estimated cost of resurfacing or repairing the surface of the highway or drainage facility which may be damaged or destroyed. The special deposit required hereunder shall in no event be less than three hundred dollars. The estimated cost shall be determined by the engineer by multiplying the number of square feet of surface which may be damaged, as shown by the application by the minimum sum of one dollar and twenty cents per square foot of surfacing.

    (b)    In cases where the applicant is granted authority to make the repairs required under this title, the city engineer may, in order to insure the completion of said repairs in a satisfactory manner, require the applicant to furnish a surety bond. Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of California and shall be in an amount equal to twice the estimated cost of performing the work authorized; provided, however, that the minimum amount of said bond shall not be less than one thousand dollars, nor the minimum period less than one year. The condition of said bond shall be that the applicant will perform the work authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this title in a good and workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the engineer. (Ord. 947 § 3, 1982; Ord. 117 § 3.04, 1962)

 

13.12.060 Applicant may make general deposit.
    (a)    In lieu of making the special deposit required by Section 13.12.050, the applicant may make and maintain with the engineer a general deposit in an amount estimated by the city engineer to be sufficient to pay for the cost of permit issuance fees and expected repairs occasioned by future excavations or obstructions, but not to exceed one thousand dollars.

    (b)    In lieu of the special deposit required by Section 13.12.050 or of making the general deposit as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the applicant may, with the approval of the city engineer, furnish a surety bond conforming in all respects to the requirements for surety bonds set forth in subsection (b), Section 13.12.050, except that the condition of such bond shall be that the applicant will pay to the city upon demand all fees, costs, or charges incurred by or due to the city under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 947 § 4, 1982; Ord. 117 § 3.05, 1962)

 

13.12.070 Conditions of permit.
    The permit shall be subject to the following conditions which shall be stated thereon:

    (1)    The permit must be kept at the site of the work and be shown, on demand, to any authorized representative of the city or any law enforcement officer.

    (2)    The permit shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway or drainage facility over which the city has jurisdiction.

    (3)    All work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this title and of all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the city and any other public agency and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

    (4)    The permit shall be nontransferable.

    (5)    The city engineer may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within sixty days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the city engineer, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending the same to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application.

    (6)    The city engineer may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter until the completion of the work, prescribe such additional conditions as he may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway or for the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. (Ord. 117 § 3.06, 1962)

 

13.12.080 Compliance with terms of permit required.
    A permittee shall not make or cause to be made any excavation, or construct, place upon, maintain, or leave any obstruction or impediment to travel, or pile or place any material in or upon any highway, or install or maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, or tunnel in, upon, or under the surface of any highway, at any location, or in any manner other than that described in the application as approved by the city engineer, or contrary to the terms of the permit or of any provision of this title. (Ord. 117 § 3.07, 1962)

 

13.12.090 Restoration of highway upon work completion.
    Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this title, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction to the satisfaction of the engineer.

    If any permittee fails or refuses to refill any excavation which he has made or remove any obstruction which he has placed on any highway, the city may do so and the applicant shall promptly reimburse the city the cost thereof. (Ord. 117 § 3.08, 1962)

 

13.12.100 Resurfacing by permittee or city.
    (a)    TEMPORARY PAVING. After completion of the refilling and compacting of the backfill material in the excavation as specified in Section 13.12.130 and the removal of the obstruction, the permittee shall promptly repair any portion of the highway surface removed or damaged by the excavation, obstruction or construction operations.

    In the event the type of consolidation used in replacing the backfill is not adequate to prevent further settling or the moisture content is excessive, temporary resurfacing shall be provided. If temporary surfacing is provided, the top surface of the backfill shall be covered with one inch of bituminous material. Such temporary paving material may be cold mix, or the permittee may use or the engineer may require hot mix. All temporary paving material shall conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining paving surface and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian travel over it as well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain temporary paving for a period not exceeding ninety days after all backfilling is completed, and shall keep same safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced with permanent paving, except that if it is impracticable to maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian travel or vehicular traffic, then the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights.

    Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the engineer shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and his or its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if discovered within twenty-four months from the completion of the excavation work. The engineer’s presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of its responsibilities hereunder.

    (b)    PERMANENT REPAVING. Permanent resurfacing of excavations may be made where the type of consolidation used in replacing the backfill is adequate, in the opinion of the engineer to prevent settling and when the moisture content of the backfill is not excessive.

    Where the pavement (except Portland cement concrete pavement) or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it with a minimum standard repair consisting of either five inches of asphaltic concrete surfacing or three inches of asphaltic concrete surfacing over six inches aggregate base except that the standard repair shall not be less in total thickness than the adjacent pavement or surfacing and except that road-mixed surfacing may be repaired with three inches of asphaltic concrete surfacing in lieu of the standard repair. Asphaltic concrete surfacing shall consist of a mixture of mineral aggregate and 150-200 penetration paving asphalt. If Portland cement concrete pavement is removed, it shall first be sawed at the neat lines of the excavation and or removed at existing breaks to the satisfaction of the engineer subsequently replaced with Portland cement concrete, to a thickness of one inch greater than the existing pavement.

    (c)    TUNNELING OR BORING. Excavation of pavement or surfacing on an arterial highway (as shown on the master plan of highways) and determined by the city engineer as having been improved with asphaltic concrete surfacing or Portland cement concrete pavement, will be permitted only when physical conditions make boring or tunneling impossible. All boring and tunneling and placing conduits, casings and pipe lines shall be done in such a manner that the existing driving lanes will not be disturbed. If a casing is installed to receive the conduit or pipe line, all voids between the casing conduit shall be filled with grout or sand.

    (d)    REPLACING ENTIRE DRIVING LANE. If the surfacing or pavement within the driving lanes of an arterial highway (as shown on the master plan of highways) and determined by the engineer as having been improved with asphaltic concrete surfacing or Portland cement concrete is removed or damaged by parallel construction operations, the existing surfacing or pavement of the width of the driving lane for the length of the damaged surfacing shall be removed and replaced except that such a removal and replacement shall in no case be less than one hundred feet in length. (Ord. 117 § 3.09, 1962)

 

13.12.110 Cost of resurfacing.
    If, after the refilling of an excavation the permittee fails or refuses to resurface or repair that portion of the surface of the highway damaged by him, or if the engineer has elected to do such resurfacing or repairing, the city shall do so and the permittee shall be charged with the cost thereof computed by the city engineer as provided in Section 13.08.100 or Section 13.12.050, whichever, in the judgment of the city engineer will most fairly compensate the city for the expenses incurred by it. (Ord. 117 § 3.10, 1962)

 

13.12.120 Cost of further repairs to be paid by permittee.
    If at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by an excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the permittee shall pay to the city the cost of such additional repairs made by the engineer. The cost shall be computed by the engineer as provided in Section 13.08.100 or Section 13.12.050, whichever in the judgment of the engineer will most fairly compensate the city for the expenses incurred by it. (Ord. 117 § 3.11, 1962)

 

13.12.130 Work regulations.
    (a)    GENERAL COMPACTION REQUIREMENTS. All backfill and compaction shall be in accordance with the applicable portions of Section 306 of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, latest edition.

    Compaction Tests: In the event there is some question in the engineer’s mind concerning the degree of compaction, he may order compaction tests to determine the quality of the work. The contractor shall supply all tests as required or place a cash deposit with the city, and the city will take the tests. All costs for the test shall be deducted from the deposit posted by the contractor.

    (b)    COMPACTION OF CLAYEY SOILS. Clayey materials shall be defined as a soil with a sand equivalent of less than thirty. Clayey material replaced as backfill shall not be ponded or jetted but shall be compacted, as specified under general compaction requirements, by any other suitable method providing the material is first conditioned by wetting or drying to within two percent of optimum moisture content.

    In lieu of backfilling with clayey material, the permittee as his option may elect to furnish sandy or granular material, with a sand equivalent of thirty or greater in which case compaction may be obtained as specified under general compaction requirements.

    (c)    FINISHING AND CLEAN UP. After the work has been completed, all debris and excess material from excavation and backfill operations shall be removed from the right-of-way and the roadway left in a neat and orderly condition.

    All roadside drainage ditches shall be restored to the original grades and the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts shall be left open, free and clear.

    All approaches to private driveways and intersecting highways and streets shall be kept open to normal traffic flow at all times.

    Clay and earth which adhere to the paved surface of the roadway shall be removed by hand scraping, washing, and sweeping, or by any other method which will leave a clean nonskid surface without impairing, injuring or loosening the surface.

    Excess and nonsurfacing materials which adhere to roadway surfacing as a result of construction operations not listed above shall be removed by approved methods to the satisfaction of the engineer. (Ord. 512 § 10, 1968; Ord. 117 § 3.12, 1962)

 

13.12.140 Breaking through pavement.
    (a)    Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the engineer when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.

    (b)    Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete may be required by the engineer when the nature of the job or the condition of the street warrants. When required, the depth of the cut shall be not less than one inch in depth; however, depths greater than one inch may be required by the engineer when circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the engineer outside of the limits of the excavation over cave-outs, overbreaks and small floating sections.

    (c)    Approved butting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations may be required by the engineer to confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench.

    (d)    Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or saw-cut edge.

    (e)    Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.

    (f)    Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the center line of the trench.

    (g)    Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line.

    (h)    Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be required by the engineer.

    (i)     Permittee shall not be required to repair damage existing prior to excavation unless his cut results in small floating sections that may be unstable, in which case permittee shall remove and pave the area. (Ord. 117 § 3.13, 1962)

 

13.12.150 Traffic to be kept open.
    The city engineer may require all crossings of streets to be performed by tunneling or boring if in his judgment a serious interruption of traffic may occur. He may deny all applications to open trench across streets. In the event such trenching is permitted, trenching for installation across any intersecting roadway open to traffic shall be progressive. Not more than one-half of the width of a traveled way shall be disturbed at one time and the remaining width shall be kept open to traffic by bridging or backfilling. (Ord. 117 § 3.14, 1962)

 

13.12.160 Location of pipes and conduits.
    All pipes and conduits laid parallel to the roadway shall be placed at least five feet from the edge of the pavement or graded traveled roadway, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the city engineer. The shallowest portion of any pipe line or other facility shall be installed not less than thirty inches below the ultimate grade of the roadway. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining all information necessary to establish the ultimate roadway grade in the event it is not coincidental with the existing roadway surface. (Ord. 117 § 3.15, 1962)

Chapter 13.16 IMPROVEMENTS
13.16.010 Permits—Required.
    No person shall lay, construct, reconstruct or repair in any public street any curb, sidewalk, gutter, roadway surface, pavement, sanitary sewer, sewage works, storm drain, culvert, stairway, retaining wall or similar structure, building or improvement, or perform any grading or filling, or subject any water line sewer, or storm drain to excessive live or dead loading, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the public works department engineer and without first obtaining approval of plans and specifications and the lines and grades therefor from the city engineer.

    Any person who desires to make any such improvement upon any private property not dedicated to a public use, may, in order to obtain the city engineer’s approval of plans and specifications therefor, city inspection and supervision of the work, and to assure that the improvement when completed will be to the satisfaction of the city engineer and that his acceptance thereof will be available if the improvement be later submitted for dedication to public use, apply for and obtain a permit therefor which shall, after such voluntary application, be treated in all respects as a permit required by law, except that the bond for the faithful performance of the work, provided for in Section 13.16.070 may be waived. All fees, and all deposits, provided for in the following sections must be demanded and received as in the case of permits required by law, and the engineer may impose such other conditions as may, in his discretion, be required to assure that the work may be inspected and supervised without cost or expense to the city, that the work will not cause loss or damage to the city or to the public, and that the improvements when completed, will be acceptable for public use if and when they shall be dedicated to or devoted to such use.

    The inspection, supervision and other services rendered or undertaken by the city shall be consideration for any conditions imposed upon the applicant and shall be withheld if he refuses any such condition. Whenever any applicant hereunder shall post with the city engineer a bond conditioned in all respects as provided in Section 13.16.070, and adequate in amount to comply therewith, such bond shall for all purposes be deemed a bond posted pursuant to that section.

    Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to bind the city to accept such improvements for public use, however, if for any reason said improvements are not in a condition satisfactory to the city engineer at the time they are offered for acceptance for public use. (Ord. 117 § 4.01, 1962)

 

13.16.020 Permits—Classification.
    All permits for work mentioned in Section 13.16.010 shall be granted under one of the following classes:

    (1)    Class “A” shall include only the repair, construction or reconstruction of curbs, sidewalks, driveways or gutters and work appurtenant to the foregoing, where, in the opinion of the city engineer, the work contemplated is so limited in extent and of such simplicity of design that the deposit of those fees provided hereinafter for class “A” permits will with reasonable certainty compensate and reimburse the city for the cost of the inspection and supervision entailed.

    (2)    Class “B” shall include all permits for work not included in class “A”. (Ord. 117 § 4.02, 1962)

 

13.16.030 Inspection.
    All work mentioned in Section 13.16.010 shall be performed in accordance with the specifications and plans, if plans are made, and shall be performed to the satisfaction of the public works department and under the supervision of the engineer. (Ord. 117 § 4.03, 1962)

 

13.16.040 Permit—Application.
    Any person desiring a permit to perform any work mentioned in Section 3.16.010 shall file a written application therefor with the public works department, which shall specify:

    (1)    The location, nature and amount of work to be performed;

    (2)    The material to be used;

    (3)    Such other information as the public works department may require. (Ord. 117 § 4.04, 1962)

 

13.16.050 Class “A” permits—Deposit required.
    If the application provided for in Section 13.16.040 is for a class “A” permit, as defined in Section 13.16.020, the applicant shall deposit with the public works department, before such permit shall be issued, an amount which shall be set forth by a resolution of the city council. For any work not mentioned in said resolution, the applicant shall pay a fee equal to the estimated cost of inspection and other services required to be provided by the city which are related to the project, to be computed by the city engineer, and thereupon, a permit for the work may be issued by the department of public works. (Ord. 1254 § 4, 1996; Ord. 947 § 5, 1982; Ord. 512 § 10, 1968; Ord. 117 § 4.05, 1962)

 

13.16.060 Class “B” permits—Deposits, computation of charges.
    (a)    If the application is for a class “B” permit, the applicant must, before the permit is issued, deposit with the public works department an amount estimated by the city engineer to be sufficient to reimburse the city for its costs of design, surveying, inspection, supervision, testing of materials, and appurtenant work and incidental costs including overhead.

    (b)    Final charges for a class “B” permit shall be the actual cost to the city for its expenses incurred in connection therewith. The permittee shall be entitled to a refund of any excess between the amount deposited and the final charges. In the event the final charges exceed the deposit, the permittee shall be required to pay the deficit to the city, and such payment shall be made before acceptance of the work.

    (c)    Upon completion of the work and acceptance thereof by the city engineer, an itemized statement of the final charges shall be rendered at the request of the permittee. (Ord. 1254 § 5, 1996; Ord. 117 § 4.06, 1962)

 

13.16.070 Class “B” permits—Plans—Bonds.
    (a)    PLANS, WHEN REQUIRED. Prior to the issuance of a class “B” permit, special plans shall be prepared therefor and thereafter approved by the city engineer, if in the opinion of the city engineer such plans are necessary.

    (b)    CLASS “B” PERMITS, BOND REQUIRED. No class “B” permit for the doing of any work for which such permit is required shall be issued unless the applicant shall first file with the city engineer a good and sufficient bond, approved by the city engineer or the city engineer’s duly authorized representative. The bond shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the proposed work as estimated by the city engineer and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance and completion of the work for which the permit is issued, in accordance with the permit and the plans and specifications prepared therefor, and referred to in the permit, and also upon the payment of all necessary costs and expenses which may be incurred or expended by the city in causing such required work to be done, and the payment of all engineering and inspection costs and fees incurred by the city. The bond shall be either a cash bond or a bond executed by a company authorized to act as surety in this state.

    (c)    CASH BOND, REIMBURSEMENT TO BE MADE THEREFROM. Whenever the applicant elects to post a cash bond, the city engineer is hereby empowered, in the event of any default on the part of the permittee in the performance of any work or improvement for which the permit was granted or in the payment of any charges due the city arising out of the issuance of such permit, to deduct therefrom on behalf of the city an amount sufficient to reimburse and to indemnify the city for any and all damages sustained by the city by reason of faulty or defective work, or by reason of carelessness or negligence of the permittee, or by reason of any failure on the part of the permittee faithfully and properly to perform and complete the work in accordance with the plans and specifications. In the event of any such default on the part of the permittee, the city engineer may, at the city engineer’s option, cause all the required work to be done and may expend therefor the whole amount of such cash bond or any part thereof.

    (d)    SURETY BOND, COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT. Whenever a surety bond has been filed in compliance with this section, the city engineer is hereby empowered, in the event of any default on the part of the principal, to enforce collection, under such bond, of all sums due and unpaid to the city as charges arising out of the issuance of the permit, and for any and all damages sustained by the city by reason of faulty or defective work, or by reason of the carelessness and negligence of the permittee in the performance of the work, or by reason of any failure on the part of the permittee faithfully and properly to perform, in accordance with the permit and the plans and specifications, the work or improvement for which the permit was issued. In the event of any such default on the part of the permittee, the city engineer may, at his option, cause all the required work to be done and the surety upon the bond shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs thereof.

    (e)    TERMINATION OF BOND. The term of each bond filed or posted pursuant to this section, shall begin upon the date of the filing or posting thereof and shall end upon the date of the completion, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, of all the improvements covered by the permit. The fact of such completion shall be evidenced by a statement thereof signed by the city engineer, a copy of which shall be furnished to any surety upon request. In any case where a cash bond has been posted there shall be returned, on demand, to the permittee or to his successors or assigns, upon or after the date of the issuance of said certificate, the amount of such cash bond less the amount, if any, expended by the public works department to complete the work or otherwise taken or deducted by the public works department to reimburse or to indemnify the city for any loss or damage incurred prior to the date of such acceptance as a result of any default covered by the cash bond.

    (f)    DUPLICATION OF SECURITY, NOT REQUIRED. If the applicant has already on file with the city engineer, and in full force and effect, a surety bond or a deposit posted pursuant to the provisions of this title approved and adequate in amount to meet the requirements of this section, no other bond shall be required to be posted by him in order to comply with this section. (Ord. 117 § 4.07, 1962)

 

13.16.080 Request for inspector.
    No person shall commence any work mentioned in Section 13.16.010 for which a permit has been issued, unless such person has made application to the public works department for an inspector therefor at least twenty-four hours before commencing said work, specifying in said application the location at which and the day and hour when said work will be commenced. (Ord. 117 § 4.08, 1962)

 

13.16.090 Completion of work—Certificate of acceptance.
    Whenever any permittee has completed any work under class “B” permit, said permittee shall so notify the city engineer, or his duly authorized representative, in writing. If the city engineer has found, by survey or inspection, or both, that the work has been completed in accordance with the requirements of the permit issued therefor and all the provisions of Sections 13.16.010 to 13.16.070, inclusive, he shall issue upon request of the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature and total amount of the work performed under the permit. (Ord. 117 § 4.09, 1962)

 

13.16.100 Permits—Duration—Expiration or cancellation.
    (a)    All class “A” and “B” permits issued under the provisions of Sections 13.16.010 to 13.16.070, inclusive, shall expire and be cancelled six months after the date of their issue, unless sooner requested by the permittee and unless actual construction of the work authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the expiration of the six month period; all class “A” and “B” permits shall expire and be cancelled sixty days after the date on which actual construction of the work was commenced, unless a longer construction period is specified in the permit, in which case such permit shall expire at the end of the longer construction period specified therein. The public works department may extend the time for the starting or the completion of the work, upon good and sufficient cause being shown therefor by the permittee, and such extension shall not be deemed to release any surety or any bond posted pursuant to Section 13.16.070.

    (b)    In the event any permittee shall not construct a portion of the work authorized by a class “A” permit, such permit, upon the application of the permittee, may be cancelled as to the omitted work only. (Ord. 117 § 4.10, 1962)

 

13.16.110 Refunds.
    (a)    Upon the cancellation of any unused class “A” permit or upon the cancellation of the unused portion of any class “A” permit or upon the expiration or cancellation of any class “B” permit, the moneys paid to the city pursuant to the requirements of Sections 13.16.050 and 13.16.060, less the sum of two dollars and less any amount expended by the city for engineering and incidental costs in connection with the permit plus fifteen percent of such costs, shall be returned to the permittee, if so requested by him in writing within six months from the date of expiration or cancellation and upon the surrender of the permit.

    (b)    All money deposited under class “A” permits and required by this section to be refunded shall be paid by the public works department from the departmental receipts of the public works department. (Ord. 117 § 4.11, 1962)

 

13.16.120 Permits—Amount of work allowed.
    No Person to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of Sections 13.16.010 to 13.16.070, inclusive, shall perform any of the work mentioned in Section 13.16.010 in an amount or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except that upon approval by the engineer, additional work may be done under the provisions of this permit in an amount not greater than ten percent of the amount specified in the permit. Any bond posted in connection with the original permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be approved pursuant to this section, within the limit mentioned herein. (Ord. 117 § 4.12, 1962)

 

13.16.130 Removal of debris.
    No person performing any work under the provisions of Sections 13.16.010 to 13.16.070, inclusive, shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove all material and debris within three days after the completion of the work. Where new work is covered with earth, the terms of the specifications of this city governing such work shall control. (Ord. 117 § 4.13, 1962)

 

 

13.16.140 Exemptions.
    (a)    Sections 13.16.010 to 13.16.070, inclusive, shall not be construed to apply to the performance of any of the classes of work therein mentioned under contracts made by property owners and duly authorized by ordinance, or under contracts made by the department of public works in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the state of California, providing for the improvement of streets in municipalities.

    (b)    Sections 13.16.010 to 13.16.070, inclusive, shall not be construed to apply to the construction, reconstruction, or repair of any curb or sidewalk by any department of this city or other governmental agency which elects to perform such work using its own departmental forces where in the opinion of the city engineer surveys, plans or inspection are not required. This exception shall not apply to the performance of any such work by a contractor engaged to perform the same by any such department or governmental agency. (Ord. 117 § 4.14, 1962)

Chapter 13.20 BUILDING MATERIAL IN STREETS
13.20.010 Permits—Required, application, fee.
    (a)    PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall deposit or maintain in or upon any street, any building material of any kind, any debris from any building or building excavation, or any other kind of material or equipment used or intended for use in connection with any building or other work upon adjacent private property without first making and filing a written application with the department of public works, receiving a permit therefrom to do so, and making a deposit with the department of public works.

    (b)    This deposit shall cover the costs of inspection and restoring the street and sidewalk to its original condition. Fee schedule is set forth in Section 13.16.050. The minimum deposit for permits for swimming pools shall be set forth by resolution of the city council.

    (c)    APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. The application for said permit shall contain: (1) the name, residence and business address of the applicant; (2) the name, location, and area of street for which a permit is desired.

    (d)    FEE. The issuance for material in streets permit shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1254 § 6, 1996; Ord. 947 § 6, 1982; Ord. 117 § 5.01, 1962)

 

13.20.020 Permits—Conditions.
    (a)    Every permit granted under Section 13.20.010 shall be granted upon the condition that the person to whom the permit was granted shall comply with all the provisions of this title.

    (b)    The department of public works may revoke any permit granted under Section 13.20.010 for the violation of any section of this title.

    (c)    No person shall continue to perform any work under any permit after the permit has been revoked by the department of public works. (Ord. 117 § 5.02, 1962)

 

13.20.030 Building material—Deposit in streets.
    (a)    No person shall fail to remove any building material of any kind whatsoever, or any debris deposited or maintained on any street, within five days after the completion of the construction, alteration, repair or demolition of any building in front of which such material or debris is deposited or maintained, nor fail to leave the street in as good a condition as the same was prior to the depositing of such material or debris therein.

    (b)    The department of public works shall proceed to do such work or have the same done upon failure of any person charged to do so under this section, and the department of public works shall deduct the costs of any such work from any deposits on hand or that may thereafter be made by such person.

    (c)    Any material deposited in the street without a permit and constituting a hazard to the public shall be removed by the department of public works and shall be held one week in the city yard. At the expiration of one week material not claimed shall become the property of the city for use on behalf of the public. If during the one-week period the owner of the material secures a valid permit and pays all costs incurred by the city in picking up, transporting, storing, plus fifteen percent overhead costs, such material shall be turned over to the owner at the city yard. The owner shall remove said material promptly. (Ord. 117 § 5.03, 1962)

 

13.020.040 Building material—Illumination.
    No person shall maintain any building material of any kind whatsoever, or any debris on any street, without placing a red light at each end of each pile of such material or debris during the whole of each night from sunset until sunrise. In the event it becomes necessary for the department of public works to place emergency-safety devices upon such material, the cost of placing and maintenance shall be deducted from the deposit. (Ord. 117 § 5.04, 1962)

 

13.20.050 Deposits—Restrictions.
    No person shall deposit or maintain any building material of any kind whatsoever, or any debris from any building or excavation, in or upon any street:

    (1)    Within twenty-five feet of any fire hydrant;

    (2)    A distance greater than ten feet from the curb on the same side of the street;

    (3)    In any manner as to prevent or endanger passage of any vehicle;

    (4)    In any manner as to obstruct the gutter space of the street;

    (5)    Except upon the same side of the street and immediately in front of the building in actual course of construction, alteration, repair or demolition. (Ord. 117 § 5.05, 1962)

 

13.20.060 Plaster-Mixing on street.
    No person shall mix, make, place or pile any mortar, plaster, or lime, or any similar substance or mixture upon any surface of any paved street, or cause the same to remain at any place in such a manner that the same will fall or leak upon the surface of any street. (Ord. 117 § 5.06, 1962)

 

13.20.070 Permits—Exhibition.
    No person shall fail to keep the permit granted for maintaining building material or debris at all times at the place where such work is being done; nor fail, upon demand therefor, to exhibit such permit to any member or inspector of the department of public works, or any public officer. (Ord. 117 § 5.07, 1962)

 

13.20.080 Building material—Removal.
    No person shall store or keep upon any street any material or debris taken from any excavation or building, or fail to remove the same from day to day as it is produced or wet any dry debris or rubbish, so as to prevent the same from being blown by the wind, whether in the course of removal from any building or excavation, or on any street. (Ord. 117 § 5.08, 1962)

 

13.20.090 Permits—Duration.
    (a)    Every permit granted by the department of public works under Section 13.20.010 shall become and be void within sixty days from the date issued.

    (b)    The department of public works may extend the time of the permit for a period not to exceed sixty days.

    (c)    None of the provisions of Sections 13.20.010 to 13.20.080, inclusive, shall apply to work performed under an excavation permit. (Ord. § 117 § 5.09, 1962)

Chapter 13.24 STRUCTURES IN STREETS
13.24.010 Permit—Required.
    No person shall erect or maintain any temporary structure or appliance in, upon, over, along or across any street, except as otherwise provided by law, without filing a written application and obtaining a written permit therefor from the department of public works. (Ord. 117 § 6.01, 1962)

 

13.24.020 Permit—Authorization to grant.
    The department of public works is hereby authorized to grant such permits. (Ord. 117 § 6.01(a), 1962)

 

13.24.030 Permit—Application contents.
    The written application referred to in Section 13.24.010 shall contain a description of the structures or appliance proposed to be erected or maintained, and the purposes for which the same are to be used. The application shall be accompanied by a map or diagram showing the location of the structure or appliance. (Ord. 117 § 6.01(b), 1962)

 

13.24.040 Permit—Contents.
    Any permit granted under Section 13.24.010 shall specify:

    (1)    The nature of the structure or appliance;

    (2)    The purpose for which it will be erected or maintained;

    (3)    The time during which such structure may be maintained;

    (4)    The location thereof. (Ord. 117 § 6.01(c), 1962)

 

13.24.050 Permit—Filing of plans and specifications.
    If required by the department of public works before the above work is commenced, complete plans and specifications thereof shall be submitted to and approved by the department of public works. (Ord. 117 § 6.01(d), 1962)

 

13.24.060 Permit—Fees and bond.
    No permit granted under Sections 13.24.010 through 13.24.070 shall be issued until the person applying for it shall have paid to the department of public works a sum which shall be set forth by city council resolution, and shall have also executed a good and sufficient bond to the city in a sum designated by the department of public works, with at least two sureties approved by the department of public works, conditioned that said person will save and keep the city, and all officers thereof, harmless from any and all costs, damages or expenses that the city or any of its officers may be obliged to pay by reason of, or that may arise out of, the granting of such permit or the erection or maintenance of the structure or appliance for which the permit is granted. (Ord. 1254 § 7, 1996; Ord. 117 § 6.01(e), 1962)

 

13.24.070 Permit—Duration—Revocation.
    No such permit shall be issued for a longer period than ninety days from the date of granting thereof.

    The department of public works may extend such period for an additional thirty days.

    The department of public works may revoke the permit at any time.

    Prior to the expiration date of the permit or at the revocation of the same, the structure or appliance shall be wholly removed from the location stated in the permit. (Ord. 117 § 6.01(f), 1962)

 

13.24.080 Electric wires—Permit required.
    No person shall string, place or attach any electric wires or electric lights of any nature whatsoever over, under, or in any manner directly or indirectly attached to or in front of any building or structure, or over any street, without first obtaining a written permit from the department of public works so to do. (Ord. 117 § 6.02, 1962)

 

13.24.090 Electric wires—Authority.
    The department of public works shall have the power and authority to regulate, inspect and supervise the stringing, placing and attaching of wires and electric lights of every nature whatsoever, now or hereafter placed over, under, or in any manner directly or indirectly attached to or in front of any building or structure or over any street. (Ord. 117 § 6.03, 1962)

 

13.24.100 Electric wires—Contents of permit.
    The permit required by Section 13.24.080 shall state the kind of work to be done thereunder and the place where such work is to be done. Said permit shall be valid only for the location so stated.

    No person shall perform any work other than that designated in the permit. (Ord. 117 § 6.04, 1962)

 

13.24.110 Electric wires—Safety.
    No electric lights or wires shall be so constructed, placed and supported over any street so as to cause fire or accident, injury or damage, to life or property. (Ord. 117 § 6.05, 1962)

 

13.24.120 Electric wires—Permit duration.
    If the work authorized under the permit required by Section 13.24.080 is not commenced within thirty days after the date thereof, such permit shall thereupon be void.

    None of the provisions of Sections 13.24.010 to 13.24.110, inclusive, shall apply to work performed under an excavation permit. (Ord. 117 § 6.06, 1962)

 

13.24.130 Electric wires—Exemption—Franchises.
    (a)    Nothing in Sections 13.24.010 to 13.24.110, inclusive, shall be construed as interfering with any rights granted to any person to string electric wires, telephone wires, telegraph wires, or wires of any other kind, which right is exercised under and by virtue of any franchise of the state of California or of the city, previously obtained.

    (b)    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed so as to interfere with the exercise of its rights under a franchise by a public utility. (Ord. 117 § 6.07, 1962)

Chapter 13.28 WATER COURSES AND WATER IN STREETS
13.28.010 Water course obstructions—Permits.
    No person shall fill or obstruct, or maintain any fill or obstruction in, any natural water course or any channel carrying storm water unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the department of public works. (Ord. 117 § 7.01, 1962)

 

13.28.020 Water course structures—Permits.
    No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, install or maintain any drainage structure in any natural water course or channel carrying storm water unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the department of public works. (Ord. 117 § 7.02, 1962)

 

13.28.030 Water courses—Interference with restricted.
    No person shall do anything to any natural water course or any channel carrying storm water that will in any manner obstruct or interfere with the flow of water through such water course or channel, and any property owner, lessee or tenant of any property through which a natural water course or any channel carrying storm water passes shall keep and maintain the same free from any obstructions that will in any manner prevent or retard the flow of water through such water course or channel, except that a water course or channel may be filled or altered if a permit to do so has been first obtained pursuant to Sections 13.28.010 and 13.28.020. (Ord. 117 § 7.03, 1962)

 

13.28.040 Permit—Application—Contents—Deposit.
    Any person desiring to obtain a permit to construct, reconstruct or repair any drainage structure or to alter or change any natural water course or natural drainage channel, or to fill or obstruct the same, shall file an application in writing therefor with the department of public works which shall state:

    (1)    The name and address of the applicant, and if applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof;

    (2)    The place where such construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration is to take place;

    (3)    The type of construction proposed to be used in such construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration, together with the materials to be used, shown on an accompanying diagram of the proposed work, and such other information as the department of public works may require to carry out the purposes of this section.

    If the department of public works determines that the proposed structure, fill, alteration, or repair (1) will not constitute a part of the city’s permanently improved storm water drainage system, (2) will not interfere with the flow of natural storm water, and (3) will not injure adjoining property, the department of public works shall issue a permit to do the proposed work in the manner specified in the application, or in such manner as the department of public works may determine is required to carry out the purposes of Sections 13.28.010 to 13.28.040, inclusive.

    The applicant at the time of obtaining any such permit shall deposit a fee of two dollars with the department of public works if the estimated value of the work does not exceed two hundred dollars and an additional fee of one dollar for each one hundred dollars, or fraction thereof, of estimated value in excess of two hundred dollars, up to one thousand dollars, if the estimated value of the work exceeds one thousand dollars, there shall be an additional fee of fifty cents for each one hundred dollars, or fraction thereof, of estimated value in excess of one thousand dollars.

    If the department of public works determined that the proposed structures will constitute a part of the city’s permanently improved storm water drainage system, the applicant shall obtain a class “B” permit and perform the work under the provisions of Sections 13.28.010 to 13.28.080 in accordance with plans and specifications therefor approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 117 § 7.04, 1962)

 

13.28.050 Irrigation water—Use of streets.
    No person shall deposit, place, discharge or conduct any water used or intended to be used for irrigating any land into or upon any street without first having obtained a permit so to do from the department of public works. (Ord. 117 § 7.05, 1962)

 

13.28.060 Water in streets.
    No person shall drain water or other liquid or permit water or other liquid to be drained from land or premises under such person’s management or control, onto any public street by any means which result in damage to the street or causes interference with or hazard to public travel on or maintenance of said public street. (Ord. 117 § 7.06, 1962)

 

13.28.070 Washing private alleys.
    No person shall wash or flush any private alley, way or place so that the water from the washing or flushing thereof shall run or be discharged into or upon any public street or into the gutter of any public street. (Ord. 117 § 7.07, 1962)

Chapter 13.32 OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZE LOADS
13.32.010 Prohibitions.
    It is unlawful for any person to move, or cause to be moved, any building, structure, equipment, vehicle, or conveyance subject to any sections of Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California (Section 35000 et seq.) in, on, upon, along or into any public street or highway in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.32.015. (Ord. 1158 § 1, 1990; Ord. 729 § 1, 1974; Ord. 270 § 1, 1964; Ord. 117 § 8.01, 1962)

 

13.32.015 Permit application.
    In accordance with Vehicle Code Section 35780 et seq., and upon written application to the director of public works, the director may, in his/her discretion, issue a permit authorizing the operation upon city highways of a vehicle or combination of vehicles, the size of weight, or load of which exceeds the maximum specified in the vehicle code. The application permit form shall be a substantially similar form to that used by the Department of Transportation. Said permit may be issued for a single move or may be for an unlimited number of moves on a annual basis. At the time of approval of the application, and the issuance of such a permit, a permit fee will be paid to the city in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in Section 13.32.020. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1990; Ord. 729 § 2, 1974)

 

13.32.020 Permit fee.
    The fee for each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be set by resolution and shall not exceed the fee schedule developed by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 35781. (Ord. 1158 § 3, 1990; Ord. 729 § 3, 1974; Ord. 117 § 8.02, 1962)

 

13.32.030 Structures or buildings—Movement.
    No permit for oversize or overweight loads for the moving or relocation of a structure  or  building  into  the  city  for  permanent  establishment therein shall be issued unless said application has been authorized by the planning commission of the city. (Ord. 729 § 4, 1974; Ord. 117 § 8.03, 1962)

 

13.32.035 Permit—Restriction.
    A permit issued is limited to the person or authorized agent and any attempt to assign or transfer rights thereunder is void and of no effect. (Ord. 729 § 5, 1974)

 

13.32.040 Withholding or restricting permits, bonds, and insurance.
    (a)    When necessary to protect against injury to the road, foundation, surfaces or structures, the director of public works may deny or restrict a permit as follows:

    (1)    By limiting the number of trips;

    (2)    By establishing seasonal or other lime limitations;

    (3)    By otherwise limiting the conditions of the operation of the vehicle.

    (b)    Bonds may not be required unless the director of public works determines that there is an unusually heavy or wide load that poses a substantial risk to public facilities.

    (c)    Proof of financial responsibility is required in compliance with the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1483 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1158 § 4, 1990; Ord. 658 § 1, 1972; Ord. 512 § 10, 1968; Ord. 117 § 8.04, 1962)

 

13.32.050 Certain times restricted.
    A permit for oversized or overweight loads shall not be issued for a move to take place on either Saturday, Sunday or any legal holiday unless specifically authorized in writing by the director of public works. All moves shall take place during daylight hours only, except that no moves will be allowed between the hours of seven a.m. to nine a.m. and four p.m. to six p.m. unless specific permission is granted by the director of public works in writing. Except for annual permits, all permits shall be issued for one day. If the move was not made on the designated date and time a new permit must be obtained by the contractor. (Ord. 1158 § 5, 1990; Ord. 512 § 10, 1968; Ord. 117 § 8.05, 1962)

 

13.32.060 Special protection.
    It is unlawful for any building or structure fourteen feet or more in width to be moved over, upon  or across any highway, street,  alley or way unless the contractor so moving the same shall have not less than five persons engaged in said moving operations comprised as follows: Number 1, a foreperson; Number 2, a truck driver; Number 3, a person on the building to handle wire clearances; Numbers 4 and 5, two flagpersons, one to be at least three hundred feet ahead of the building or structure; the other flagperson shall follow said building or structure at a distance sufficient to give adequate warning to approaching traffic. Said flagperson shall carry the signals required by law. (Ord. 1158 § 6, 1990; Ord. 117 § 8.06, 1962)

 

13.32.070 Street closures.
    If a street must be closed during a house moving operation, the contractor must effect the street closure in conformance with the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook (W.A.T.C.H.) as published by Building News Incorporated. Electronic sequential arrow boards shall be used on all lane/road closures. Arrow boards shall be in conformance with Section 5-06 of the Traffic Manual, State of California, or successor provision. (Ord. 1158 § 7, 1990; Ord. 117 § 8.07, 1962)

 

13.32.080 Safety precautions.
    To take care of any contingencies that may arise, the “mover” shall provide lanterns, additional fuel for same or extra lanterns, jacks, “Street Closed” signs, and other warning and safety devices which must be carried on the equipment assigned to the move.

    The contractor shall carry a fire extinguisher on the moving equipment to quickly extinguish fires that may occur. (Ord. 117 § 8.08, 1962)

 

13.32.090 Equipment and persons necessary to move.
    The contractor must have sufficient persons to handle the move and enough power (trucks) to pull the load.

    The contractor shall be responsible to place flags, ahead or behind the building to be moved, to protect traffic. (Ord. 117 § 8.09, 1962)

 

13.32.100 Route of move.
    The city engineer shall have the authority to reject an application in which the route proposed is unsatisfactory for causes of structural inadequacy of the existing paving on the proposed route. (Ord. 117 § 8.10, 1962)

 

13.32.110 Failure to complete move.
    (a)    If through any circumstances, the house moving contractor is unable to get the load to its destination before the expiration time of the permit, he shall take all precautions to protect the traveling public. The load shall be relocated so that no portion projects within four feet of the traveled lane. He shall protect the public by providing an adequate number of warning lights and other safety devices.

    (b)    The permittee shall post an undertaking or other security as may be deemed necessary by the city to assure that the building is moved by the completion time set forth in the permit. The terms of said surety shall provide that, in the event the permittee fails to complete the move as scheduled for whatever reason, the city may take possession of the building and moving equipment and cause it to be moved or relocated by its own forces or by other contract forces. (Ord. 863 § 1, 1978; Ord. 117 §§ 8, 11, 1962)

Chapter 13.36 DRAINAGE PLAN
13.36.010 Master drainage plan.
    The master plan of drainage which is adopted pursuant to city council resolution is the city’s master plan of drainage and a portion of the public services and facilities element of the general plan of the city. A copy of the master plan of drainage is made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 896 § 2, 1980)

 

13.36.020 Planned local drainage facilities fund.
    There is created a separate fund which shall be known as the “planned local drainage facilities fund.” Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement of local drainage facilities construction. (Ord. 896 § 2, 1980)

 

13.36.030 Drainage annexation fee.
    (a)    There is established a drainage annexation fee in order to implement the goals and objectives of the master drainage plan and to mitigate water runoff impacts of new development in the drainage area. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development’s fair share of improvements.

    (b)    The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments.

    (c)    The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:

    (1)    Pay for the city’s future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to (b) above, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

    (2)    Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity.

    (d)    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in subsection (b) may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the water runoff impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1132 § 1, 1989; Ord. 896 § 2, 1980)

 

13.36.040 Consideration in lieu of cash.
    The city shall have the right to accept consideration in lieu of cash for any requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 896 § 2, 1980)

 

13.36.050 Additions to present facilities.
    The drainage facilities planned in the master plan of drainage are in addition to the present local drainage facilities serving the drainage area. (Ord. 896 § 2, 1980)

 

13.36.060 Drainage area.
    The boundaries of the city of Fountain Valley shall be the drainage area. (Ord. 896 § 2, 1980)

 

13.36.070 Chapter application.
    This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land and the development of all land within the drainage area, excepting therefrom land owned by the United States government. (Ord. 896 § 2, 1980)

Chapter 13.40 UNDERGROUND WIRING
13.40.010 Definitions.
    Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

    (1)    “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

    (2)    “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

    (3)    “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric communication of similar or associated service.

    (4)    “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.40.030.

    (5)    “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 482 § 1, 1968)

 

13.40.020 Public hearing by council.
    (a)    The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive.

    (b)    Prior to holding such hearing, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 482 § 2, 1968)

 

13.40.030 Designation of districts.
    If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 482 § 3, 1968)

 

13.40.040 Overhead structures—Removal.
    Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.40.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.40.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 482 § 4, 1968)

 

13.40.050 Overhead structures—Installation for emergency.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the director of public works in order to provide emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 482 § 5, 1968)

 

13.40.060 Overhead structures—Chapter exceptions.
    In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.050, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

    (1)    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works;

    (2)    Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

    (3)    Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

    (4)    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

    (5)    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

    (6)    Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

    (7)    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

    (8)    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 482 § 6, 1968)

 

13.40.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.

    Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified herein, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 482 § 7, 1968)

 

13.40.080 Utility company responsibility.
    If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 482 § 8, 1968)

 

13.40.090 Property owner responsibility—Connections.
    (a)    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.40.080 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

    (b)    In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subsections (a) of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.40.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. (Ord. 482 § 9, 1968)

 

13.40.100 Property owner responsibility—Alternate procedures.
    (a)    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.40.080 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.40.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

    (b)    The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, city of Fountain Valley. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.

    (c)    The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

    (d)    If upon the expiration of the thirty day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

    (e)    The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

    (f)    Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

    (g)    If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add tile amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (Ord. 482 § 9, 1968)

 

13.40.110 Responsibility of city.
    The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.40.030. (Ord. 482 § 10, 1968)

 

13.40.120 Variance.
    A variance committee is hereby established to consist of the planning director, public works director and director of building and safety to consider variances to the provisions of this chapter and shall have the authority to issue variance permits. Variances may be approved by the committee if by a majority vote a determination is made that the integrity and character of the area, value of adjacent property, the general welfare of the neighborhood would be maintained if the variance were granted. In addition, should unusual or severe economic hardship result to the applicant from the requirements of this chapter the committee may take such findings under consideration to vary, defer or waive such requirements.

    (1)    The public works director shall issue the variance permit only after the conditions upon which such permit was authorized to be issued either have been fulfilled, or adequate guarantees that such conditions will be fulfilled, have been given by the applicant.

    (2)    The committee shall meet upon call of any member of the committee. (Ord. 482 § 12, 1968)

 

13.40.130 Extension of time.
    In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 482 § 13, 1968)

Title 14 WATER AND SEWERS
Chapter 14.04 WATER SYSTEM
Chapter 14.08 WATER DEPARTMENT
Chapter 14.12 WATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES
Chapter 14.16 WATER REGULATIONS
Chapter 14.17 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
Chapter 14.18 WATER CONSERVATION
Chapter 14.20 WATER MAINS AND SERVICE EXTENSIONS
Chapter 14.24 WATER SERVICE TO SUBDIVISIONS AND ANNEXATIONS
Chapter 14.28 WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS
Chapter 14.32 SANITATION SYSTEM
Chapter 14.36 SEWERS
Chapter 14.38 GREASE CONTROL
Chapter 14.40 STORMWATER REGULATIONS

Chapter 14.04 WATER SYSTEM
14.04.010 System established.
    A municipal water system is hereby established by the city of Fountain Valley for the city of Fountain Valley. From time to time, the city shall take such steps as necessary in the acquisition of water lines and other facilities as it may be deemed expedient. (Ord. 23 § 2, 1958)

Chapter 14.08 WATER DEPARTMENT
14.08.010 Created.
    There is hereby created and established a water department to be known as “The Fountain Valley Municipal Water Department.” (Ord. 85 § 1.01, 1962)

 

14.08.020 Definitions.
    “Applicant” means an individual or agency applying for water service.

    “Commercial service” includes commercial uses and retail businesses excluding commercial agricultural usage.

    “Customer” means an individual or agency of record receiving water service from the Fountain Valley municipal water department.

    “Date of presentation” means the date upon which a bill or notice is mailed or delivered personally to the customer.

    “Domestic service” means provision of water for household residential purposes, including water for sprinkling lawns, gardens and shrubbery, and other similar and customary purposes.

    “Fire protection service” means provision of water to premises for automatic fire protection.

    “Industrial service” means provision of water to a customer for use in manufacturing or processing activities.

    “Irrigation service” means provision of water for irrigation of open land or fields separate and distinct from domestic service as herein defined and for commercial agricultural, floricultural or horticultural use.

    “Main” means distribution pipelines located in streets, highways, public ways, or private rights-of-way which are used to serve the general public.

    “Main extensions” means extension of distribution pipelines, exclusive of service connections, beyond existing facilities.

    “Meter rate service” means provision of water in measured quantities.

    “Municipal or public use” means provision of water to other departments within the city government, or to other public body.

    “Premises” means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided.

    “Service connection” means the pipe, valves and other facilities by means of which the utility conducts water from its distribution mains to and through the meter, or to the curbstop or shut-off valve on an unmetered service connection.

    “Temporary service” means a service for circuses, bazaars, fairs, construction work, irrigation of vacant property, and similar uses, that because of their nature will not be used steadily or permanently.

    “Water superintendent” or “superintendent” means the person designated by the city council to be the chief officer of the water department or such officer or agent as shall be duly authorized to act in enforcement of these regulations. (Ord. 426 §§ 2 and 3, 1966; Ord. 85 § 1.05, 1962)

 

14.08.030 Water superintendent.
    There shall be a water superintendent who shall, under the direction of the director of public works, have charge of the supervision and administration of the water department of the city and the enforcement of this title.

    The director of public works or his authorized representative shall act in such capacity without additional compensation until such time as such additional position may be authorized by the city council. (Ord. 736 § 1, 1975; Ord. 426 § 1, 1966: prior Ord. 85 § 1.02, 1962)

14.08.040 Service area.
    The area in which service is or will be furnished by the water department is that area wherein the city can exercise appropriate jurisdiction over said water system. The area does not exclude those areas outside the city boundaries which may be served upon approval of the city council. (Ord. 85 § 1.03, 1962)

 

14.08.050 Description of service.
    (a)    SUPPLY. The water department will exercise reasonable diligence and care to deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to the customer at a proper pressure, and to avoid any shortage or interruption in delivery.

    (b)    QUALITY. When furnished for human consumption, the water department will supply a safe and potable water at all times.

    (c)    CLASSES OF SERVICE. All service installed by the water department will be classified as follows:

    (1)    Domestic;

    (2)    Commercial;

    (3)    Industrial;

    (4)    Irrigation;

    (5)    Municipal or public use;

    (6)    Fire protection.

    (d)    TYPES OF SERVICE. The types of service available from the water department are:

    (1)    Metered rate;

    (2)    Temporary. (Ord. 85 § 1.04, 1962)

 

14.08.060 Employee’s identification cards.
    An official identification card shall be carried or worn by inspectors, foremen, meter readers, and all employees who in line of duty may be required to enter upon private premises. (Ord. 85 § 8.01, 1962)

 

14.08.070 Water service inspection.
    Duly authorized representatives of the water department shall have the right of access at all reasonable times to any premises where water is used, for the purpose of inspection.

    In case such representatives are refused admittance to any premises or are otherwise prevented from making an inspection, the water department may cause the water to be shut off from said premises after giving at least twenty-four hour’s notice to the owner or occupant of said premises. (Ord. 85 § 8.02, 1962)

 

14.08.080 Identification cards to be turned in.
    Every officer or employee, upon resignation or dismissal from the water department, shall forthwith surrender and deliver to the proper officials all identification cards, badges, and credentials of the water department. (Ord. 85 § 8.03, 1962)

Chapter 14.12 WATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES
14.12.010 Rules and regulations adoption.
    The city council reserves the right and power to, and may from time to time, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations for the operation and maintenance of the water system of the city, and for furnishing water users; and may likewise, by resolution, modify the rates, charges, deposits, and penalties established and imposed; and may from time to time, by resolution, prescribe rules for the extension of water mains within the boundaries and outside the boundaries of the city. The city council may, by resolution, prescribe the procedure for re-evaluation of water usage charges related to the cost of wholesale water purchase or produced for use in the city water system. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.020 Rates inside city limits.
    The monthly metered rates to be charged and collected by the water department from all its customers shall be as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.030 Rates outside city limits.
    The monthly rates to be charged and collected by the water department for services to customers outside the city limits of the city from city owned and maintained water lines shall be as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution.

    The city council may, by separate resolution, establish special districts outside the city limits in which the prevailing rate within the city shall be charged for a stated period of time. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.035 Accounts.
    Persons establishing accounts may be required to make deposits as prescribed by resolution. Such decisions shall be based on the credit-worthiness of each applicant, in accordance with criteria set forth by resolution. The sum shall not exceed twice the average bill. Tenants shall have their own accounts, unless owners agree to be responsible. Absent such an agreement, an owner shall not be responsible for an account that the tenant has established. New tenants shall not be responsible for a previous tenant’s account. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.040 Bi-monthly billing.
    Customers shall be billed on a bi-monthly basis. Billing for a two month period will be based upon the number of units consumed during the billing period multiplied by the appropriate rate per unit described in Section 14.12.020 of this chapter. Water bills may also include any unpaid penalties or charges as described in this chapter. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.050 Water bills due dates and fees.
    A water bill shall be considered due and payable immediately after it is received by the customer. If a bimonthly water bills is not received by the customer in a timely manner, it is the customer’s responsibility to notify the water billing department, during regular business hours, that a bill was not received; the water billing department shall then inform the customer of the amount due. A water bill shall be considered late if it is not paid at the water billing department, in person or by mail, by five p.m. on or before the twentieth day after the bill is mailed to the customer. If the twentieth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the bill shall be considered past due after five p.m. of the next working day.

    As a penalty, customers who do not pay their water bills within the required time shall be assessed a fee set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. A notice shall be mailed to the customer indicating the assessment of this fee, the current balance on the account and a date by which the balance shall be satisfied to avoid discontinuance of service. If any bill is not paid at the water billing department by five p.m. on or before the sixtieth day after the original bill was mailed to the customer, the water may be turned off and service discontinued. If the sixtieth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the account shall be eligible for disconnection if it is not satisfied before five p.m. of the next working day.

    In case the water is turned off as provided for in this section, it shall not be turned on again until all legitimate charges for services rendered have been fully paid, in person or by mail, to the water billing department or as otherwise provided in this chapter. There shall be included in these legitimate charges the charge for the service call to turn the water off as well as the charge required to restore service once again.

    In addition, the city may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction for any amount due and payable together with penalties as herein provided, the costs of said suit and for such other and further relief as to the court may appear appropriate in the premises. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.060 Applications—Fees.
    All applications for water must be made on the form provided by the water billing department. All individuals over the age of eighteen living at the address stated on the application, whether they own or lease the property, must complete the application. Those residents renting or leasing the property stated on the application must include the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on the application. All applications, except those completed and submitted applications which pertain to governmental agencies, shall be submitted along with an application fee as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. Applications shall be submitted to and application fees paid at the water billing department during regular business hours. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.065 Procedures to contest or appeal a bill.
    A customer may initiate a complaint or request an investigation regarding the amount of a bill within five days of receiving a disputed bill. A bill shall be deemed received by a customer five days after mailing and immediately upon emailing. A customer may initiate a complaint or request an investigation by submitting a written request and supporting documentation to the city.

    A timely complaint or request for investigation shall be reviewed by the finance director or designee, who shall provide a written determination to the customer within fourteen days of receipt of the dispute. The city may, in its discretion, review untimely complaints or requests for investigation; however, such complaints or requests are not subject to appeal.

    The affected customer has fourteen days from the time the written determination letter was mailed to the customer to file an appeal with the city clerk. If an appeal is not received by the city clerk within fourteen days, the affected customer failed to exhaust his or her administrative remedies and the decision of the finance director or designee shall become conclusive. If an appeal is received by the city clerk within fourteen days of the date the reply was mailed, then the appeal shall be forwarded to the city manager. The city manager shall review the appeal and mail or deliver a written determination letter to the affected customer or representative. The city manager’s decision is final. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.070 Turning off water—Restoration of service.
    (a)    Discontinuation of Water Service for Nonpayment. The city will provide a mailed notice to the customer of record at least twenty  days before discontinuation of water service. The city will also send a notice to the occupants living at the service address at least twenty  days before discontinuation of water service.

    (b)    Circumstances Under Which Services Will Not Be Discontinued. The city will not discontinue residential water service for nonpayment under the following circumstances:

    (1)    During an investigation by the city of a customer dispute or appeal as set forth in Section 14.12.065;

    (2)    During the period of time in which a customer’s payment is subject to a city-approved extension, amortization or alternative payment schedule, as set forth in Section 14.12.075, and the customer remains in compliance with the approved payment arrangement;

    (c)    Special Medical and Financial Circumstances Under Which Services Will Not Be Discontinued. The city will not discontinue water service if all of the following conditions are met:

    (1)    The customer, or a tenant of the customer, submits to the city the certification of a licensed primary care provider that discontinuation of water service will be life threatening to, or pose a serious threat to the health and safety of, a resident of the premises where residential service is provided;

    (2)    The customer demonstrates that he or she is financially unable to pay for residential service within the city’s normal billing cycle. The customer is deemed financially unable to pay during the normal billing cycle if: (A) any member of the customer’s household is a current recipient of an assistance program (i.e. CalWorks, CalFresh, Medi-Cal, Supplemental Security Income, etc.); or (B) the customer declares under penalty of perjury that the household’s annual income is less than two hundred percent of the federal poverty level; and

    (3)    The customer is willing to enter into an alternative payment arrangement with respect to the delinquent charges.

    (d)    Discontinuation of Water Service for Other Customer Violations. The city reserves the right to discontinue water service for any violations of city ordinances, rules, or regulations other than nonpayment.

    (e)    Restoration of Service. The water service shall not be restored until payment is made of all amounts due including any applicable service call fees. Payment of any amount due and/or fees assessed shall be made at the water billing department during regular business hours. If a customer wishes to have water service restored after regular business hours, the city shall provide this service for a charge which shall be set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. Special after-hours service can be obtained by submitting payment to the police department.

    No water service shall be terminated unless notice of the delinquency and proposed termination are given in accordance with applicable state law. Water service shall not be terminated on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday or at any time in which the water department is not open for business. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.075 Extensions and alternative payment arrangements.
    If a customer is unable to pay a bill during the normal payment period, the customer may request an extension or other alternative payment arrangement. If a customer submits his or her request within thirteen days after mailing of a written notice of discontinuation of service by the city, the request will be reviewed by the finance director or designee. The finance director’s or designee’s decisions regarding extensions and other alternative payment arrangements are final.

    If approved by the finance director or designee, a customer’s payment of his or her unpaid balance may be extended. The finance director or designee shall determine, in his or her discretion, how long an extension shall be provided to the customer. The customer shall pay the full unpaid balance by the date set by the finance director or designee and must remain current on all water service charges accruing during any subsequent billing periods. The extended payment date will be set forth in writing and provided to the customer. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.080 Service call fee.
    The city shall charge a service call fee as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution any time a service call is made to shut off or reconnect water, or any other reason connected with discontinuance of service for nonpayment as described in this chapter. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.090 Unauthorized turn-on—Penalty.
    No person other than a duly authorized employee of the city shall turn on water or any meter service. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty to be set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution in addition to any criminal penalty. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.100 Nonpayment deposits.
    Customers who require more than two service calls for nonpayment in a twelve month period shall be required to post an additional deposit as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. Said deposit shall be in addition to charges for service calls to turn off and turn on the service. Water service shall not be restored until these charges and the deposit have been made. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.110 Owner’s responsibility.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the property owner shall be ultimately responsible to the city to keep his or her property and its waterlines and all water appurtenances in good repair and order. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.120 Vacant dwellings.
    In case a house becomes vacant, the water department shall turn off the water service unless otherwise requested by the owner. If the water is turned off, the owner or new tenant of the property shall be charged a service call fee as described in Section 14.12.080 of this chapter. If the owner or tenant requests that the water be kept on, the regular minimum rate shall be charged and collected from the owner whether water is used or not. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.130 Change of address.
    Water service shall not be given any customer who changes his residence or business or changes his or her billing address until all delinquent charges owing thereof at the former residence or billing address have been paid. If a customer moves to a new residence or place of business within the city, the customer shall complete an application and pay the appropriate fee described in Section 14.12.060. If the customer only changes his or her mailing address but does not change his or her residence or place of business, no fees are assessed to the customer. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.150 Service connection charges—Meters.
    (a)    All non-temporary water supplied to any water customer shall be metered. In the event that a meter must be installed to measure the amount of water being supplied to a customer, the following procedures shall be followed:

    (1)    The customer shall make an application and pay the required application fees.

    (2)    The customer shall make an application for a water meter with the water superintendent during regular business hours.

    (3)    The customer shall pay in advance a sum of money as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution to cover the costs associated with installing a new service connection.

    (b)    All services installed outside the incorporated limits of the city shall have the same charge for installation as those services within city limits. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.160 Change of meter location.
    Any person desiring to change the location of a meter that already has been installed shall make an application to the water superintendent during regular business hours. After receiving the application, the water superintendent shall make a determination as to whether the meter location change is possible or warranted. If the water superintendent approves the request for the meter location change, he shall collect a deposit as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution based on a cost estimate determined by the water superintendent. Once the meter location change has been completed, the difference, if any, between the actual costs incurred by the city and the customer’s deposit shall be returned to the customer. If the deposit is insufficient, the balance will be due within thirty days. The water superintendent also has the right to deny a meter location change if it is not found to be consistent with the public welfare and any decision that the water superintendent makes regarding this section is final and conclusive. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.170 Meter failure.
    If a meter fails to register during any period of time or is known to register inaccurately, the water superintendent shall make the determination as to how much the customer will be charged until the meter is repaired or replaced. The water superintendent’s determination will be based upon: (a) the average seasonal consumption by the meter when in use and functioning properly in the previous year; or (b) a comparable user’s meter. The water superintendent’s determination shall be final. If a meter needs repair or replacement, it shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with Section 14.16.180. It is also the owner’s responsibility to care for the meter and to keep it in good working order. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.180 Testing meters.
    (a)    Any customer may demand that the meter through which water is being furnished to the premises may be examined and tested by the water superintendent for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering accurately the amount of water which is being delivered through it. Such demand shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by a payment equivalent to the service call fee described in Section 14.12.080. Such demand shall be made to the water billing department during regular business hours.

    (b)    Upon receipt of such demand, the water superintendent shall cause the water meter to be examined and tested. If on such examination and test the meter is found to register three percent over the amount of water that passes through it, the following shall occur:

    (1)    Another meter shall be substituted for the faulty meter;

    (2)    The service call fee shall be refunded to the customer;

    (3)    The water charges for the current and previous period shall be adjusted fairly by the determination of the fiscal services manager.

    (c)    If the meter is found to register not over three percent fast, the city shall retain the service call fee, the bill amount shall be paid as it appears on the on the customer’s water bill and no adjustments shall be made. The customer or his authorized representative may be present to witness the test. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

14.12.190 Temporary service.
    (a)    Application for temporary water service shall be made to the water department at City Hall during regular business hours. Temporary service as discussed in this section normally applies to contractors or builders, but temporary service may also be extended to other applicants for water. When temporary service is requested, the water department shall collect a deposit from the applicant to compensate the department for all water furnished to said applicant during such period of temporary service. Such deposit shall be as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. In addition to estimated charges for water, the applicant shall also reimburse the water department for all costs required in furnishing such service together with all damages that may occur to the facilities. Upon deposit of such a sum as the water superintendent shall require and the submission of an application on a form supplied by the water superintendent, a permit may be issued for temporary water use by the applicant.

    (b)    It shall be the determination of the water superintendent as to whether temporary water service shall be metered or unmetered. The difference between metered and unmetered temporary water service rates are as follows:

    (1)    Metered Water Service. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain a meter provided by the water superintendent in the city yard to measure the temporary water usage; the charges for temporary water service where such service is metered shall be charged at the rates described in Section 14.12.020.

    (2)    Unmetered Water Service. The use of unmetered water may occur under two conditions; (A) if, in the determination of the water superintendent, the setting of a water meter is uneconomical or impractical for the supply of water; or (B) temporary service is provided to furnish construction water.

    (c)    The term “construction water” includes the water to be utilized for the preparation of building sites, streets, sidewalks and appurtenances, sewers, water mains, and all construction work through the initial phase of the development; but shall not include water used after the date of installation of water meters for normal residential use; and shall not include water used for growing of vegetation, lawns, shrubs, or otherwise.

    (d)    Rates for unmetered temporary water service providing construction water shall be charged in the following manner: if the unmetered water is provided to furnish construction water for a residential subdivision, such construction water shall be charged at a rate as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution; if the unmetered water is provided to furnish construction water for purposes other than for residential subdivision, a different rate shall be charged as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution.

    (e)    Once meter installation by the subdivider for the purpose of serving residential units is achieved, temporary service shall be considered metered service and shall be charged at the rates as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. Temporary water service shall be provided to and charged to the subdivider up to and including the date that application is made to the city for permanent water service by the purchaser or occupant of the unit or units built by the subdivider or once the water service is metered, the subdivider may submit a written request to the water billing department for discontinuance of temporary service.

    (f)    Once temporary service is terminated, all outstanding charges will be levied against the customer’s deposit and all material and appurtenances provided to the customer by the city shall be returned to the city. Any outstanding deposit balance in favor of the customer shall be returned to the customer; any charges in excess of the customer’s deposit shall be paid immediately to the city by the customer. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.200 Fire protection rates and charges.
    (a)    Private Fire Service—Standby Rates. The rates to be charged and collected for water standby and fire detector charges shall be as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution.

    (b)    Private Fire Service—Installation Charges. Whenever a service is installed for private fire protection, a charge shall be made for all labor, fire detector checks and/or other approved devices, together with all appurtenant materials and engineering plus administrative overhead costs. The water superintendent shall estimate what the total amount of the charge shall be and will collect a deposit from the customer as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. Once installation is completed, the difference, if any, between the actual costs incurred by the city and the customer’s deposit shall be returned to the customer. If the deposit is insufficient, the balance will be due within thirty days. Such service shall be used only in case of fire or other purpose expressly provided in this section. Use of such private fire protection service for any other purpose than in this section provided shall be a misdemeanor.

    (c)    Private Fire Service—Testing/Maintenance Charges. Should it be necessary to use water through a fire line meter for the purpose of testing or maintaining a private fire prevention system, the water superintendent may authorize such use upon the receipt of a written request received during regular business hours stating:

    (1)    Date and time of use;

    (2)    Purpose;

    (3)    Estimated quantity of water to be used;

    (4)    Estimated maximum flow.

    The superintendent may restrict such non-emergency flows which may be detrimental to or tend to dewater the system. The water superintendent shall determine the charges to be levied against the customer based on the estimated quantity of water to be used.

    (d)    Public Fire Protection. The annual standby charge for public fire protection shall be set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. The purpose of this charge is to reimburse the water fund for standby costs absorbed by the water department resulting from the city’s use of fire hydrants for public fire protection. The standby charge shall be computed on November 1st of each year based on the number of hydrants in service on that date. The standby charge shall be payable in one annual installment due on July 1st. This installment shall be charged against the general fund and payable to the water fund. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.210 Fire hydrant and valve location.
    Fire hydrants shall be installed in the location specified by the water superintendent. If a property owner or other party desires a change in size, type or location of such hydrants, he shall bear all costs of such changes. Any change in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the superintendent. All required fees must be paid in advance of commencement of work. A deposit shall be collected if the exact amount of such changes is unknown. This deposit shall be as set forth in a schedule to be adopted by separate resolution. Once installation is completed, the difference, if any, between the actual costs incurred by the city and the customer’s deposit shall be returned to the customer. If the deposit is insufficient, the balance will be due within thirty days. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.220 New development—Water supply facilities fee.
    (a)    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the municipal water system of the city and to mitigate the water usage impacts caused by new development within the city, and areas outside city boundaries that may be served, certain public water system improvements must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development’s fair share of improvements.

    (b)    A water supply facilities fee is established for development in the city-wide area and areas service outside corporate limits of the city to pay for water supply facilities to provide domestic treated water to new developments. The city council shall, by resolution set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the water supply facilities fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, and describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments. For each new service connection or meter installation, a water supply facilities fee shall be paid to the city water utility. Payment shall be made only once upon any one service connection or meter installation. This fee shall be paid prior to the approval of any final tract map. For connections other than tract development, this fee shall be paid prior to the installation of the meter or connection of the service. Fees are exclusive of the cost of the meter, water service materials or service connection costs. The size of meter and size of service connection shall be determined by the water superintendent. When the water service charge is designed to include fire protection, the water superintendent may calculate a water service size which will be used to apply the above service fees and other water charges dependent thereon as set forth in this chapter. His/her determination of said size shall be final. For meters larger than the sizes indicated in the fee resolution, the service fee shall be determined by the water superintendent, based proportionately upon the amount of water that may be drawn through said service connection or meter.

    (c)    The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account shall be used solely to:

    (1)    Pay for the city’s future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

    (2)    Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity.

    (d)    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in subsection (b) of this section may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the domestic treated water use of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment of reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

 

14.12.230 New development—Waterline assessment fee.
    (a)    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the municipal water system of the city and to mitigate the use of water supply impacts caused by new development within corporate city limits certain public waterline improvements must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development’s fair share of improvements.

    (b)    A waterline assessment fee is established for development in the city-wide area to pay for waterlines. The city council shall, by separate resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments. Any land being developed or improved which fronts upon the water main constructed under the Water Assessment District No. 1 Improvement Act of 1911 shall be charged this special assessment. Said charge shall be paid by the developer based upon the land being developed or improved so fronting said main or portion thereof when said properties are being developed. If application is made for water service other than by a developer, the total premises or segment thereof receiving benefit from the water service shall pay a fee, if said property fronts on said mains constructed under Water Assessment District No. 1. This chapter shall not apply to land owned by the United States government.

    (c)    The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:

    (1)    Pay for the city’s future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

    (2)    Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity.

    (d)    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in subsection (b) of this section may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the use of the water supply impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1554 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 14.16 WATER REGULATIONS
14.16.010 Waste in plumbing.
    Any person who, as owner or occupant of any premises, fails, refuses or neglects to maintain said premises with plumbing of such character and quality as to prevent the wasting of water, shall ten days after being served by the superintendent by written notice of such intention, have all water service discontinued pending such repairs. (Ord. 85 § 4.01, 1962)

 

14.16.020 Water restrictions.
    The use of water for irrigation, sprinkling, wetting, construction or industrial purposes, may be restricted, if and when such use be contrary to the public safety or welfare.

 

POOLS AND TANKS

 

    When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool or for other purposes, arrangements must be made with the water department prior to taking such water.

    Permission to take water in unusual quantities shall be given only if it can be safely delivered through the water department’s facilities and if other consumers are not inconvenienced. (Ord. 85 § 4.02, 1962)

 

14.16.030 Outside city water consumers.
    Sale for domestic consumption may be made to consumers outside the city limits in accordance with all rules, regulations and rates only upon the recommendation of the water superintendent and with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 426 § 12, 1966; Ord. 85 § 4.03, 1962)

 

14.16.040 Development of water for use outside city.
    It is unlawful to drill a new well or develop an existing well and facilities for the purpose of transporting or conveying water outside of the city for any use not herein authorized unless in the public interest and pursuant to an agreement approved by the city council.

    The city may grant a short duration emergency permit to transport water to adjoining areas for other than domestic use. The facts constituting any emergency shall be subject to evaluation by the city council.

    The water superintendent is authorized to grant permission for the temporary transportation or conveyance of water for construction purposes outside the city if in the superintendent’s judgment such withdrawal will not materially reduce the service within the city. (Ord. 1236 § 2, 1995; Ord. 85 § 4.04, 1962)

 

 

14.16.050 Shutting off water for repairs.
    The water department reserves the right to shut off the water in their mains, after appropriate notice to the users, for the purpose of making extensive repairs or for any other purpose found necessary. The city shall not be responsible for any damages which may occur due to water shut-offs. The owner and/or consumer shall be conclusively presumed to have made all necessary precautions in compliance with the building codes and regulations of the plumbing code in anticipation of emergency shut-offs. (Ord. 85 § 4.05, 1962)

 

14.16.060 Water pressure.
    The water department will endeavor to maintain such pressures as recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters. In the event any consumer deems that pressures are inadequate, the consumer shall furnish at his own expense whatever devices are necessary to boost the pressure for his own premises. In the event water pressures are in excess of any consumers normal requirements, it shall be the responsibility of such water consumer to install such devices on his own premises to protect his normal needs. (Ord. 85 § 4.06, 1962)

 

14.16.070 Changes and/or damages to mains and fittings.
    The superintendent shall be given a written notice a minimum of ten days prior to any street improvements which are to be performed which will cause the relocation of existing water mains, fittings, meters or other water equipment. Any changes which are required or any damages which may occur to such mains, fittings, meters or other water equipment without fault or negligence of the city, shall be chargeable to the person or agency requiring said work to be done. (Ord. 85 § 5.01, 1962)

 

14.16.090 By-pass connections.
    Any by-pass or connection around the meter between the service and the main shall be prohibited. All water used except as provided in case of private fire service, shall pass through the meter. Exception: a by-pass may be permitted, however, where in the judgment of the superintendent a temporary interruption of service might jeopardize the health or safety of a user. (Ord. 85 § 5.03, 1962)

 

14.16.100 Connection to private source.
    Any and all connections shall be prohibited between any private water source and the water supply of the city. Provided, however, subject to the approval of the State Board of Health, the city may maintain emergency connections with other public utilities supplying water. (Ord. 85 § 5.04, 1962)

 

14.16.110 Shut-off valves.
    All shut-off valves and service cocks are installed by the water department for the use of the department. Such shut-off valves and service cocks shall not be used or molested in any way or manipulated by the consumer or any person except in extreme emergency. For ordinary usage all consumers shall provide their own valves and shut-off cocks between the water meter and the first outlet placed by the consumer. (Ord. 85 § 5.05, 1962)

 

14.16.120 Meters, property of the city.
    All water services and water meters connected to the water system shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the water department when rendered unserviceable by normal wear and tear. Where replacements, repairs, or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by any act resulting from malice, carelessness or neglect of the consumer or any member of his family, or any one employed by him, and any damage which may result from hot water, or steam from water heater, boiler or otherwise, shall be charged to and paid for by such consumer to said water department on presentation of bill therefor; and in case such bill is not paid the water shall be shut off from such premises and shall not be turned on again until all charges are paid. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to interfere with or remove or cause to be interfered with or removed from any service any water meter where it has been attached. (Ord. 426 § 14, 1966; Ord. 85 § 5.06, 1962)

 

14.16.130 Meter box or fire hydrant obstruction.
    Fire hydrants, water meters, and meter boxes are and shall remain the property of the city. It is unlawful to damage, obscure, or interfere with them, or to place dirt, trash, leaves or lawn cuttings, or other obstructions on or over the meter boxes; and it is unlawful to place garbage or rubbish boxes, cans or barrels on them. (Ord. 85 § 5.07, 1962)

 

14.16.140 Fire hydrants—Use.
    City fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires and shall be opened and used only by the water department and fire department, or such persons as may be authorized to do so by the department of public works. No person shall draw water through any fire hydrant without the use of a standard fire hydrant wrench and an auxiliary valve, such auxiliary valve to be placed on fire hydrant opening with the auxiliary valve closed before any fire hydrant is opened. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to supply a valve and meter for said service which must be inspected by the water superintendent and shall meet with his approval prior to drawing any water from the hydrant.

    No person shall draw water through any fire hydrant, or other hydrant owned or controlled by the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the water department. No such permit shall be issued to any person who has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or who has not paid the city for water used, or damage to hydrants. Such permits shall show the date of issuance, the number of the hydrant to be used, and the location thereof. All such permits shall expire at the end of construction period or six months after issuance, whichever occurs first, and shall not be transferred. (Ord. 85 § 5.08, 1962)

 

14.16.150 Wasting water.
    No person, firm or corporation shall waste, cause, permit, or allow to be wasted, any water in any cooling system, ornamental fountain or other device of any kind whatsoever, nor shall such person, firm or corporation fail, refuse or neglect to recirculate said water through such cooling system, ornamental fountain, or other device; provided further, that it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to cause, permit, or allow any water furnished through the facilities of the water works, as herein defined, to be wasted in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. 85 § 9.01, 1962)

 

14.16.160 Drawing water from fire hydrant.
    No person or persons other than those designated and authorized by the superintendent shall open any fire hydrant, attempt to draw water from it or in any manner damage or tamper with it. (Ord. 85 § 9.02, 1962)

 

14.16.170 Tampering, removing of meters.
    No person, firm or corporation shall tamper with, remove, cause, permit, or allow to be tampered with or removed, any meter where the same has been attached to any service, without first having made application to the meter service clerk of the water department, and receiving a permit therefor. (Ord. 85 § 9.03, 1962)

 

14.16.180 Unauthorized turn on.
    No person other than a duly authorized employee of the city shall turn on water at any meter service.

    It shall be the duty of the water superintendent to report any violations of this section to the city attorney. (Ord. 85 § 9.04, 1962)

 

14.16.190 Tapping of mains.
    No person, firm or corporation shall tap, open or connect to, cause, permit, or allow to be tapped, opened or connected to any water main or pipe without first having made application to the water department and receiving a permit therefor. (Ord. 85 § 9.05, 1962)

 

14.16.200 Unauthorized possession or use of badges or official identification.
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess, carry, wear or exhibit any badge and/or other official identification of the water department, nor shall any person, whether or not possession be authorized display, exhibit or cause to be exhibited any badge or other official identification of the water department, at any time, place, or in any manner or for any purpose which is not authorized by the said water department. (Ord. 85 § 9.06, 1962)

 

14.16.210 Fluoridation.
    The city shall have the power to add fluorine or fluorine compound to the water supply of the city only if the proposition to make such addition shall first be submitted to the qualified electors of the city at a special or general municipal election, and a majority of the votes cast on the question of making such addition shall have been cast in favor thereof. The provisions of this section shall supersede and control all other provisions of this code in conflict therewith. (Ord. 619 § 1, 1971)

Chapter 14.17 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
14.17.010 Purpose.
    In accordance with standards established in the California Administrative Code, as administered by the water superintendent, approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed to protect the public water supply system from contamination due to potential and actual cross-connections. Prevention of cross-connections include: (1) isolating, within the premises, contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; (2) eliminating existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; (3) eliminating cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination; (4) safeguarding against cross-connections in the future. This shall be accomplished by the establishment of a cross-connection control program as required by state regulations. The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the State of California Administrative Code, Title 17, of the California Code of Regulations, “Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections,” hereinafter referred to as the “state regulations.” (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

 

14.17.020 Application.
    This chapter shall be interpreted so as to comply with the state regulations on cross-connections as the same exist now, or as subsequently amended. The definitions set forth therein are adopted, except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

 

14.17.030 Administration.
    The cross-connection control program shall be administered by the water department’s cross-connection control specialist under the general supervision of the water superintendent. The water department will establish and maintain a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies, as well as a list of approved backflow prevention assembly testers. The cross-connection control specialist shall conduct necessary surveys of water user premises to evaluate the degree of potential health hazards. The water department shall notify the user when an assembly needs to be tested. The user shall receive a notice containing a due date for backflow prevention assembly testing. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

 

14.17.040 Cross-connection protection requirements.
    The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the public water supply system shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard, actual or potential, that exists on the water user’s premises. Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited. The type of backflow protection assembly that may be required includes: air-gap separation (AG), reduced pressure principle backflow protection assembly (RP), and double check valve assembly (DC) The types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user’s water connection, to premises with varying degrees of hazard are listed in Table 1 of the state regulations. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the water superintendent in accordance with the nature of the hazard presented. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

 

14.17.050 Backflow prevention assemblies.
    (a)    Only backflow prevention assemblies which have been approved by the water department, in accordance with the state regulations, shall be acceptable for installation by a water user. A list of approved backflow prevention assemblies will be provided upon request. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner prescribed in the state regulations. Location of the assemblies shall be as close as practical to the user’s connection. The water superintendent shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention assembly. Upon installation, backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested by an Orange County health department certified backflow tester.

    (b)    Testing of backflow assemblies shall be conducted only by an Orange County health department certified backflow tester that possesses a current city of Fountain Valley business license. Backflow prevention assemblies must be tested immediately after installation, relocation or repair. Approval must be obtained from the water department prior to removing, relocating or replacing a backflow prevention assembly.

    (c)    As a minimum, backflow prevention assemblies other than single-family residential irrigation systems, as well as other applications using atmospheric vacuum breakers, must be tested annually. More frequent testing may be required if deemed necessary by the water superintendent, based on facts demonstrating a potential hazard. No assembly shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. These assemblies shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced, whenever they are found to be defective. All costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

 

14.17.060 Inspection fee.
    When a new backflow prevention assembly is installed or an existing backflow prevention assembly relocated, an installation inspection shall be completed by the water department. The installation inspection shall be conducted by the water department’s cross-connection control specialist at the expense of the water user. The inspection fee, established by separate resolution, shall be paid by the water user prior to acquisition of water service. On single-family residential irrigation systems, as well as other applications where atmospheric vacuum breakers are considered appropriate backflow protection, no tests, inspections or fees shall apply. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

 

14.17.070 Water service termination.
    When the water department encounters water uses that represent a hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated by other means, the procedure for terminating water service shall be instituted. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for termination of water service shall include, but are not limited to the following:

    (1)    Refusal to install or to test a backflow prevention assembly, or to repair or replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly;

    (2)    Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer connection;

    (3)    Unprotected, direct or indirect, connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

    (4)    Unprotected, direct or indirect, connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system.

    Unless immediate action is required because of an urgent health and safety problem, the water department will terminate service to a water user’s premises after proper notification has been sent. If no action has been taken within the allowed period, water service may be terminated, locked service valves installed, and service shall not be restored until corrections have been made, all provisions of this code met, and the public health, safety and welfare ensured. In cases in which immediate termination is required because of an urgent health and safety problem, service may be immediately terminated. The conditions constituting the urgent health and safety problem should be promptly documented. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

 

14.17.080 Violations.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, at any time, to make or maintain, or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city water department, and any other source of water supply, or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which, by reason of their construction, may cause or allow backflow of water, or other substances, into the water supply system of the city, and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city, or to fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Violations shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 1247 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 14.18 WATER CONSERVATION
14.18.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for year-round water conservation, to promote the efficient use of water, to reduce or eliminate the waste of water in the city, to complement the city’s stormwater regulations and urban runoff reduction efforts, and enable implementation of the city’s water shortage contingency measures. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Agriculture/nurseries” agricultural users and commercial nurseries are defined as businesses which produce crops for commercial benefit.

    “Billing unit” means the unit of water used to apply water rates for purposes of calculating water charges for a person’s water usage and equals one hundred cubic feet or seven hundred forty-eight gallons of water.

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley, Orange County, California.

    “Commercial/industrial laundry facilities” are facilities that use water in manufacturing or processing activities and does not include the laundromat or common laundry area facilities.

    “Effective date” means the date the ordinance adopting this chapter becomes effective.

    “Impervious surface” means a constructed or modified surface that cannot effectively infiltrate water. The term includes, but is not limited to, sidewalks, driveways, v-ditches, gutters and roadways.

    “Landscape irrigation system” means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system.

    “Non-essential water use” means the application or usage of water for functions or additional activities which do not have any health or safety impacts, are not required by regulation, and are not part of the core function or business process at a site. This would include but not be limited to uses such as the watering of planters and landscape at a business, the washing of vehicles on display at a vehicle dealer, and other activities that a reasonable person would concur will reduce extra use of water, while not affecting a given enterprise in a fundamental way.

    “Person” means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water provided by the city.

    “Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

    “Properly programmed” shall refer to a weather-based or sensor-based irrigation controller that has been programmed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and site-specific conditions.

    “Public entity” is a governmental agency with a common interest acting for the people or community for the purpose of local function.

    “Quasi-public entity” means an entity, other than a government agency, whether characterized by statute as a public corporation, public instrumentality, or otherwise, that is expressly created by statute for the purpose of administration of a state or local function.

    “Recycled water” means the reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for irrigation.

    “Sensor-based irrigation controller” means an irrigation controller that operates based on input received from any combination of sensors, such as rain, solar radiation, and soil moisture sensor, installed within and/or around the irrigated landscape area.

    “Undue hardship” is a unique circumstance in which a requirement of this chapter would result in a disproportionate impact on a water user or property upon which water is used compared to the impact on water users generally or similar properties or classes of water use.

    “Water budget allocation” is a formal definition of the quantity of water that would be required by an efficient level of water use. An allocation is the amount of water a customer is expected to need based on number of residents and landscape square footage. Use above this level may be penalized by a higher commodity rate.

    “Water conservation officer” is the city manager or designee.

    “Water flow restrictor” is a device that restricts the flow of water approximately one gallon per minute capacity for meter services up to one and one-half inch size and comparatively sized restrictors for larger services.

    “Water quality regulations” are the storm water regulations in Chapter 14.40 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code.

    “Water waste” means uses of water which are prohibited or limited, going beyond the purpose of necessary or intended use, including water runoff, and which could reasonably be prevented.

    “Weather-based irrigation controller” means an irrigation controller that operates based on evapotranspiration rates and historic or real-time weather data. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.030 Application.
    (a)    The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of any potable water provided by and/or used in the city.

    (b)    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as parks, police, fire and other similar emergency services.

    (c)    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water, with the exception of subsections (a) and (b) of Section 14.18.040.

    (d)    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops, exotic animals, aquatic life, or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.

    (e)    This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.040 Permanent water conservation requirements—Prohibition against waste.
    The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water.

    (a)    Limit on Watering Duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than fifteen minutes watering per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour and weather based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a seventy percent efficiency standard.

    (b)    Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m., Pacific Time on any day, except by use of hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

    (c)    Drought Tolerant Plants. Any new planting should be drought tolerant plants, as listed in the Metropolitan Water District’s list of California friendly plants and the city’s established Drought Tolerant Plant List.

    (d)    No Water Runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows water runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited.

    (e)    No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device or a low-volume, a water broom, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used. Cleaning shall comply with the city’s water quality regulations and best management practices. General maintenance cleaning shall be performed by other means such as by using a broom.

    (f)    Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than three days of receiving notice from the city, is prohibited.

    (g)    Re-circulating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. No person shall use water to operate or maintain levels in decorative fountains, basins, ponds, lakes, and waterways unless a recirculation device is in use. Filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds not equipped with a re-circulating pump is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain exotic animals or aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply shortage level under this chapter. Discharge of water, other than directly to the sanitary sewer system is prohibited. Discharge of filter backwash water to the storm water drainage system is prohibited.

    (h)    Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat, motor home, or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility that recycles water.

    (i)     Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Option to Not Launder Linen Daily. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language.

    (j)     Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, shall use water conserving dish wash valves.

    (k)    Commercial Car Washes.

    (1)    Commercial car wash facilities shall not permit the washing of any boat or vehicle in such facility or on its premises, other than by the following methods:

    (A)   Use of mechanical automatic car wash facilities utilizing water recycling equipment;

    (B)   Use of a hose that operates on a timer for limited time periods and shuts off automatically at the expiration of the time period;

    (C)   Use of a hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle; and/or

    (D)   Use of bucket and hand washing.

    (2)    All wash/rinse water must be captured and recycled or discharged into the sanitary sewer system through an appropriate treatment system, after obtaining a special discharge permit from the California Regional Water Quality Board, Santa Ana region and the Orange County Sanitation District.

    (3)    Mobile car detailing enterprises using water shall have a city business license and carry a statement of approval by the water conservation officer as to knowledge of and compliance with the city’s water quality regulations, and the required best management practices and techniques to prevent runoff to storm drains.

    (l)     Washing of Equipment and Machinery. No person shall use a water hose to wash any type of equipment or machinery, or any portion thereof, unless the hose is equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle. All wash water from such washing/cleaning activity must be prevented from discharging to the storm water drainage system. All wash water from such washing/cleaning containing chemicals shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system through an appropriate treatment system. Any person discharging water containing chemicals is required to first obtain a special discharge permit from the California Regional Quality Water Board, Santa Ana region and the Orange County Sanitation District before such water can be discharged to the sanitary sewer.

    (m)   Cleaning of Structures. No person shall use water through a hose, including pressure-washing, to clean the exterior of any building or structure unless such hose is equipped with a shut-off nozzle. All wash water from such activity must be prevented from discharging to the storm water drainage system, and shall comply with the city’s water quality regulations and best management practices.

    (n)    Swimming Pools and Spas. No person shall empty and refill a swimming pool except to prevent or repair structural damage or to comply with public health regulations. Discharge of pool or spa water, other than directly to the sanitary sewer system is prohibited. Discharge of pool or spa filter backwash water to the storm water drainage system is prohibited. All pools and spas shall be equipped with a water recirculation device. The use of a pool/spa cover is strongly encouraged to prevent evaporative water loss, and for the additional energy and chemical saving benefits.

    (o)    Commercial/Industrial Laundry Facilities, Laundromats and Common Area Laundry Rooms. New commercial/industrial laundry facilities shall be equipped with a water reclamation system for reuse of rinse water. Laundromats and common area laundry rooms shall install high efficiency clothes washing machines, as older machines are replaced.

    (p)    Visitor-Serving Facilities. The owner and manager of each hotel, motel, restaurant, and other visitor-serving facility shall ensure that such facility displays, in places visible to all customers, placards or decals promoting public awareness of the need for water conservation and/or advising the public that waste of water is prohibited.

    (q)    Public and Quasi-Public Entities. All public and quasi-public entities shall display, in visible locations in all restrooms, kitchens, and dining areas promoting public awareness of the need for water conservation and/or advising the public that waste of water is prohibited.

    (r)    Food Service Facilities.

    (1)    Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to a restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar, club or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested.

    (2)    Dishwashing and Garbage Disposals. All commercial kitchens with dishwashing facilities shall encourage the activity of scraping food waste into a garbage can rather than using a garbage disposal.

    (3)    Other Water Using Activities. Defrosting food with running water is prohibited. If using a hose for wash down of kitchens, garbage areas, or any other area required by the health department or for sanitation reasons, it shall have a positive shut-off nozzle. Scoop sinks shall be set at minimum flow at all times, and during hours of operation carefully monitored to avoid using water unnecessarily when the scoop sink is not in active use.

    (4)    New or Remodeled Kitchens. All other water using equipment in new or remodeled kitchens shall use the best available water conserving technology.

    (s)    Construction.

    (1)    No potable water may be used for compacting or dust control purposes in construction activities where there is a reasonably available source of other non-potable water approved by the California Department of Public Health and appropriate for such use. This condition must be identified and specified on construction drawings submitted to the city for review.

    (2)    All water hoses used in connection with any construction activities shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle when an automatic shut-off nozzle can be purchased or otherwise obtained for the size or type of hose in use.

    (3)    All water used on a construction site shall be prevented from entering any part of the stormwater drainage system.

    (t)     Use of Hydrants. No person may use water from any fire hydrant for any purpose other than fire suppression or emergency aid, without first obtaining a city hydrant meter account or written approval from the director of public works/city engineer or designee.

    (u)    Water Recycling Required if Alternative Available. The use of potable water, other than recycled water, is prohibited for specified uses after the city has provided to the customer an analysis showing that recycled water is a cost-effective alternative to potable water for such uses and the customer has had a reasonable time, as determined by the city manager or designee, to make the conversion to recycled water.

    (v)    Indiscriminate Use. No person shall cause or permit the indiscriminate running of water not otherwise prohibited above which is wasteful and without reasonable purpose.

    (w)   Public Health and Safety. These regulations shall not be construed to limit water use which is immediately necessary to protect public health and/or safety.

    (x)    Exceptions. The prohibited uses of water are not applicable to that use of water necessary for public health and safety or for essential governmental services such as police, fire and, other similar emergency services. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.050 Water shortage contingency measures.
    The city council by resolution shall require or impose reductions in the use of water if such reductions are necessary in order for the city to comply with water use restrictions imposed by federal, state or regional water agencies, or to respond to local or regional water shortage conditions and emergencies. Depending on the expected duration and severity of the shortage, these measures may include, but are not limited to, some or all of the actions listed in the following four levels of water conservation, which shall take effect upon declaration by the city council. In an emergency, the city manager or designee may make the declaration, which will be ratified by the city council at a subsequent meeting.

    During each elevated water shortage contingency level the elements will include the permanent water conservation requirements and the elements of the previous level(s). Each level is intended to be more restrictive than the previous level(s).

    (a)    Level 1—Voluntary Compliance—Water Watch. Level 1 applies during periods when the possibility exists that the city will not be able to meet all of the demands of its customers and water conservation measures are requested to be undertaken on a voluntary basis to reduce their usage by five to fifteen percent. Level 1 may also be declared when the state or a regional supplier has recommended a reduction in water use, or when normal production and supply are curtailed.

    (1)    Staff. All city staff to be alerted to the level 1 conditions, supplied with educational material, and directed to actively intervene and educate the public, when excessive use is observed.

    (2)    Lawn Watering and Landscape Irrigation. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. on a schedule established and posted by the city.

    (3)    Adjust Water Usage Rates. The city may increase water usage rates, other than tier 1 rates, which would apply for the duration of the level 1 water supply shortage alert.

    (4)    Agriculture/Nurseries. All non-essential water use should cease.

    (5)    Public Entities. All non-essential water use should cease.

    (6)    Commercial/Industrial Use. All non-essential water use should cease.

    (7)    Other Prohibited Uses: The city may prohibit other water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers.

    (8)    Other Actions Possible. Initiate or implement additional or innovative actions to increase the supply of water available to the city and to conserve the city’s existing water supply.

    (9)    Media. The declaration of this and subsequent stages shall be communicated to the media.

    (b)    Level 2—Mandatory Compliance—Water Supply Shortage Alert. Level 2 water supply shortage exists when the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply restrictions, a water supply shortage exists and consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Noncompliance with mandatory restrictions on water waste shall be subject to an administrative citation.

    (1)    All Users. Require all water users to reduce their usage by fifteen to thirty percent determined by staff to be necessary to sustain adequate water supply for the city. Such percentage shall be based both on the rate of supply to the city and the rate of current water demand.

    (2)    Staff. At the discretion of the city manager or designee, hire, divert, or employ additional city staff and volunteers to monitor water usage, provide assistance to water users to reduce their water consumption, and to monitor the enforcement of the requirements, restrictions and priorities adopted by the city in response to the emergency water shortage condition.

    (3)    Adjust Water Usage Rates. The city may increase water rates, other than tier 1 rates, which would apply for the duration of the level 2 water supply shortage alert.

    (4)    Residential Car Washing. Washing of autos, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes motor homes, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited, other than at a commercial car wash.

    (5)    Hydrant Water Use. Use of a temporary fire hydrant meter from the city, or otherwise using water through a temporary city water service including jumpers is prohibited.

    (c)    Level 3—Mandatory Compliance—Water Supply Shortage Water Warning. Level 3 water supply shortage water warning exists when the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other supply reductions, a water supply shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions.

    (1)    Mandatory Percentage Use Reductions. During a level 3 water supply shortage all users are required to reduce their usage by thirty to fifty percent or a percentage determined by staff to be necessary to sustain adequate water supply for the city. Such percentage shall be based both on the rate of supply to the city and the rate of current water demand.

    (2)    Rates and Charges. Further reduce allocations, raise rates and increase penalty charges, for water use over a baseline defined by the severity of the shortage and anticipated demand at the time of the emergency.

    (3)    Lawn Watering and Landscape Irrigation. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two days per week.

    (4)    Agriculture/Nurseries. Agricultural users and commercial nurseries may be subject to additional restrictions if the regional or local agency or jurisdiction deems necessary. Monetary penalties will be passed through to agricultural customers, if assessed by Metropolitan Water District or other agency.

    (5)    Air Conditioning. No water shall be used for air conditioning purposes.

    (6)    The issuance of new pool construction permits is prohibited.

    (7)    No New Potable Water Service. No new potable water service will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as will serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability) will be issued, except under the following circumstances:

    (A)   A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project;

    (B)   The project is necessary to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare; or

    (C)   The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demand for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the city.

    This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less.

    (8)    No New Annexations. Upon the declaration of a level 3 water supply shortage condition, the city will suspend consideration of annexations to its service area. This subsection does not apply to boundary corrections and annexations that will not result in any increased use of water.

    (d)    Level 4—Mandatory Compliance—Water Supply Shortage Emergency Condition. A level 4 water supply shortage condition is also referred to as an “emergency” condition. A level 4 condition exists when the city declares a water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is necessary to make more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. Level 4 applies when a failure of any supply or distribution facility, whether temporary or permanent, occurs in the water distribution system of the State Water Project, Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, Municipal Water District of Orange County, Orange County Water District, or the city’s facilities, and the supply of water necessary to meet the city’s demands is likely to be further reduced or interrupted. Any and all measures necessary to meet basic health and safety needs shall be undertaken, while all other water uses shall be significantly reduced or prohibited.

    (1)    Mandatory Percentage Use Reductions. During a level 4 water supply shortage all users are required to reduce their usage by fifty percent or a greater percentage determined by staff to be necessary to sustain adequate water supply for the city. Such percentage shall be based both on the rate of supply to the city and the rate of current water demand.

    (2)    No Watering or Irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. There shall be no restriction on watering utilizing reclaimed water. This restriction does not apply to the following categories of use:

    (A)   Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or a very low-flow drip type irrigation system when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour subject to the hour restrictions in Section 14.18.040(a);

    (B)   Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well being of rare animals;

    (C)   Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, school grounds, and golf greens, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week according to the schedule and time restrictions established in Section 14.18.040(a);

    (D)   Public works projects and actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects.

    (3)    Agriculture/Nurseries. Use of water for agricultural or commercial nursery purposes, except for livestock water, is prohibited.

    (4)    Discontinue Service/Water Flow Device. After providing due process, the city, in its sole discretion, may discontinue service or place a flow restricting device on the meter of consumers who willfully violate provisions of this section.

    (5)    Water Allocations/Water Budgets. The city may establish, develop or adjust budget-based water allocations for any of its classes or water users served by the city, which would apply for the duration of level 4 water supply shortage emergency. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.060 Procedures for determination/ notification of water supply shortage.
    (a)    Declaration and Notification of Level 1, Level 2 and Level 3 Water Supply Shortage. The existence of level 1, 2 and 3 water supply shortage conditions may be declared by resolution of the city adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to level 1, 2 and 3 conditions will take effect on the tenth day after the shortage level is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for the publication of official notices. If the city establishes a budget-based water allocation and/or adjusts water rates, it will provide notice of the allocation mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service and will be in accordance with the guidelines of Proposition 218. A water allocation will be effective on the date as specified in the notice.

    (b)    Declaration and Notification of Level 4 Water Supply Shortage. The existence of a level 4 water supply shortage emergency condition may be declared in accordance with the procedures specified in Water Code Sections 351 and 352. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable in level 4 conditions take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage level is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for the publication of official notices. If the city establishes a budget-based water allocation, it will provide notice of the allocation by mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service and will be in accordance with the guidelines of Proposition 218 contained in California Constitution Article XIII D. A water allocation will be effective on the date as specified in the notice. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.070 Other provisions.
    (a)    Commercial Car Wash Systems. Effective on January 1, 2011, all commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed and operational recirculating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the city.

(b)        Large Landscape Areas—Rain Sensors. Large landscape areas, such as parks, golf courses, school grounds, and playing fields, that use landscape irrigation systems to water or irrigate, must use landscape irrigation systems with rain sensors that automatically shut off such systems during periods of rain or irrigation timers which automatically use information such as evapotranspiration sensors to set an efficient water use schedule.

    (c)    Reporting Mechanism—Hotline. The city establishes a water waste hotline(s), telephone and/or website www.fountainvallev.org/water for residents to report violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.080 Enforcement and administration.
    The city manager and all officers and employees of the city, officers and employees, shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter. The city manager or designee shall implement and administer this chapter. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.090 Hardship waiver.
    Undue and Disproportionate Hardship. If due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users then the person may apply for a waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.

    Written Finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship.

    (a)    Application for a Waiver. Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by the city manager or designee, and accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount set by resolution by the city council.

    (b)    Supporting Documentation. The written application will be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, or other pertinent information as applicable, including a written statement of the applicant.

    (c)    Approval Authority. The city manager or designee, will exercise approval and act upon any completed application after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the variance. The applicant requesting the variance will be promptly notified in writing of the action taken. The decision of the city manager is final. Unless specified otherwise, at the time a waiver is approved, it will apply to the subject property for the duration of the water supply shortage or emergency. The hardship waiver is nontransferable.

    (d)    Required Findings for Waiver. Based on information and supporting documents provided in the application, additional information provided as requested, and water use information for the property as shown by the records of the city, the city manager, in making the waiver determination, will take into consideration the following:

    (1)    That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other city of Fountain Valley water service customers;

    (2)    That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to water service customers generally;

    (3)    That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest;

    (4)    That the condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature; and

    (5)    That no person shall be given relief on appeal for hardship unless the water service customer has installed water saving devices, as determined by the city, and made every reasonable effort to reduce water use. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.100 Violations, notices and remedies.
    (a)    Notice of Noncompliance. If any person fails or refuses to comply with this chapter, the city manager or designee shall provide that person with written notice of the violation and an opportunity to correct the noncompliance. The written notice shall:

    (1)    Be posted or presented at the site of the noncompliance;

    (2)    State the time, date, and place of violation;

    (3)    State a general description of the violation;

    (4)    State the means to correct the violation;

    (5)    State a date by which correction is required (period for compliance will be shortened depending on any applicable water conservation contingency stage);

    (6)    State the possible consequences of failing to correct the violation; and

    (7)    Include appeal and hearing rights and procedures; and

    (8)    A copy of the written notice shall be mailed to the address of the violation, to the party who is billed for the water, or to the owner of the property, as appropriate.

    (b)    Compliance Remedies. Failure to correct the notice of noncompliance violation within the time specified in the written notice will result in one or more of the following actions after providing appropriate due process:

    (1)    Any penalties, surcharges or increased charges incurred by the city for excessive use by customers shall be passed on to the customers causing the excessive use of water.

    (2)    Impose an administrative citation of not more than one hundred dollars for a first violation, two hundred dollars for a second violation, and five hundred dollars for each additional violation occurring within the calendar year.

    (3)    Place a flow restricting device on the meter. Payment of the city’s charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the city’s schedule of charges then in effect is the responsibility of the customer.

    (4)    Abate the violation as a nuisance in accordance with Section 14.18.100 of this chapter.

    (5)    Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate offense.

    (c)    Regulatory Fine Recovery. In the event that a person causes a regulatory agency to levy a fine against the city of Fountain Valley resulting from the person’s violations of the provisions of this chapter, such person shall be required to reimburse the city for the fine and associated administrative costs.

    (d)    Administrative Hearing for Notices of Noncompliance, Invoices for Costs and Adverse Determinations. Any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, an invoice for costs, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing.

    (e)    Request for Administrative Hearing. Any person appealing a notice of noncompliance, an invoice for costs or an adverse determination shall, within fifteen days of receipt thereof; file a written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution, with the office of the city clerk. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager within fifteen business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted.

    (f)    Hearing Proceedings. The city officer and/or employee issuing the notice of noncompliance, invoice for costs or adverse determination shall appear in support of the notice, invoice for costs, or determination, and the appealing party shall appear in support of dismissal of the notice, determination, and invoice for costs. Each party shall have the right to present testimony, present their own witnesses and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of their case. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper admission of such evidence over an objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding by the hearing officer, unless it would be admissible over an objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The appealing party shall notify the city forty-eight hours in advance of the hearing, if legal counsel will be present on their behalf.

    (g)    Final Decision and Appeal. The final decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the parties. The decision shall include notice that it is final and any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within ninety days following its issuance. The administrative hearing fee paid by a prevailing party in an appeal shall be refunded. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.105 Violations as misdemeanor.
    Pursuant to Water Code Section 377, any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty days, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by both. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.110 Nuisances, abatement, injunctive relief.
    (a)    Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare,. and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771.

    (1)    Court Order to Enjoin or Abatement. At the request of the city manager, or the person designated by the city manager, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance.

    (2)    Notice to Owner and Occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the city manager, or the person designated by the city manager, shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring.

    (3)    Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the city in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other expenses recoverable under state law, including reasonable consulting fees and attorneys fees, shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.

    (4)    Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1 and Section 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1.

    (5)    At the direction of the city manager, or the person designated by the city manager, the city attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the property in accordance with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.120 Relief from compliance.
    The city manager or designee may, in writing, grant variances to persons who apply on forms supplied by the city. No variance shall be granted to any customer unless the customer has demonstrated that he or she has already achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption as can be achieved by the affected property or business. Any variance granted shall be based upon the water consumption rates of similar water users, properties or businesses. No variance shall be granted for the complete filling of any decorative fountain, basin, pond, hot tub, spa or permanent swimming or wading pool, unless the filling occurs as the result of performing necessary leak repairs and unless other provisions of this section are met. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

 

14.18.130 Additional water conservation measures.
    (a)    In addition to the water conservation requirements established by this chapter, the city manager or designee is authorized to develop and promulgate additional water conservation plans and measures which shall be directed to achieve target goals for reductions in water consumption as determined by the city council by resolution from time to time.

    (b)    The city may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the building services approvals, inspections, and enforcement authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1430 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 14.20 WATER MAINS AND SERVICE EXTENSIONS
14.20.010 Applications, deposits, and installation.
    Any person who as owner or subdivider of a single lot, subdivision or tract of land, desires the extension of water mains and services to such lot, subdivision or tract of land, shall file a written application with the water department.

    In the event such application be approved in the manner provided herein, said person shall deposit with the department cash in an amount determined by the superintendent of the water department to be the total estimated cost of such mains including all labor, pipe valves, fittings, fire hydrants, and appurtenances necessary for a complete system exclusive of services and water meters, plus administrative overhead charges. The deposit shall also include tapping fee and service charges, as established in this title. Upon proper application, meters will be installed in accordance with the charges established in this title.

    The water superintendent may, at his discretion, authorize an applicant to make the installation at the applicant’s own cost. Installation shall be in conformance with the standards and specifications as set forth by the water superintendent.

    The city may elect to enter into a reimbursement agreement with the applicant to reimburse applicant for a portion of his costs. The agreement shall be made in accordance with the water main reimbursement policy in effect at the time the extension is made. (Ord. 426 § 15, 1966; Ord. 85 § 6.01, 1962)

 

14.20.020 Adoption—Public Works Department Standard Specifications and Plans for Water Appurtenances.
    The city council shall adopt “Public Works Department Standard Specifications and Plans for Water Appurtenances” by resolution. Those standards are incorporated herein and a complete bound copy shall be kept on file with the director of public works. All mains, valves, fire hydrants, fittings and all other appurtenances dedicated to and accepted by the city shall conform with those standard specifications and plans prior to the placement of facilities and appurtenances. The water superintendent shall determine the size of such mains, type and make of valves, fire hydrants, fittings, customer services and all other appurtenances deemed necessary for applying water to the property served. Any variation of the “Public Works Department Standard Specifications and Plans for Water Appurtenances” shall require written approval from the water superintendent. (Ord. 1144 § l, 1990; Ord. 85 § 6.02, 1962)

 

14.20.030 Transmission mains.
    Those mains which are larger than eight inches in diameter shall be designated as transmission mains. Such transmission mains shall be paid for jointly by the city and the person or persons benefitted therewith in accordance with the policy of the city in effect at the time such extensions are made. (Ord. 426 § 16, 1966; Ord. 85 § 6.03, 1962)

 

14.20.040 Payment for extension of mains.
    Persons owning land adjacent to streets or rights-of-way in which water mains have been previously installed by the city by a previous applicant or jointly by the city and a previous applicant, shall reimburse the city for their proportionate share of said main in accordance with the then current water main reimbursement policy in effect or applicable reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 426 § 17, 1966; Ord. 85 § 6.04, 1962)

 

14.20.050 Service connection to service one premises.
    No one service connection shall serve more than one premises. For the purpose of this chapter “premises” is defined as a lot or parcel under one ownership; provided, however, portions thereof having well defined boundaries such as fences or hedges which prevent the common use of the property by all occupants shall be deemed separate premises. (Ord. 85 § 6.04, 1962)

Chapter 14.24 WATER SERVICE TO SUBDIVISIONS AND ANNEXATIONS
14.24.010 Owners to provide water system.
    Except as hereinafter provided, at the time of laying out and subdividing or resubdividing any tract or parcel of land within the city, or upon the annexation of any parcel of land, either developed or undeveloped, the owner or owners of such tracts, lands or annexations shall at their own expense provide for such water mains, submains and water services as may be necessary for the distribution of water to each lot, piece or parcel of land. When installed such mains, submains and services shall become and be the property of the city, and dedicated to the public for the purpose of distributing water to said lands.

    The water superintendent may, at his discretion, authorize an applicant to make the installation at applicant’s own cost and in conformity with the specifications set forth by the water department.

    Whenever real property is annexed to the city which real property has already installed therein existing water facilities that meet the standards and requirements of the water department of the city, the city council may authorize purchase of such facilities. Should the city council be unable or unwilling to purchase such water facilities, it may allow such annexed property to continue to be served through the existing facilities by motion recorded in its official minutes.

    Owner or owners of proposed subdivisions, or of property being annexed, shall apply to the superintendent of the water department for water service. The superintendent shall thereupon make or cause to be made, plans and estimates to determine the probable cost of required installation. Mains, submains and services shall be of such size and kind as shall in the opinion of the superintendent, be adequate to supply the tracts, or annexations with water at proper pressure for fire protection based upon the National Board of Fire Underwriters Standard having due regard to requirements of adjacent lands and the growth of the city. (Ord. 85 § 7.01, 1962)

 

14.24.020 Annexation of areas excluded from primary assessment.
    (a)    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the municipal water system of the city and to mitigate the use of water supply impacts caused by new development outside the corporate city limits, certain public water supply facility improvements must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development’s fair share of improvements.

    (b)    A water annexation fee is established for development outside the city boundaries by the city to pay for water supply facilities. The city council shall by resolution set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments. The owners of all land annexed to the city after January 1, 1962 or the owners of any federal or state land released from governmental use after January 1, 1962 shall pay a fee in addition to all other charges prescribed by resolution at the time water service is requested from the city.

    (c)    The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:

    (1)    Pay for the city’s future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

    (2)    Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity.

    (d)    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in subsection (b) of this section may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the use of the water supply impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1132 § 4, 1989; Ord. 897 § 8, 1980; Ord. 85 § 7.02, 1962)

 

14.24.030 Water wells deeded.
    Whenever land is to be subdivided, any water wells, water producing equipment, mains and easements needed therefor which may be appurtenant thereto or which may be used exclusively thereon shall be deeded to the city in consideration of the city’s approving any application for city water. Said deed to the city shall be executed before any such application shall be approved by the city council; provided, however that where water wells and equipment are used to supply water to additional land not subdivided, such wells and equipment may continue to supply the unsubdivided portion previously served until such time as the total area served is subdivided or otherwise developed and improved. (Ord. 85 § 7.03, 1962)

Chapter 14.28 WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS
14.28.005 Sewer and water lines constructed.
    The city owns sewer and water lines throughout the city which were constructed at a cost to the city. (Ord. 370 §§ 1, 2, 1965)

 

14.28.010 Tie-in fee.
    Any person, firm or corporation who ties into said line or lines shall pay to the city a sum of money equal to one-half the estimated cost of an eight-inch line which abuts the property being developed. (Ord. 370 § 5, 1965)

 

14.28.020 Estimate of cost.
    The estimate of cost shall be made by the city engineer and be payable before any tie-in is allowed. (Ord. 370 § 6, 1965)

 

14.28.030 Cost computation for abutting property lines.
    In the event the property being developed has any of said lines abutting more than one side of the property, the cost shall be computed by using all of said lines where said lines abut the property being developed. (Ord. 370 § 7, 1965)

 

14.28.040 Exclusion.
    This chapter shall not apply to any of said lines constructed by 1911 Act moneys. (Ord. 370 § 8, 1965)

Chapter 14.32 SANITATION SYSTEM
14.32.010 Establishment.
    A municipal sanitation system is hereby established by the city of Fountain Valley for the city of Fountain Valley. From time to time, the city shall take such steps as necessary in the acquisition of a sanitation system and other facilities as it may deem expedient. (Ord. 24 § 2, 1958)

Chapter 14.36 SEWERS
14.36.010 Sanitation department.
    There is hereby established a sanitation department for the city to serve all properties within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be the duty of the department to perform all operations pertinent to collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal of sewage and waste within the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the department to inspect and supervise all construction of sanitary sewers and sewer facilities within the city. (Ord. 69 § 1, 1961)

 

14.36.020 District—Limits.
    The city of Fountain Valley is hereby declared to be a sewer district and all properties lying within the corporate limits of the city and as such limits may be changed by annexation shall be required to connect to the facilities of the city’s sanitation system. (Ord. 69 § 2, 1961)

 

14.36.030 Connection waiver.
    The city council may upon proper showing, waive the requirement that all property within the corporate limits of the city connect to the city sanitary system. (Ord. 404 § 1, 1966; Ord. 69 § 2.1, 1961)

 

14.36.040 Waiver requirements.
    Before such waiver is granted it shall be shown that:

    (a)    The applicant has full knowledge of various taxing districts wherein the property is located and the possible future costs and charges to him or her;

    (b)    The applicant has paid to the city the sewer assessment fee pertaining to the land in question;

    (c)    A hardship would result in connecting into the city system as compared to another jurisdiction;

    (d)    The property in question is not likely to frequently change ownership. (Ord. 404 §1, 1966; Ord. 69 § 2.2, 1961)

 

14.36.050 File contents.
    If the city council grants the relief requested, such facts as herein set forth shall be noted in the file concerning said property. (Ord. 404 § 1, 1966; Ord. 69 § 2.3, 1961)

 

14.36.060 Engineer responsibility.
    The city engineer shall be in supervisory charge of all activities necessary to the maintenance of the Fountain Valley sewer facilities. The city engineer or authorized representative shall be charged with the responsibility of supervising all design of sewers and supervising inspection of construction of all sewer facilities installed in the city. (Ord. 69 § 3, 1961)

 

14.36.065 Definitions.
    (a)    “Sewer main” means the main sewer, used as a trunk line or major channel of passage for transporting sewage and waste, constructed in a street, highway, alley, place or right-of-way dedicated to public use. It does not include sewer laterals.

    (b)    “Sewer laterals” mean that connecting sewer line running from sewer main to the private property line and extending to the structure to which it connects. (Ord. 645 § 1, 1971)

 

14.36.066 Policy.
    It is the policy of the city to require the owners of property to maintain sewer laterals thereon at their own expense. (Ord. 645 § 2, 1971)

 

14.36.067 Required maintenance.
    All sewer laterals shall be maintained by the owner of the property served by such lateral in a safe and sanitary condition so that there is no seepage of waste at any point from the structure to and including the junction of the sewer lateral at the sewer main and so that passage of waste through the lateral to the sewer main is free from stoppage and obstruction; all devices and safeguards which are required by this chapter or by order of the city engineer for the operation of the sewer system shall be maintained in good working order at all times. It shall be the responsibility of the city of Fountain Valley to keep the sewer mains free and clear for the even flow of sewage. (Ord. 645 § 3, 1971)

 

14.36.070 Dedications.
    All sewage facilities installed with the public streets, thoroughfare ways and easements shall be dedicated to and become the property of the city. (Ord. 69 § 4, 1961)

 

14.36.080 Application for connection.
    (a)    The city is subject to the State Water Resources Control Board Order imposing waste discharge regulations on the city, including a requirement to prevent sewer system overflows. To prevent such overflows, the city has adopted a sewer system management plan. Such plan includes components requiring city standards of construction to be followed and a capacity assurance plan specifying the capacity of the system to assure that the system is not overburdened by current or anticipated sewage flows.

    (b)    No new connection to the city’s system shall be made unless pursuant to a connection permit.

    (c)    An application for a connection permit shall require adherence to city construction standards and shall be inspected by the city building official or designee before connection is authorized by such a permit. Additionally, said application shall detail the nature of the use of the property so that the director of public works/city engineer can determine if the character of the sewage and the quantity of the discharge are consistent with city’s capacity assurance plan and the sewer facilities in place. Such application shall be accompanied by the fee established by separate resolution.

    (d)    New development or change of use operations in out-of-city service areas shall not be served by city’s sewer system unless an application has been made for a connection permit and a “will serve” letter issued by the director of public works/city engineer.

    (e)    The application shall be on a form provided by the city and when submitted shall be accompanied by a map of the area proposed to be served and a precise legal description of said area or parcel. (Ord. 1445 § 1, 2010; Ord. 69 § 5, 1961)

 

14.36.090 Tampering with sewage facilities.
    No person shall, without the permission of the city engineer or the city engineer’s duly authorized representative, remove, change, disturb or in any way tamper with or interfere with any of the facilities, apparatus, appliances for storage or disposal of sewage by the city; nor shall any person without the permission of the city engineer install any pipe, apparatus, appliance or connection to any part of the city sewer system. (Ord. 69 § 6, 1961)

 

14.36.100 Inspection.
    Any connection to the city sewer system shall be inspected by the city engineer. Said connection construction must meet with the city engineer’s approval and shall be constructed in accordance with the sewer ordinance and sewer specifications. (Ord. 69 § 7, 1961)

 

14.36.110 Connection permit.
    A sewer connection permit shall be obtained from the office of the city engineer prior to commencing sewer connection work. (Ord. 69 § 8, 1961)

 

14.36.120 Maintenance and inspection fee.
    The sanitation department as a condition to granting the application for sewer connections, is authorized to charge, and shall collect in advance those sums which shall be authorized by the city council for the purpose of reimbursing the city for the cost of maintaining system, services, and inspecting the installation of connections. Such charge shall be computed and set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1254 § 8, 1996; Ord. 69 § 9, 1961)

 

14.36.130 Cost, replacement and extension fee.
    (a)    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the master plan of sewers of the city and to mitigate wastewater impacts caused by new development lying within the corporate city limits, certain public sewer improvements must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development’s fair share of improvements.

    (b)    A sewer annexation fee is established for development within corporate city limits to pay for sewer improvements. The city council shall by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments. The city, as a condition to granting the application and furnishing sewer service to a parcel of land, shall charge and collect fees for the purpose of paying for the cost of the system and future replacements and extensions thereof:

    (1)    Subdivisions. Fees will be charged per acre or proportionately for a fraction thereof for the gross acreage of the parcel being subdivided. For purposes of determining this fee the acreage of the parcel shall be computed to the centerline of any contiguous or abutting street.

    (2)    Variances, Use Variance Permits. Fees will be charged per acre or proportionately for a fraction thereof for the gross acreage of the parcel for which the variance or use variance is proposed. This charge shall be assessed as a condition of approval by the city council of said variance or use variance. Said fee shall be paid prior to final approval and prior to the issuance of a connection permit.

    (3)    Fees will be charged for each acre upon which a zone change is proposed. Such fee shall be paid prior to final approval of the zone change and prior to the issuance of a connection permit.

    (4)    Exception. Zone changes or variance in conjunction with parcels of land proposed to be developed into a subdivision shall not pay such fees until such time as the final map is approved.

    (5)    Subdivision of Four or Less Parcels—Records of Survey. Fees will be paid for each acre or proportionately for a fraction thereof included within the boundary of a record of survey prepared for the purpose of delineating new property lines. For the purpose of determining the service fee the acreage of the parcel or parcels shall be computed to the centerline of each contiguous street. Such fees shall not be required in conjunction with records of survey prepared for the purpose of clarifying property lines legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Upon written request to the city council by the owner, the city council may elect to require payment of service or connection fees for only that parcel upon which a building permit is obtained. Such fees shall be paid at the time the sewer connection permit is obtained.

    (6)    Single Lot. Fees will be paid per parcel of land containing one-fourth acre or less, or per acre or proportionately for a fraction thereof for a lot containing more than one-fourth acre, whichever sum is greater.

    (7)    Public Agency. The service fee for lands owned by public agencies may be waived by the city council, on condition that in the event any such lands are later transferred to private use, the service fee shall be payable before sewer service will be furnished for private use.

    (c)    The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:

    (1)    Pay for the city’s future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

    (2)    Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity.

    (d)    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in subsection (b) of this section may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the sewer usage impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than: (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project; or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1132 § 5, 1989; Ord. 69 § 11, 1961)

 

14.36.140 Violation—Penalty.
    No permit shall be issued for the connection to the city sewer system by any property subject to the service fee or connection fee until the same has been paid to the city. Any person connecting, or causing the connection of, any such property to the city sewer system either directly or indirectly, without compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 69 § 11, 1961)

Chapter 14.38 GREASE CONTROL
14.38.010 Intent and purpose.
    It is the intent of this section to establish regulations for the disposal of grease (defined to mean “fats, oils and grease” or “FOG”) and other insoluble waste discharges from food facilities within the city of Fountain Valley. The purpose is to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the sanitary sewer systems while at the same time attempting to prevent blockages of those sanitary sewer systems as a result of the discharge of FOG, and to specify appropriate FOG disposal requirements for food facilities and multiple dwelling units to protect the public health and safety. This chapter is specifically enacted to comply with the Clean Water Act and orders promulgated by the Regional Water Quality Control Board (“RWQCB”) related to the NPDES permit in effect for the watershed. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.020 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall apply:

    (a)    “Food facility” as defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL) Section 113785, shall mean any commercial entity within the city, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving or manufacturing, packaging or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities or for consumption by the public, its members or employees and which has any process or equipment that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL, Section 113785.

    (b)    “Limited food preparation establishments” shall mean establishments engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products. It does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor or consistency of food. For purposes of this chapter, a limited food preparation establishment is not considered to be a food facility.

    (c)    “Change in operations” shall mean any change in the ownership, food types or operational procedures that have the potential to increase by twenty-five percent the amount of fats, oils or grease used or generated by food preparation.

    (d)    “Building official” shall mean the building official, or his or her designee.

    (e)    “Food grinder” shall mean any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by-products for the purpose of disposing it in the sanitary sewer system.

    (f)    “Fat, oil and grease” (“FOG”) shall mean any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a by-product of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions.

    (g)    “Grease control device” shall mean any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism or equipment, which attaches to wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap/collect FOG prior to it being discharged into the sanitary sewer system. There are two primary types of grease control devices:

    (1)    A “grease interceptor” is a two or three compartment device that is generally required to be located, according to the Uniform Plumbing Code, underground between a food facility and the connection to the sanitary sewer system. These devices can be large (in excess of seven hundred fifty gallons) and primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on a regular interval to be effective. Interceptors shall be structurally intact, including acceptable internal plumbing, manhole inspection covers, baffles between chambers and a structure not compromised by intruding tree roots, etc.

    (2)    A “grease trap” is a device much smaller than a grease interceptor and services up to a maximum of four individual fixtures. Grease traps need to be emptied more often than grease interceptors to be effective due to their small size. Grease traps have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor is determined to be impossible or impracticable.

    (h)    “Multiple dwelling unit” shall mean a building designed and used by three or more families or similar groups of persons living independently of each other which has a common sewer or sewer connection to the city’s sewer main.

    (i)     “Remodeling” shall mean a physical change to a food facility that requires a permit, or involves any one or more combination of the following: (1) under-slab plumbing in the food processing area, (2) a twenty percent increase in the net public seating area, (3) a twenty percent increase in the size of the kitchen area, or (4) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment.

    (j)     “Grease disposal mitigation fee” shall mean a fee charged to an owner/operator of a food facility or multiple dwelling unit when there are physical limitations to the property that make the installation of the usual and customary grease interceptor for the food facility under consideration, impossible or impracticable.

    (k)    “Sewer lateral” shall mean a building sewer (sanitary) as defined in the Uniform Plumbing Code and as further defined in this code.

    (l)     “SSO” shall mean a sewage system overflow.

    (m)   “Impossibility/impracticability” shall mean, in addition to that which is physically or legally impossible, that which is so difficult to accomplish because of excessive or unreasonable cost. The fact that grease interceptors are expensive or the fact that excavation of paved surfaces may be required will not alone cause impracticability. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.030 Grease interceptor required for food facilities and multiple dwelling units.
    (a)    All fixtures, equipment and drain lines located in the food preparation and clean up areas of food facilities that are sources of FOG discharge shall be connected to an approved grease interceptor unless otherwise determined in accordance with the provisions of this section. Dishwashers or other fixtures discharging emulsifying agents (e.g., detergents) shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system such that their potential to adversely impact the operation of the grease control device operation is minimized.

    (b)    Grease interceptors shall be used in all new food facilities where it is necessary to install a grease control device, shall have a minimum capacity of seven hundred fifty gallons, and shall have a direct flow-through sample box. New food facilities shall follow sizing criteria for larger devices as specified by resolution of the city council.

    (c)    Grease interceptors shall be required in new multiple dwelling units and for multiple dwelling units which have experienced an SSO following adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If it is impossible or impractical to install a grease interceptor in an existing multiple dwelling unit that has experienced an SSO following adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the owner shall agree to comply with such measures as the building official shall impose to mitigate the problems likely to be caused by the multiple dwelling unit, including any combination of the following:

    (1)    Installation of other devices, such as grease traps;

    (2)    Security and other assurances that appropriate maintenance will occur; and

    (3)    The posting of bonds or payment of such amounts of money as will reimburse the city for its costs in performing extra line cleaning or similar preventative or remedial work.

    (d)    All existing food facilities undergoing remodeling or a change in operations shall be required to install grease control devices with each chamber readily and easily capable of cleaning and inspection of each chamber from the surface and shall include a downstream sample box in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as determined by the building official.

    (e)    All existing food facilities that have caused documented SSOs within the last three years of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall install a grease interceptor within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Appropriate due process shall be afforded before the determination is made.

    (f)    All existing food facilities that cause an SSO after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall install a grease interceptor within one year of the date of the SSO. Appropriate due process shall be afforded before this determination is made.

    (g)    Property owners of commercial properties shall be required to install and maintain approved grease control devices serving multiple food facilities that are located on a single parcel, in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code.

    (h)    No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued for a food facility that is required to have an approved grease control device, until such device has been installed, inspected and approved by the building official.

    (i)     It is the intent of this chapter that existing food facilities that have remained in continuous operation and were never required to install a grease interceptor and which have never caused an SSO, shall be allowed to continue to operate without a grease interceptor.

    (j)     The building official may establish additional guidelines to supplement this chapter regarding, but not limited to:

    (1)    Design and construction of grease control devices;

    (2)    The management, operation and maintenance standards for grease control devices;

    (3)    Kitchen best management practice to prevent FOG from entering the devices;

    (k)    Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the installation of food grinders in the plumbing system of new food facilities shall be prohibited.

    (l)     Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the introduction of any additives into a food facility’s wastewater system for the purposes of emulsifying FOG, is prohibited without the specific written authorization from the sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction over the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.040 Maintenance requirements.
    (a)    Within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all existing and newly installed grease control devices shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance plan approved by the building official.

    (1)    No FOG that has accumulated in a grease control device shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sanitary sewer system, storm drain or public right-of-way during maintenance activities.

    (2)    Each new and existing food facility with a grease control device shall have an approved maintenance plan which specifies the minimum maintenance frequency for removal of all accumulated FOG from the grease control device, which shall be determined as follows:

    (3)    For new food facilities, the minimum maintenance frequency for interceptors shall be as follows:

 

Type of Establishment

Minimum Maintenance Frequency

 

 

Take out only

Every 45 days

With wok stoves, deep fryers or more than one griddle

Every 20 days

 

 

Take out & seating

Every 60 days

With wok stoves, deep fryers or more than one griddle

Every 30 days

 

 

Seating only

Every 90 days

With wok stoves, deep fryers or more than one griddle

Every 60 days

 

    (b)    For existing food facilities with a grease interceptor, the maintenance plan shall be determined in one of the following methods:

    (1)    In the same manner as for new food facilities under subsection (a)(3) of this section; or

    (2)    The owner/operator of a food facility in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may submit an application to the building official requesting that a maintenance plan other than that identified in subsection (a)(3) of this section, be imposed on that food facility, due to the fact that the food facility has been following a regular maintenance cycle in the past, and based on the particular food facility operation, the current regular maintenance plan is adequate to guard against FOG passing into the sanitary sewer system. Upon a determination by the building official that an acceptable grease control device maintenance plan is being followed that meets the minimum requirements set forth in the Uniform Plumbing Code, then it may be used as the approved maintenance plan for that particular food facility.

    (3)    In the event it is determined that a food facility, as a result of a change in operations, is using a grease interceptor that is smaller in capacity than would be required for that food facility under this chapter, the building official may allow the food facility to continue to operate with the smaller grease interceptor, provided the food facility prepares a maintenance plan acceptable to the building official that requires more frequent servicing than would otherwise be required if the proper sized grease interceptor was installed.

    (c)    Notwithstanding the above, if any grease interceptor at any time contains floating oil/grease in the final chamber, or sludge in any chamber that is within two inches of the discharge outlet, or contains solids in excess of twenty-five percent of the total capacity of the grease interceptor, the owner and/or operator of the food facility shall have the grease interceptor serviced such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor after which the interceptor shall be refilled with cold water.

    (d)    Notwithstanding the above, all existing food facilities with a grease interceptor shall be serviced not less than every one hundred eighty (180) days. grease traps shall be cleaned of all material on a daily basis.

    (e)    The owner and/or operator of a food facility with an approved grease control device, shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than two years. The owner and operator of a food facility shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to any county health care or code enforcement representative, or his or her designee, representative of a local sanitation agency that has jurisdiction of the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized inspector that has jurisdiction under the water quality ordinance.

    (f)    The owner and/or operator of a food facility with a grease control device shall allow any county health care or code enforcement representative or a representative of the local sanitation agency that has jurisdiction of the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized inspector that has jurisdiction under the water quality ordinance, access to the food facility premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the food facility’s grease control devices, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices.

    (g)    The owner and/or operator of a food facility shall be required to file a declaration under penalty of perjury, on such form as the building official shall approve, demonstrating that the duties imposed by this chapter have been performed. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless full compliance with this chapter has been determined. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.050 Impossibility/Impracticality.
    If it is impossible or impractical to install a grease interceptor in an existing food facility, the business owner and operator shall agree to comply with such measures as the building official shall impose to mitigate the problems likely to be caused by the business, including any combination of the following:

    (a)    Installation of other devices, such as grease traps;

    (b)    Security and other assurances that appropriate maintenance will occur; and

    (c)    The posting of bonds or payment of such amounts of money as will reimburse the city for its costs in performing extra line cleaning or similar preventative or remedial work. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.060 Appeals.
    Any decision of the building official may be appealed by any owner or operator of a food facility or multiple dwelling unit affected by the decision, to the planning director. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.070 Violations.
    (a)    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a food facility or multiple dwelling unit if he, she or it:

    (1)    Fails to install an approved grease control device as required by this chapter; or

    (2)    Makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city, county or other local agency required by this chapter; or

    (3)    Tampers with or knowingly renders inoperable any grease control device required under this chapter; or

    (4)    Fails to clean, maintain or remove grease from a grease control device within the required time for such cleaning, maintenance or grease removal; or

    (5)    Fails to keep up-to-date and accurate records of all cleaning, maintenance and grease removal for the food facility’s grease control device and upon request to make those records available to any county health care or code enforcement representative, or his or her designee, any representative of a local sanitation agency that has jurisdiction over the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized inspector that has jurisdiction under the water quality ordinance; or

    (6)    Refuses a city or county health care or code enforcement representative, or his or her designee, a representative of a local sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction over the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized inspector that has jurisdiction under the water quality ordinance, reasonable access to the food facility for the purposes of inspecting, monitoring or reviewing the grease control device manifests, receipts, invoices or any other record of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device and/or to inspect the grease control device; or

    (7)    Disposes of, or knowingly allows or directs FOG to be disposed of, in an unlawful manner; or

    (8)    Introduces additives into a wastewater system for the purposes of emulsifying fats, oils and grease without written, specific authorization from the sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction of the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility; or

    (9)    Fails to undertake the mitigation measures set forth in Section 14.38.040; or

    (10)  Fails to file the required declaration. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.080 Abatement.
    Provided the city can prove that a person, firm or corporation caused grease build up so that a city line or appurtenance is damaged or so that a SSO occurs, the city may charge the responsible person for that damage and for the abatement costs thereof. The city shall first provide the ostensibly responsible person with a copy of the evidence that forms the basis of the proof and a copy of the building official tentative conclusions about the cause of the grease and a copy of this chapter. The responsible person shall have an appropriate amount of time to respond to charges in a hearing in which appropriate due process will be provided. Generally, at least ten days notice of the hearing shall be given. If possible, the responsible person shall be given notice at the time of the sewer overflow or damage if the person is believed to be the cause at that time. The responsible person shall also be provided with a copy of the charges incurred to date before the hearing if those are available. To the extent legally permissible, abatement charges may also include any fines or costs imposed on the city by the regional water quality control board or similar entity. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

 

14.38.090 Penalty.
    Violations under this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this code. (Ord. 1354 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 14.40 STORMWATER REGULATIONS
14.40.010 Purpose.
    The federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) requires that various state and local agencies implement regulations to control stormwater pollution. The city does establish these regulations as a co-permittee pursuant to its National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.020 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall have the meanings described herein:

    “Authorized inspector” means the director of public works and persons designated by and under his/her instruction and supervision, who are assigned to investigate compliance with, detect violations of and/or take actions pursuant to this chapter.

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley, Orange County, California.

    “Co-permittee” means the county of Orange, the Orange County flood control district, and/or any one of the thirty-one municipalities, including the city of Fountain Valley, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES permit.

    “DAMP” means the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Development project guidance” means DAMP Chapter VII and the appendix thereto, entitled Best Management Practices for New Development Including Non-Residential Construction Projects, as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any liquid, semisolid or solid substance.

    “Discharge exception” means the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this chapter, including only:

    Discharges composed entirely of stormwater; discharges subject to regulation under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board issued NPDES permits, state general permits, or other waivers, permits or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency; discharges from property for which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance are being implemented and followed; discharges to the stormwater drainage system from potable water line flushing, firefighting activities, landscape irrigation systems, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, and de minimis groundwater infiltration to the stormwater drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems); discharges from potable water sources, water wells, passive foundation drains, air conditioning condensation and other building roof runoff; agricultural irrigation water runoff; water from crawl space pumps, passive footing drains, lawn watering, noncommercial vehicle washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; discharges of reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility; public street wash waters when related to cleaning and maintenance by, or on behalf of, the city; discharges authorized pursuant to a permit issued under Section 14.40.110; discharges allowable under the domestic sewage exception; discharges for which the discharger has reduced to the extent feasible the amount of pollutants in such discharge; and discharges authorized pursuant to federal or state laws or regulations.

    In any action taken to enforce this chapter, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that a discharge was within the scope of this discharge exception.

    “Domestic sewage exception” means discharges which are exceptions to this chapter and excluded from the definition of prohibited discharge, as defined herein, including only:

    Discharges composed entirely of accidental spills of untreated sanitary wastes (commonly called domestic sewage) and other wastes, but limited solely to wastes that are controlled by and are within publicly owned wastewater treatment system collection facilities immediately prior to the accidental spill.

    “Enforcing attorney” means the city attorney or district attorney acting as counsel to the city of Fountain Valley and his/her designee, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the district attorney and/or city attorney, or his/her designee, shall act as the enforcing attorney.

    “EPA” means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.

    “Hearing officer” means the city manager or his/her designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein.

    “Illicit connection” means any man-made conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through which the discharge of any pollutant to the stormwater drainage system occurs or may occur. The term illicit connection shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the stormwater drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made.

    “Invoice for costs” means the actual costs and expenses of the city, including but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries and other expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection conducted pursuant to Section 14.40.050 of this chapter, or where a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option under Section 14.40.060 of this chapter is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter.

    “Legal nonconforming connection” means connections to the stormwater drainage system existing as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter that were in compliance with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established.

    “New development” means all public and private residential (whether single family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

    “Nonresidential plumbing permit” means a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than stormwater, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage.

    “NPDES permit” means the currently applicable municipal discharge permit(s) issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, which permit(s) establishes waste discharge requirements applicable to stormwater runoff in the city.

    “Person” means any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

    “Pollutant” means any liquid, solid or semisolid substances, or combination thereof, including and not limited to:

    (1)    Artificial materials (such as floatable plastics, wood products or metal shavings);

    (2)    Household waste (such as trash, paper and plastics; cleaning chemicals; yard wastes; animal fecal materials; used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment);

    (3)    Metals and nonmetals, including compounds of metals and nonmetals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, cyanide, phosphorus and arsenic), with characteristics which cause an adverse effect on living organisms;

    (4)    Petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);

    (5)    Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including stables, show facilities, or polo fields);

    (6)    Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6, or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor;

    (7)    Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids; construction equipment washing; concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and use of super chlorinated water for potable water line flushing);

    (8)    Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;

    (9)    Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractible organic compounds;

    (10)  Those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act; and

    (11)  Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state.

    “Prohibited discharge” means any discharge which contains any pollutant, from public or private property to (1) the stormwater drainage system; (2) any upstream flow, which is tributary to the stormwater drainage system; (3) any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough; or (4) any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific Ocean. The term prohibited discharge shall not include discharges allowable under the discharge exception.

    “Significant redevelopment” means the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single-family, multiunit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail or other nonresidential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

    “State general permit” means either the state general industrial stormwater permit or the state general construction permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, then the term state general permit shall also refer to any EPA-administered stormwater control program for industrial and construction activities.

    “Stormwater drainage system” means street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the county-wide stormwater runoff system and owned, operated, maintained or controlled by county of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District or any co-permittee city, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of stormwater. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.030 Prohibitions.
    (a)    No person shall:

    (1)    Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection;

    (2)    Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge;

    (3)    Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

    (b)    The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following:

    (1)    For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater drainage system, the expiration of five years from the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

    (2)    For all nonstructural improvements to property existing for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater drainage system, the expiration of six months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this chapter.

    (c)    A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the public works director upon consideration of the following factors:

    (1)    The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters;

    (2)    The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and

    (3)    The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection.

    (d)    A civil or administrative violation of subsection (a) of this section shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

    (e)    If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the thirty-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the thirty-day period any such discharge shall constitute a violation of subsection (a) of this section.

    (f)    If a request for an extension of use is denied, the owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 14.40.060(g) through (k) for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.040 Control of urban runoff.
    (a)    New Development and Significant Redevelopment.

    (1)    All new development and significant redevelopment within the city shall be undertaken in accordance with:

    (A) The DAMP, including but not limited to the development project guidance; and

    (B) Any conditions and requirements established by the planning, public works or building departments, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in stormwater runoff from the project site.

    (2)    Prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the planning, public works or building departments shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit, the planning, public works or building departments shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with subsection (a) of this section prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the city’s discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map.

    (3)    Notwithstanding the foregoing, compliance with the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of a (one) single-family detached residence unless the city planning, public works, or building department determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the stormwater drainage system.

    (4)    Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this chapter.

    (5)    If the city planning, public works or building department determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of stormwater runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the development project guidance.

    (6)    The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on a new development or significant redevelopment project. Each failure by the owner of the property or its successors or assigns to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to Section 14.40.040(a) on a new development or significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

    (7)    The city planning, public works or building department may require that the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section be recorded with the county recorder’s office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the property or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of these terms, conditions and requirements and a signature on behalf of the city shall not be required for recordation.

    (b)    Cost Recovery. The city shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses incurred by the planning, public works or building departments, in the review of new development or significant development projects for compliance with the DAMP. The city planning, public works or building departments may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.050 Inspections.
    (a)    When required by law, the authorized inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant.

    (b)    The authorized inspector may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the stormwater drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the city.

    (c)    Compliance Assessments. The authorized inspector may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to (1) identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property, (2) identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants, (3) investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and manmade conveyance systems, (4) establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system, (5) locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge, (6) evaluating compliance with any permit issued, and (7) investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection.

    (d)    For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment.

    (e)    The authorized inspector may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system.

    (f)    The authorized inspector may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. The authorized inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property.

    (g)    The authorized inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the stormwater drainage system.

    (h)    The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized inspector. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.060 Administrative remedies.
    (a)    The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provision(s) of this chapter or the applicable permit which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or person. The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed ninety days unless the authorized inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional ninety days where good cause exists for the extension.

    (b)    The authorized inspector may issue an administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be delivered in accordance with Section 14.40.060(f) The administrative compliance order may be issued to:

    (1)    The owner or occupant of any property requiring abatement of conditions on the property that cause or may cause a prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this chapter;

    (2)    The owner of property subject to terms, conditions or requirements imposed on a project in accordance with Section 14.40.040(a) to ensure adherence to those terms, conditions and requirements;

    (3)    A permittee subject to the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to Section 14.40.110 to ensure compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the permit;

    (4)    Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge.

    (c)    The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and requirements:

    (1)    Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or to prevent imminent threat of a prohibited discharge, including but not limited to a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area;

    (2)    Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection;

    (3)    Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff;

    (4)    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to the imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state of California or regional agency;

    (5)    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto.

    (d)    (1) The authorized inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant of any property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to:

    (A)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the stormwater drainage system;

    (B)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter;

    (C)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter;

    (D)   Clean up the area affected by the violation.

    (2)    The authorized inspector may direct by cease and desist order that (A) the owner of any property or his/her successor-in-interest, which property is subject to any conditions or requirements issued pursuant to Section 14.40.040(a), or (B) any permittee under any permit issued pursuant to Section 14.40.110, must immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the conditions or requirements issued pursuant to Section 14.40.040(a) or the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable permit.

    (e)    The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the city for the actual costs incurred by the city in issuing and enforcing any notice or order. If any owner or occupant, permittee or any other person subject to an invoice for costs fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs, then the enforcing attorney may institute collection proceedings.

    (f)    Any notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order or invoice of costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following:

    (1)    The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth herein in this chapter.

    (2)    Delivery shall be deemed complete upon (A) personal service to the recipient; (B) deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery; or (C) facsimile service with confirmation of receipt.

    (3)    Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the city.

    (4)    Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized inspector, a notice of noncompliance or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of ten business days.

    (g)    Except as set forth in subsection (i) of this section any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, these administrative appeal procedures shall not apply to criminal proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter.

    (h)    Any person appealing a notice of noncompliance, an administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs or an adverse determination shall, within thirty days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution, with the office of the city clerk, with a copy of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the city manager. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within forty-five business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted.

    (i)     An administrative hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held within five business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action.

    (j)     The authorized inspector shall appear in support of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs or emergency abatement action, and the appealing party shall appear in support of withdrawal of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or in opposition to the emergency abatement action. Except as set forth in Section 14.40.020 (definition of discharge exception) the city shall have the burden of supporting any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case.

    (k)    The final decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. The final decision shall include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within ninety days following issuance of the final decision. Notwithstanding this subsection (k), the final decision of the hearing officer in any proceeding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing.

    (l)     In the event the owner of property, the operator of a facility, a permittee or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, operator, permittee or person pursuant to this chapter, the authorized inspector may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the city in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to Section 14.40.070(d) (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.070 Nuisance.
    (a)    Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. At the request of the director of public works, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance.

    (b)    Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the director of public works shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring.

    (c)    In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the director of public works or authorized inspector may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant.

    (1)    An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public safety or the environment.

    (2)    Notwithstanding the authority of the city to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to Section 14.40.060(i) shall follow the abatement action.

    (d)    All costs incurred by the city in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other expenses recoverable under state law, shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.

    (e)    All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1 and Section 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. At the direction of the public works director, the enforcing attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.080 Criminal sanctions.
    Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.090 Injunctions.
    At the request of the director of public works, the enforcing attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction, of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.100 Other civil remedies.
    (a)    The director of public works may cause the enforcing attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of (1) all costs incurred in enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages, (2) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health, and (3) damages for irreparable harm to the environment.

    (b)    The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the stormwater drainage system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the stormwater drainage system.

    (c)    The remedies available to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not limit the right of the city to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. (Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.110 Permits.
    (a)    On application of the owner of property or the operator of any facility, which property or facility is not otherwise subject to the requirements of a state general permit or a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit regulating stormwater discharges, the director of public works or authorized inspector may issue a permit authorizing the release of non-stormwater discharges to the stormwater drainage system if:

    (1)    The discharge of material or constituents is reasonably necessary for the conduct of otherwise legal activities on the property; and

    (2)    The discharge will not cause a nuisance, impair the beneficial uses of receiving waters, or cause any reduction in established water quality standards.

    (b)    The applicant shall provide all information requested by the director of public works or authorized inspector for review and consideration of the application, including but not limited to specific detail as to the activities to be conducted on the property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the property, identification of equipment or processes to be used on-site and other information as may be requested in order to determine the constituents, and quantities thereof, which may be discharged if permission is granted.

    (c)    The permit shall be granted or denied by the director of public works or authorized inspector or his/her designated representative, no later than sixty business days following the completion and acceptance of the application as determined by the director of public works or authorized inspector. The applicant shall be notified in person or by first class mail, postage prepaid, of the action taken.

    (d)    The permit may include terms, conditions and requirements to ensure compliance with the objectives of this chapter and as necessary to protect the  receiving waters, including but not limited to:

    (1)    Identification of the discharge location on the property and the location at which the discharge will enter the stormwater drainage system;

    (2)    Identification of the constituents and quantities thereof to be discharged into the stormwater drainage system;

    (3)    Specification of pollution prevention techniques and structural or nonstructural control requirements as reasonably necessary to prevent the occurrence of potential discharges in violation of this chapter;

    (4)    Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge;

    (5)    Requirements for submission of documents or data, such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports, self-monitoring reports and waste manifests; and

    (6)    Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the protection of receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents approved by any federal, state of California or regional agency.

    (e)    In the discretion of the director of public works or authorized inspector, the permit may, in accordance with the conditions identified in subsection (d) of this section, be prepared as a general permit applicable to a specific category of activities. If a general permit is issued, any person intending to discharge within the scope of the authorization provided by the general permit may do so by filing an application to discharge with the director of public works or authorized inspector. No discharge within the scope of the general permit shall occur until such application is so filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing in this subsection (e), the director of public works or authorized inspector, in his/her discretion, may eliminate the requirement that an application for a general permit be filed for any specific activity for which a general permit has been issued.

    (f)    The permission to discharge may be conditioned upon the applicant’s payment of the city’s costs, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by separate resolution, as follows:

    (1)    For individually issued permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, preparing and issuing the permit, and the costs reasonably related to administrating this permit program;

    (2)    For general permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, that portion of the costs of preparing the general permit which is reasonably attributable to the permittee’s application for the general permit, and the costs reasonably related to administering the general permit program. (Ord. 1326 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.120 Permit suspension, revocation or modification.
    (a)    The public works director or authorized inspector may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that:

    (1)    The permittee has violated any term, condition or requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this chapter; or

    (2)    The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate to except the discharge from the prohibitions on prohibited discharge contained within this chapter; or

    (3)    The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for compliance issued pursuant to this chapter; or

    (4)    Any regulatory agency, including EPA or a Regional Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction over the discharge, notifies the city that the discharge should be terminated.

    (b)    The public works director or authorized inspector may modify any permit when it is determined that:

    (1)    Federal or state law requirements have changed in a manner that necessitates a change in the permit; or

    (2)    The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify the permit’s terms, conditions or requirements; or

    (3)    A change to the permit is necessary to ensure compliance with the objectives of this chapter or to protect the quality of receiving waters.

    The permittee, or in the case of a general permit, each person who has filed an application pursuant to Section 14.40.110(e), shall be informed of any change in the permit terms and conditions at least sixty days prior to the effective date of the modified permit. In the case of a general permit issued pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 14.40.110, any change in the permit terms and conditions shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least sixty days prior to the effective date of the modified permit. The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended, revoked or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the same procedures applicable to appeal of an administrative compliance order hereunder. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee may continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative decision by the hearing officer. (Ord. 1326 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.130 Permittee rights.
    (a)    Compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the permittee from compliance with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and permit requirements, applicable to the activity for which the permit is issued.

    (b)    Permits issued under this chapter are for the person or entity identified therein as the permittee only, and authorize the specific operation at the specific location identified in the permit. The issuance of a permit does not vest the permittee with a continuing right to discharge.

    (c)    No permit issued to any person may be transferred to allow:

    (1)    A discharge to the stormwater drainage system at a location other than the location stated in the original permit; or

    (2)    A discharge by a person other than the person named in the permit, provided however, that the city may approve a transfer if written approval is obtained, in advance, from the director of public works or authorized inspector. (Ord. 1326 § 4, 2002; Ord. 1265, 1997)

 

14.40.140 Interagency cooperation.
    (a)    The city intends to cooperate with other agencies with jurisdiction over stormwater discharges to ensure that the regulatory purposes underlying storm water promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.) are met.

    (b)    The city may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits and enforcement authorized by this section. (Ord. 1326 § 5, 2002)

Title 15 (RESERVED)

Title 16 OIL WELLS
Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 16.12 PERMITS
Chapter 16.16 DRILLING AND OPERATING
Chapter 16.20 ABANDONMENT PROCEDURE
Chapter 16.24 INSPECTIONS
Chapter 16.28 STORAGE FACILITIES
Chapter 16.32 HIGH PRESSURE PIPE SYSTEMS
Chapter 16.36 FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 16.40 BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Chapter 16.44 ENFORCEMENT

Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.04.010 County ordinance adopted.
    Ordinance No. 1097 of the County of Orange, as set forth in this title, is here: by adopted as Ordinance No. 27, of the city of Fountain Valley, state of California. (Ord. 27 § 2, 1959)

 

16.04.020 Title.
    This title shall be known and may be cited as “The Orange County Oil Code.” (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.08 DEFINITIONS
Note
*   Whenever reference is made to a county official or department, it shall be understood to refer to the comparable city official or department.

 

16.08.010 Definitions.
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the meaning and the interpretation of these regulations. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular: the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.020 Abandonment.
    “Abandonment” is the restoration of the drill site as required by these regulations. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.030 A.P.I.
    “A.P.I.” is the American Petroleum Institute. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.040 Approved.
    “Approved” means approved by the superintendent. “Approved type,” or “approved design,” is and includes improvements, equipment or facilities of a type or design approved by the superintendent. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.050 A.S.M.E.
    “A.S.M.E.” is the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.060 Blow-out.
    “Blow-out” is the uncontrolled discharge of gas, liquid, or solids or a mixture thereof from a well into the atmosphere. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.070 Blow-out preventer.
    “Blow-out preventer” is a mechanical, hydraulic or pneumatic or other device or a combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith designed and capable of preventing a blow-out. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.080 Cellar.
    “Cellar” is an excavation around or above the top joint of the casing in a well. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.090 Completion of drilling.
    A well is completed, for the purpose of these regulations, thirty days after the drilling crew has been released, unless drilling or remedial operations are resumed before the end of the thirty days. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.100 Derrick.
    “Derrick” is any frame work, tower, or mast together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, including any foundations, pump house, pipe racks, and each and every part thereof, which is or are required, or used, or useful for the drilling for and the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons from the earth except tanks used for storage purposes. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.110 Desertion.
    “Desertion” is the cessation of operations at a drill site without compliance with the provisions of this ordinance relating to suspended operations or abandonment. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.120 Diligence.
    “Diligence,” is used in these regulations, means that the drilling derrick is in its operating position over the well, properly anchored and supported and that an operating crew is on duty at the drill site at all reasonable times. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.130 Division of oil and gas.
    “Division of oil and gas” means the Division of Oil and Gas of the Department of Natural Resources of the state of California or any other state agency that may in the future be charged with its responsibilities. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.140 Drilling.
    “Drilling” means digging a hole in earth formation with a power driven drill bit for the purpose of exploring for or developing of oil or gas. Drilling includes those operations that are concerned with the completion of a well. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.150 Drill site.
    “Drill site” is the premises used during the drilling and subsequent life of a well or wells, which is necessary for the safe operation thereof. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.160 Gas.
    “Gas” means the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.170 Lessee.
    “Lessee” is the possessor of the right to exploit the premises for mineral. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.180 Lessor.
    “Lessor” is the mineral right owner. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.190 Maintenance.
    “Maintenance” means and includes the repair and replacement of parts of a structure where same does not alter or lessen the strength or stability of a structure. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.200 Natural gasoline plant.
    A “natural gasoline plant” or “absorption plant,” is a plant for the processing of natural gas from the production wells and processed into its various components. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.210 Oil.
    “Oil” includes petroleum, and petroleum includes oil. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.220 Operator.
    “Operator” is the person, whether proprietor, lessee or independent contractor, actually in charge and in control of the drilling, maintenance, operation or pumping of a well or lease. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.230 Outer boundary line.
    Where several contiguous parcels of land in one or different ownerships are operated as a single oil or gas lease or operating unit, the term “outer boundary line” means the exterior limits of the land included in the lease or unit. In determining the contiguity of any such parcels of land, no street, road or alley lying within the lease or unit shall be deemed to interrupt such contiguity. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.240 Owner.
    “Owner” is the person who owns a legal or equitable title in and to the surfaces of the drill site. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.250 Person.
    “Person” includes any individual, firm, association, corporation, joint venture, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.260 Redrilling.
    “Redrilling” means the deepening of an existing oil well or otherwise drilling beyond the extremities of the existing well casing. The provisions of this title relating to drilling shall be equally applicable to redrilling. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.270 Source of ignition.
    “Source of ignition” means any flame, are, spark, or heated object or surface capable of igniting flammable liquids, gases, or vapors. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.280 Structure.
    “Structure” is that which is built or constructed; a tank, edifice, or a building of any kind. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.290 Superintendent.
    “Superintendent” means and includes the superintendent of building and safety of the county of Orange, his assistants, deputies, inspectors, and officers of the department of building and safety of the county of Orange. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.300 Suspended operations.
    “Suspended operations” is the approved, temporary suspension of drilling or redrilling operations pending a resumption of operations or abandonment. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.310 Tank.
    A “tank” is a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of an oil well, for holding or storing liquids at or near atmospheric pressure. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.320 Well.
    A “well” or “oil well” is a well or hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring for or extracting from the earth oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances, or a well or hole in the earth by means of and through which oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances are extracted, produced, or capable of being produced from the earth, or a well or hole for the purpose of secondary recovery or disposal thereof. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.08.330 Well servicing.
    “Well servicing” is remedial or maintenance work performed within any existing well which does not involve drilling or redrilling. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.12 PERMITS
16.12.010 General requirements.
    (a)    A permit from the superintendent shall be obtained:

    (1)    For drilling or redrilling operations in connection with the exploration for or the production of petroleum, or for the purpose of secondary recovery;

    (2)    To erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any structure.

    (b)    No permit shall be required for well servicing or maintenance of or for any structure for which a building permit is not required. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.020 Procedure—Application.
    (a)    The applicant shall file an application in writing for a permit on a form furnished for that purpose by the department of building and safety. The application shall be accompanied by:

    (1)    A complete legal description of the property;

    (2)    A fully informative plot plan showing the location of the well, the location of which has been staked on the ground, appurtenant structures and their relation to any existing hospital, sanitarium, church, rest home, airport, school, and dwelling within the radius required by this title;

    (3)    Plans and engineering specifications of structures, drilling derricks, drilling masts, tanks, and high pressure systems regulated by this ordinance. Applicant need not file plans and engineering specifications of standard derricks, masts and tanks when such plans and specifications are already on file in the office of the superintendent;

    (4)    A statement of the valuation of the proposed work for which a building permit is required;

    (5)    A verified statement signed by the applicant certifying that he is duly authorized by operator to make and file the application and that he has read the application and the same is true and correct;

    (6)    An acknowledged statement in writing subscribed by the owner of the surface rights of the drill site and by the owner of any private road by which access is had to the drill site unconditionally granting to the county of Orange the right to enter upon the drill site for the purpose of inspection and restoring the premises in the event the applicant should fail to do so;

    Any operator may in lieu of filing the statement required by subsection (6), file a bond in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars for the drilling or redrilling of each well, said bond to conform in all other particulars to the bond requirements of this section. Upon later compliance by the operator with the provisions of subsection (6) or upon the abandonment of the well in compliance with the provisions of law relating thereto, the said fifty thousand dollar bond may be exonerated;

    (7)    A statement as to the means by which liquid spills will be removed from diked area or catchment basins;

    (8)    Such other pertinent information as may be required by the superintendent. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.030 Bond—Requirements.
    Every application for the drilling or redrilling of any off well for which such bond is not on file shall be accompanied by a corporate surety bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars for each such well. The bond shall be filed with the department of building and safety, on a bond form approved by county counsel prior to the issuance of any drilling or redrilling permit. The bond shall be executed by the operator as principal, and by the authorized surety company, as surety and conditioned that the principal named in the bond shall faithfully comply with all the provisions of this title in drilling or redrilling and maintaining all production facilities as required by this title until properly abandoned in conformity with the provisions hereof. The bond shall secure the county of Orange against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it by reason of the failure of operator to fully comply with the provisions of this ordinance. The bond shall include the correct name or number of the well and such other information as may be necessary to readily identify the oil well.

    Any operator may in lieu of filing such bond for each well drilled, redrilled, produced or maintained, file a bond in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars to cover all of his said operations conducted within the county of Orange. A rider to said bond shall be filed with the superintendent showing the correct name or number of the well and such other information as may be necessary to readily identify the oil well for each well covered by the bond. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.040 Bond—Default—Notice.
    (a)    Whenever the superintendent finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition of these regulations, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond.

    (b)    Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the superintendent to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.

    (c)    After receipt of such notice, the surety shall, within the time therein specified either cause or require work to be performed, or failing therein, shall pay over to the superintendent the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal to twenty-five percent of said estimated cost. Upon receipt of such moneys, the superintendent shall proceed by such mode as he deems convenient to cause the repaired work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the division of oil and gas, such additional moneys may be demanded from the surety as is necessary to restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this title. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.050 Bond—Exoneration.
    Any bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled and the surety be relieved of all obligations thereunder when the well has been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this title and in conformity with all regulations of the division of oil and gas and notice to that effect has been received by the department of building and safety. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.060 Bond—Substitute.
    A substitute bond may be filed in lieu of any bond on file hereunder and the superintendent shall accept and file the same if it is qualified and in proper form and substance and the bond for which it is substituted shall be exonerated but only if the superintendent finds that all of the conditions of last mentioned bond have been satisfied and that no default exists as to the performance upon which the bond is conditioned. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.070 Fee—Drilling or redrilling.
    A fee for each drilling permit or redrilling permit shall be paid to the superintendent as set forth in Section 16.12.110.

    Where drilling, redrilling, construction, or other work for which a permit is required by this title is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees hereunder specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons, firms, corporations or employees from fully complying with the requirements of this ordinance or the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.080 Fees—Plan-checking.
    A plan-checking fee shall not be charged for the derrick, or its appurtenances. A plan-checking fee shall be charged for all permanent buildings, production tanks, washing tanks, skim ponds and such other structures not directly connected with the derrick itself. A plan-checking fee shall be charged for oil well cellars designed to accommodate more than one oil well. Said plan-checking fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee as set forth in Section 16.12.110. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.090 Fees—Annual inspection.
    The superintendent shall inspect annually and at such other times as he deems necessary, each producing oil well and suspended oil well regulated by this title for the purpose of ascertaining whether the well is being operated or maintained in conformity with the minimum standards of this chapter. To meet the expense of such inspection, the operator shall pay to the department of building and safety an annual inspection fee as specified in Section 16.12.110 on or before June 30th of each year; however, no additional fee shall be charged for additional inspections which may be required during the year. The superintendent shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all annual inspection fees collected and received under this chapter, the name of the operator for whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the well name and designation and the general location of the well. A report of the superintendent’s annual inspection findings shall be furnished to the operator. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.100 Fees—Building permit.
    A building permit fee shall be charged for the erection or construction or relocation of any permanent building, tank or other structures hereinabove included and such fee shall be based on the total valuation of the structure when completed. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.110 Fees—Schedule.
    (a)    A fee established by resolution of the city council shall be charged for the drilling or redrilling of any oil well, no pan of which shall be refundable.

    (b)    Annual Inspection Fees. A fee established by resolution of the city council shall be charged for the annual inspection of each existing, suspended, or producing well.

    (c)    For all construction work for which a building permit is required, a fee schedule for this permit shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1254 § 9, 1996; Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.12.120 Permit utilization.
    No permit issued hereunder shall be valid unless utilization of the privileges granted thereby be commenced within sixty days from and after the date of issuance of the permit and diligently and progressively prosecuted thereafter. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.16 DRILLING AND OPERATING
16.16.010 Location of wells.
    (a)    No oil well shall be drilled within one hundred fifty feet of the right-of-way of any existing public street, alley or highway, nor within one hundred fifty feet of the ultimate right-of-way line of any highway shown on the master plan of arterial highways, nor within one hundred fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railway which carries passengers for hire.

    (b)    No oil well shall be drilled within one hundred fifty feet of any building used for human occupancy, nor shall any such buildings be erected within one hundred fifty feet of any oil well not abandoned, except buildings incidental to the operation of the well. No oil well shall be drilled within one hundred fifty feet from the outer boundary line.

    (c)    No oil well shall be drilled within three hundred feet of any building used as a place of public assemblage, institution, or school; nor shall any such building be erected within three hundred feet of any oil well not abandoned.

    (d)    In any area adjacent to an existing oil well, the superintendent may suspend any provisions of subsection A in whole or in part, or impose less restrictive requirements if such provisions or requirements are rendered unnecessary or unreasonable by the then-existing special features, such as: topography, nature of the use and occupancy of and the proximity to buildings on adjoining property, the height, character and structure of such buildings, the type and character of oil field development, and may impose additional safety requirements rendered necessary because of such special features. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.020 Private roads and drill sites.
    Prior to commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the drill site itself shall be surfaced by clean, crushed rock, gravel or decomposed granite, or oiled, and maintained to prevent dust and mud.

    In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads and drill sites may be altered at the discretion of the superintendent after consideration of all of the circumstances including but not limited to distances from public streets and highways, distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operator and the purposes for which the property of such owners are or may be used, topographical features, nature of the soil and exposure to wind. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.030 Derricks.
    All derricks and masts hereafter erected for drilling or redrilling shall be at least equivalent to the American Petroleum Institute Standards 4A, 14th Edition and 4D, 3rd Edition. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.040 Signs.
    A sign having a surface area of not less than two square feet and no more than six square feet bearing the current name and number of the well and the name or insignia of the operator shall be displayed at all times from the commencement of drilling operations until the well is abandoned. In the event there are more than two producing wells on one leasehold, it shall be sufficient if the entrances to said leasehold are posted with a sign not less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches bearing the name of the operator, together with the name or designation of the lease, together with an openly visible sign on each producing well designating the particular number thereof. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.050 Blow-out prevention—Drilling wells.
    Protection shall be provided to prevent the blow-out of an oil well, during drilling and redrilling operations and shall conform to the requirements of the state of California, Petroleum Safety Orders—Drilling and Production Section 6691 of the Administrative Code of California. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.060 Blow-out prevention—Wells other than drilling wells.
    (a)    Protection shall be provided to prevent the blow-out of an oil well, conforming to the requirements of the state of California Safety Orders-Drilling and Production Section 6692 of the Administrative Code of California in the following cases:

    A.    During perforating, shooting or cutting off a string of casing;

    B.     During well servicing operations on a well that is known to have sufficient gas pressure to cause the well to flow, or where the gas pressure is unknown.

    (b)    The operator shall notify the superintendent, in writing, at least one day before any of the operations described in this subsection are commenced. In the event that the day following the day on which notice be given falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, then such additional days notice must be given as may be required so that there shall be one day, Saturday, Sunday and holidays excepted, between the date notice be given and any of the said operations commenced. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.070 Sump or sump holes.
    Rotary mud, drill cuttings, oil field waste, oil or liquid hydrocarbons and all other oil field wastes derived or resulting from, or connected with the drilling of any well shall be discharged into a sump hole or steel tank. Such drill cuttings, rotary mud, and drilling waste materials shall be removed from the drill site upon completion of drilling operations. Tanks used as and for sump purposes shall be removed from the drill site and sump holes shall be drained and back filled within thirty days from and after completion of drilling. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.080 Fencing.
    All sumps or sump holes and all oil well production equipment having unguarded external moving parts hazardous to life or limb shall be attended twenty-four hours per day or be enclosed by a steel chain link type fence not less than six feet in height and in addition having not less than three strands of barbed wire sloping outward at approximately a forty-five degree angle and for eighteen inches from the top of the fence. There shall be no aperture below such fence greater than four inches. Fence gates shall be placed at nonhazardous locations and shall be locked at all times when unattended by a watchman or service man. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.090 Cellars.
    The following regulations shall apply to cellars:

    (1)    Every cellar shall be constructed in accordance with Chapters 23, 26 and 33 of the Uniform Building Code, adopted by the board of supervisors of the county of Orange as Ordinance No. 922 of said county.

    (2)    Such cellars shall be kept free from water, oil drilling fluids, or other substances which might constitute a hazard, except during drilling and servicing operations.

    (3)    The depth of such cellars shall be the vertical measurement between the lowest point of the floor area in the bottom of such cellar and the lowest point of ground or any surface adjacent to the top of the cellar wall.

    (4)    All multi-well cellars exceeding three feet in depth and twenty-five feet in length shall have two separate means of exit or entrance. If the cellar exceeds fifty feet in length, one of the means of entrance or exit shall be a stairway. If the cellar exceeds two hundred feet in length, a third means of entrance or exit shall be provided.

    (5)    Multi-well cellars shall have a steel grate covering with no unobstructed openings in excess of three inches. Materials, equipment, or other appurtenances shall not be stored or placed on the grating so as to interfere with the escape of gases and vapors. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.100 Removal of equipment.
    All drilling equipment and the derrick shall be removed from the premises within sixty days following the completion, abandonment or desertion of any well. Once the well is a producing well, it shall be serviced with a portable derrick when required. Drilling operations shall be diligently prosecuted until the well is completed or abandoned. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.16.110 Soundproofing.
    Soundproofing acoustical blankets for the drilling derrick and accessory structures shall be: fibrous glass insulation one and one-half inch thick, 0.50 pounds per cubic foot, density, .063 pounds per square foot, weight, .00010 to .00015 fiber diameter limit of four hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit sewed between layers of fire retardant, vinyl fiberglass cloth, 15-17 ounces per square yard sewed with Dacron thread D-92 with stitches not more than six to the inch. The lacing cord shall be flat vinyl coated tape composed of fibrous glass yarn braided, heat set and bonded. The tape shall have a ninety pound tensile strength. Grommets shall be No. 4 brass.

    All doors and similar openings shall be kept closed, during drilling operations, except for ingress and egress. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.20 ABANDONMENT PROCEDURE
16.20.010 Responsibility.
    It shall be the responsibility of the superintendent to determine that the drill site and all facilities pertinent thereto have been restored to their original condition as nearly as practicable in conformity with the regulations of this title including the requirements in this chapter. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.20.020 Standard.
    It shall be the responsibility of the operator to comply with the abandonment provision of this title and he shall furnish the superintendent the approval of the division of oil and gas, department of natural resources, confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under the state laws.

    It shall be the responsibility of the operator to comply with the abandonment provision of this title and he shall furnish the superintendent with (1) a copy of the approval of division of oil and gas, department of natural resources, confirming compliance with all abandonment proceeding under the state law, and (2) a notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated.

    Abandonment shall be approved by the superintendent after restoration of the drill site and the subsurface thereof has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements:

    (1)    The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the drill site;

    (2)    All tanks, towers and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;

    (3)    All concrete, pipe, wood and other foreign materials shall be removed from the drill site to a depth of six feet below grade, unless part of a multiwell cellar, then being used in connection with any other well for which a permit has been issued;

    (4)    The oil well casing shall be cut off at a point six feet below the drill site grade at the cellar, but in no case below sea level. Nothing shall be placed in the hole above the point of cut-off until the cut-off has been inspected by the superintendent and by him found to be in compliance with all applicable provisions of law;

    (5)    The top ten feet of the remaining casing shall be filled with a cement plug to prevent gas fumes from escaping;

    (6)    A steel cap of not less than the same thickness as the well casing shall be tack welded to the casing in a minimum of four places;

    (7)    All holes and depressions shall be filled and packed with native earth. All oil, waste oil, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.20.030 Conversion to water well.
    A well may be converted to a domestic or agricultural water well upon the approval of the superintendent after:

    (1)    A request in writing by the land owner has been made to the superintendent;

    (2)    An original or certified copy of the approved conversion permit from the division of oil and gas has been furnished the superintendent;

    (3)    All the provisions of abandonment in the preceding paragraph have been complied with except that those appurtenances necessary in the opinion of the superintendent for the operation of a water well may be retained. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.24 INSPECTIONS
16.24.010 Approval of superintendent.
    Except as provided in Section 16.24.030 hereof no drilling, redrilling, work or construction shall be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the superintendent. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.020 Site preparation.
    (a)    The well location shall be clearly marked by a stake or other suitable means and identified as the “well location.”

    (b)    The drill site shall be prepared as required in these regulations and shall be of such size so as to provide for the safe erection of the mast or derrick and all appurtenant structures thereto as indicated on the approved plot plan.

    (c)    Any private road used for ingress or egress of equipment to the drill site shall be prepared as required by these regulations.

    (d)    The proposed well shall be located in conformity with these regulations as to distances from streets, outer boundaries, public buildings and dwellings. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.030 Commencement of drilling.
    The superintendent shall be called and notified when the drilling derrick or mast has been erected in conformity with these regulations and all necessary equipment pertinent to the drilling operations thereof has been installed and is on the site. Drilling may proceed prior to inspection of the derrick or mast, provided that its design has been previously approved by the superintendent. It will be the obligation of the superintendent to inspect such facilities as to their conformity with these regulations as soon as reasonably practicable. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.040 Release of drilling crew.
    The superintendent shall be notified immediately in writing, when the drilling crew is released and it shall then be his duty to inspect. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.050 Completion of drilling.
    Upon completion of drilling operations an inspection request shall be called for. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.060 Abandonment.
    An inspection shall be made subsequent to the approval of the abandonment notice and the superintendent shall certify that the well has been abandoned in conformity with all regulations to a depth of six feet below grade. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.070 Notice—Service.
    Every operator of any oil well shall designate an agent who is a resident of the state of California, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this title may be served in person, or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten days notify the superintendent, in writing, of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the county are discontinued. Service by registered, or certified mail, or in person on the agent so designated shall constitute service for all purposes of this title. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.080 Notice—Transfer of operator.
    The operator shall notify the superintendent in writing of the sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, or exchange by said operator of wells, property and equipment within ten days after such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange. The notice shall contain the following:

    (1)    The name and address of the person to whom such well and property was sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed or exchanged;

    (2)    The name and location of the well;

    (3)    The date of sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, or exchange;

    (4)    The date when possession was relinquished by the former operator;

    (5)    A description of the properties and equipment transferred. Every person who acquires any well, property, or equipment, whether by purchase, transfer, assignment, conveyance, exchange, or otherwise shall within ten days after acquiring each well, property, or equipment notify the superintendent, in writing, of his ownership, The notice shall contain the following:

    A.    The name and address of the person from whom such well and property was acquired;

    B.     The name and location of the well;

    C.     The date of acquisition;

    D.    The date possession was acquired;

    E.     A description of the properties and equipment transferred;

    F.     The person designated for service of notice and his address. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.090 Notice—Suspension of operations.
    The operator of any well shall notify the superintendent, in writing, of any temporary suspension of operations, pending a resumption of operations or abandonment. The superintendent, for good cause, may approve temporary suspension of operations. Such notice shall be filed with the superintendent within thirty days from and after release of drilling crew. Failure of the superintendent to act within ten days shall constitute approval thereof. The operator shall notify the superintendent, in writing, upon resumption of operations giving the date thereof. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.24.100 Notice—Change in drilling contractor.
    The operator before changing drilling or redrilling contractors, shall file with the superintendent a written notice of the change, giving the name of the original contractor, and the name of the proposed contractor, and such information as was originally required to meet the design and structural requirements of this title. Such notice shall be attached to and become a part of the original oil drilling or redrilling permit. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.28 STORAGE FACILITIES
16.28.010 Storage capacity.
    The maximum tank capacity for each producing oil well is as follows:

    If oil or other liquid storage facilities are established incidental to a producing well on a drill site, such storage facilities shall not exceed a total of two thousand barrels per well. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.020 Design and construction of tanks.
    All tanks shall be constructed in conformity with the Building Code of the county of Orange, adopted by the board of supervisors as Ordinance No. 922 of the county of Orange. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.030 Foundations and supports.
    Tanks shall rest directly on the ground or on foundations, supports or pilings of concrete, masonry, steel, crushed rock or wood. Exposed piling or steel supports shall be protected by fire resistive materials to provide a fire resistance rating of not less than two hours. Stairs, platforms and walkways which extend more than three feet above the surrounding ground level shall be of incombustible construction. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.040 Spacing between tanks.
    (a)    No tank for the storage of any flammable liquid shall be located closer than three feet to any other such tank.

    (b)    For tanks above fifty thousand gallons individual capacity for the storage of any flammable liquid, except crude petroleum, the distance between such tanks shall not be less than one-half the diameter of the smaller tank.

    (c)    Tanks for the storage of crude petroleum having capacities not exceeding one hundred twenty-six thousand gallons (three thousand barrels) shall not be less than three feet apart; tanks having a capacity in excess of one hundred twenty-six thousand gallons (three thousand barrels) shall not be less than the diameter of the smaller tank apart.

    (d)    The minimum separation between a liquefied petroleum gas container and any other tanks for the storage of any flammable liquids shall be twenty feet. Suitable means shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of flammable liquids under adjacent liquefied petroleum gas containers such as by diking, diversion curbs or grading. When flammable liquid storage tanks are diked the liquefied petroleum gas containers shall be outside the diked area and at least ten feet away from the center line of the dikes. The foregoing provision shall not apply when liquefied petroleum gas containers of one hundred twenty-five gallons or less capacity are installed adjacent to Class III flammable liquid storage tanks of two hundred seventy-five gallons or less capacity. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.050 Location of tanks.
    Minimum distance between any outside above ground tank to the nearest building or line of adjoining property which may be built upon:

    (1)    Flammable liquids other than those having boil-over characteristics similar to crude petroleum:

 

 

 

 

Capacity of Tank

Class of Flammable Liquid

Minimum
Distance

0 to 275 gallons

III

0 feet

276 to 750 gallons

III

5 feet

0 to 750 gallons

I and II

10 feet

721 to 12,000 gallons

III

10 feet

751 to 12,000 gallons

I and II

15 feet

12,001 to 24,000 gallons

I, II and III

15 feet

24,001 to 30,000 gallons

I, II and III

20 feet

30,001 to 50,000 gallons

I, II and III

25 feet

 

    (2)    Crude petroleum and other liquids having boil-over characteristics similar to crude petroleum and flammable liquid tanks with capacity in excess of fifty thousand gallons:

 

STORAGE FACILITIES

CRUDE PETROLEUM AND TANKS WITH CAPACITIES

IN EXCESS OF FIFTY THOUSAND GALLONS

 

    Tanks with capacities in excess of fifty thousand gallons and all tanks for the storage of crude petroleum shall be located in accordance with the following provisions (applicable to gas-tight tanks including conservation type tanks constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards):

 

 

PRODUCT
STORED

 

TANK PROTECTION

DISTANCE FROM LINE OF ADJOINING PROPERTY WHICH MAY BE BUILT UPON SHALL NOT BE LESS THAN

Refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boil-over

Group
A
Tanks

   (1) An approved permanently attached extinguishing system or,

   (2) An approved floating roof

   Greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank, except that such distance need not exceed one hundred twenty feet.

 

 

 

 

 

Group
B
Tanks

Not equipped with either of the above

   Two times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that such distance need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet.

 

 

 

 

 

Group
C
Tanks

   (1) An approved permanently attached extinguishing system or,

   (2) An approved floating roof

   Two times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that such distance shall not be less than twenty feet and need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet.

 

 

 

 

Crude Petroleum

Group
D
Tanks

Not equipped with either of the above

   Three times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that such distance shall not be less than twenty feet and need not exceed three hundred fifty feet.

(Ord. 27, 1959)

 

 

16.28.060 Group A tanks.
    Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards and equipped either with:

    (1)    An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

    (2)    An approved floating roof, which is to be used only for the storage of refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boil-over, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank, except that such distance need not exceed one hundred twenty feet. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

*The term gas-tight tank includes so-called conservation type tanks.

 

16.28.070 Group B tanks.
    Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards but not equipped either with:

    (1)    An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

    (2)    An approved floating roof, which is to be used only for the storage of refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boil-over, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than one and one-half times the greatest dimensions of diameter or height of the tank, except that such distance need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

*The term gas-tight tank includes so-called combination type tanks.

 

16.28.080 Group C tanks.
    Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with three or equivalent standards and equipped either with:

    (1)    An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

    (2)    An approved floating roof, which is to be used for the storage of crude petroleum, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than twice the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank except that such distance shall be not less than twenty feet and need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.090 Group D tanks.
    (a)    Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards and not equipped either with:

    (1)    An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

    (2)    An approved floating roof, which is to be used for the storage of crude petroleum shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than three times the greatest dimension of diameter of height of the tank except that such distance shall not be less than twenty feet and need not exceed three hundred fifty feet.

    (b)    NOTE: The term “approved attached extinguishing system,” as used in the foregoing description, may be interpreted to apply to:

    (1)    A fixed foam or other recognized extinguishing system embodying a supply of the extinguishing medium; or

    (2)    A system employing a pipe line for conveying foam from a point outside the dike to the tank; or

    (3)    Portable overshot devices for applying foam over the rim of the tank. Where reliance is placed on a pipe line for conveying foam, the pipe line shall be so installed and attached as to be an integral part of the tank. Where reliance is placed on a portable over-shot device, the practicability of its use shall be demonstrated before approval. Approved foam generating equipment of sufficient capacity should be available on the property, by response of a municipal or other public fire department, or otherwise readily available; and there should be on hand or otherwise readily available a sufficient supply of foam-producing materials as specified in NBFU Standards for Foam Extinguishing Systems, No. 11. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

*   The term gas-tight tank includes so-called combination type tanks.

 

16.28.100 Essential buildings.
    Buildings essential to the operation of the storage facilities (building location) are regulated as follows:

    No building used for human occupancy, except buildings essential to the operation of the storage facilities shall be erected within the distances set out in the tables in this chapter from such storage tanks. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.110 Diverse ownership.
    Where tank locations of diverse ownerships have a common boundary, the superintendent may, with the written consent of the owners, waive the required distances from the common property line and substitute the space between tanks as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.120 Dikes, diversion walls and catchment basins.
    (a)    Required Tanks or groups of tanks shall be protected from the effects of flammable liquid spills originating at or encroaching upon the tank setting.

    (b)    Methods. Diversion walls or drains safely directing the flow to catchment basins, impounding basins formed by dikes around tanks or groups of tanks, or combinations thereof shall be used.

    (c)    Location. No catchment basin or diked impounding area shall be located closer than one hundred feet from the outer boundary line, or from any building intended for human occupancy, nor shall any building intended for human occupancy be erected or placed closer than one hundred feet to any catchment basin or diked impounding area.

    (d)    Capacity. The net capacity of a catchment basin, diked impounding basin, or any combination thereof shall be equal to the capacity of the largest tank, plus ten percent of the aggregate capacity of all other tanks served, in computing the required capacity of a catchment basin, diked impounding basin or combination thereof:

    (1)    The volume of the largest tank up to the height of the dike shall be considered as part of the available capacity of a diked impounding basin.

    (2)    No part of the volume of tanks other than the largest tank shall be considered as part of the available capacity.

    (3)    The capacity of a separate catchment basin may be used to reduce the required capacity of a diked impounding basin provided drainage sufficient to prevent overflow of the dike and effective control of flow are provided.

    (4)    The capacity of a single separate catchment basin may be applied to reduce the required capacity of each of the diked impounding basins draining into it.

    (e)    Construction. Dikes shall be of earth, concrete or solid masonry designed to be liquid tight, to withstand a full hydraulic head, and shall be maintained at full design capacity. Where piping passes through dikes, provision shall be made for movement without damage to the dike and to minimize leaks under emergency conditions. Earthen dikes shall be built and maintained at a minimum height of two feet. The distance between the inside toe of any dike and the shell of the tank shall be not less than five feet for tanks not more than thirty feet in diameter, and ten feet for tanks in excess of thirty feet in diameter.

    (1)    Spill dikes. Where tanks within a common diked impounding basin may cause mutual exposure from spills, spill dikes shall be provided between tanks of ten thousand barrels or greater individual capacity. Groups of tanks of less than ten thousand barrels individual capacity and not in excess of fifteen thousand barrels aggregate capacity may be enclosed within a single spill dike. The height of such spill dike shall not exceed fifty percent of the height of the main or perimeter dikes.

    (2)    Drainage. Drainage shall be provided at a consistent slope of not less than one percent away from tanks and fittings to a sump, drain box or other safe means of disposal located within the diked impounding area and at the greatest possible distance from the shell of the tank. Traps with not less than six inches of liquid seal shall be provided between the sumps, drain boxes or sewer openings within any impounding area and the sewers or drains intended for the disposal of spills. A valve, operable from outside the dike, shall be provided in the dike drain system and shall normally be kept closed.

    (3)    Disposal. Approved provisions shall be made for disposing of water and of oil retained by dikes, impounding or catchment basins. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.130 Suspension of requirements.
    In particular installations, some or all of the requirements of Sections 16.28.040 through 16.28.100 and 16.28.120 governing storage facilities may be suspended, in whole or in part, or less restrictive requirements may be imposed pending further order of the superintendent, where such requirements are rendered unnecessary or unreasonable by reason of the then existing special features such as topography, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings on adjoining property, the height and character of construction of such buildings, capacity and construction of the proposed tanks and the character of liquids to be stored, the degree of private fire protection to be provided and the facilities of the fire department to cope with flammable liquid fire. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.140 Skim ponds.
    Any open, accessible, surface or subsurface installation used for the disposal of permitted waste liquids shall be fenced in accordance with the preceding fencing provision. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.28.150 Loading by truck from production tank sites.
    Location. Tank vehicle loading racks, loading platforms or movable loading spouts or arms dispensing flammable liquids shall be separated from tanks, warehouses, other buildings, public streets and nearest line of property that may be built upon by a clear distance of not less than twenty-five feet, measured from the nearest position of any fill stem. Buildings for pumps or for shelter of loading personnel may be part of the loading rack or platform. No person shall lead or unload, or permit the loading or unloading of a tank vehicle unless such vehicle is located outside of any public street right of way.

    Loading and unloading operations. During the loading or unloading of a tank vehicle, a qualified person shall be at the loading or unloading controls. Provision shall be made for the safe disposal of the oils released by overflow and from loading spouts or lines. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.32 HIGH PRESSURE PIPE SYSTEMS
16.32.010 County specifications.
    All piping subjected to pressures in excess of 150 P.S.I. shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the Building Code of the county of Orange, adopted by the board of supervisors as Ordinance No. 922. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.36 FIRE PREVENTION
16.36.010 Electrical equipment.
    All electrical equipment used, installed or maintained within fifty feet of a drilling well and within twenty-five feet of a producing well shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the regulations of the California Electrical Safety Orders, Article 22, Hazardous Locations, Class I, Division 2, heretofore adopted by the board of supervisors as Ordinance No. 786 of the county of Orange. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.36.020 Internal combustion equipment and open flames.
    No internal combustion engine, storage tanks, boiler, fired equipment or open flames except welding supervised by the production foreman, drilling foreman, drilling engineer, drilling supervisors, or safety supervisors shall be located closer than twenty-five feet to a producing well nor closer than one hundred feet to a drilling well. Internal combustion engines (and their fuel tanks) used in the drilling, production and servicing of oil wells are exempt from the above provisions. During drilling operations on a drill site of two acres or less in area where two or more wells are drilled and drilling and production equipment are located on such sites, the provisions in this subsection relating to distances of storage tanks may be altered at the discretion of the superintendent after consideration of the special features such as topographical conditions; nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings on adjoining property and height and character of construction of such buildings; capacity and construction of proposed tanks and character of liquids to be stored; degree of private fire protection to be provided, and facilities of the fire department to cope with flammable liquid fires. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.36.030 Muffling exhaust.
    The engines used in connection with the drilling of any oil well or in any production equipment of any oil well shall be equipped with an exhaust muffler to prevent excessive or unusual noise. Means shall be provided on all engines used during drilling operations to prevent the escape of flames, sparks, ignited carbon and soot. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.36.040 Flammable waste gases and vapors.
    Flammable waste gases or vapors escaping from a production drill site shall be burned or controlled to prevent hazardous concentrations reaching sources of ignition or otherwise endangering the area.

    (1)    Flares. Approved means of ignition shall be provided whenever hydrocarbon gases are released to the air through flares.

    (2)    Venting. Gases or vapors not burned may be discharged to the atmosphere at not less than twenty feet vertically above grade and not less than twenty-five feet horizontally from any source of ignition and at locations that do not create a hazard to the general area. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.36.050 Waste control of drill site.
    (a)    No person shall permit or cause to be permitted the discharge of any liquid containing crude petroleum or its products into or upon any street, public highway, drainage canal or ditch, storm drain or flood control channel.

    (b)    No person shall permit or cause to be permitted any oil, waste oil, refuse or waste material to be on the surface of the ground, under, around or near any oil well, pump, boiler, oil storage tank or building except within an oil sump, tank, catchment basin or skimming pond.

    (c)    All land within twenty-five feet of any oil well, flammable liquid tank or other appurtenance to any such well shall be at all times kept free and clear of dry weeds, grass, rubbish or other combustible debris. When this distance is not sufficient to provide reasonable fire safety, a greater distance may be required which shall not exceed the height of the derrick or greatest dimension of the tank. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.36.060 Smoking.
    No person shall smoke or cause, permit or allow another person to smoke within fifty feet of any well, tank location, or any area contaminated by oil or waste gas. (Ord. 27, 1959)

 

16.36.070 Fire control equipment.
    A minimum of two fire extinguishers shall be maintained at all oil well locations where drilling, servicing or repair work is being conducted. Each such extinguisher shall have a minimum classification of 20B as set forth in N.B.F.U. No. 10, N.F.P.A. No. 10, “First Aid Fire Appliances,” as adopted by the board of supervisors, county of Orange, as Ordinance No. 877 of the county of Orange. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.40 BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
16.40.010 Appeal—Authority—Procedure.
    The board of supervisors shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the superintendent in the administration or enforcement of any of the provisions of this title.

    (b)    An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate in the office of the superintendent. An appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination by the superintendent must set forth specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by his action or where the decision is not supported by the evidence in the matter.

    (c)    Any appeal not filed within ten days from and after the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination complained of shall be dismissed by the board of supervisors.

    (d)    Within five days from and after the filing of the appeal, the superintendent shall transmit to the board of supervisors all papers involved in the proceedings and two copies of the appeal. In addition, he may make and transmit to the board of supervisors such supplementary report as he may deem necessary to present clearly the facts and circumstances of the case.

    (e)    Upon receipt of the record, the board of supervisors shall set the matter for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and to the superintendent and any other party at interest who has requested in writing to be so notified and no other notice need be given.

    (f)    Upon the date set for the hearing, the board of supervisors shall hear the appeal, unless for cause the board of supervisors shall on that date continue the matter. No notice of continuance need be given if the order therefor be announced at the time for which the hearing was set.

    (g)    Upon the hearing of such appeals, the board of supervisors may affirm, change or modify the ruling, decision or determination appealed from or in lieu thereof may make such other or additional determination as it deems proper in the premises subject to the same limitations as are placed upon the superintendent by this ordinance and by other provisions of law. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Chapter 16.44 ENFORCEMENT
16.44.010 Superintendent’s duty.
    It shall be the duty of the superintendent to enforce the provisions of this title. If at any time the superintendent finds any operator is violating any of the provisions of this title, he may order immediate compliance. If immediate compliance is not obtained, the superintendent shall order immediate cessation of operations. The operator shall immediately comply with the order of the superintendent to cease and shall not resume any operations until written approval by the superintendent is had. (Ord. 27, 1959)

Title 17 FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 17.02 FIRE CODE ADOPTED
Chapter 17.04 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17.06 EMERGENCY RESPONSE SYSTEMS AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Chapter 17.08 FEES
Chapter 17.10 FALSE ALARMS
Chapter 17.12 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Chapter 17.14 FIREWORKS
Chapter 17.16 FLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES
Chapter 17.18 APPENDIX B
Chapter 17.20 PARAMEDIC FEES

Chapter 17.02 FIRE CODE ADOPTED
17.02.020 California Fire Code adopted with modifications.
    The California Fire Code, 2019 Edition, is hereby adopted with modifications. The adoption of the California Fire Code includes all of the inclusions and exclusions set forth in each chapter’s matrix provided that the following provisions excluded are hereby included: Chapter 1, Division 2 except that Section 109 is excluded; and Sections 305, 307, 308, 503, 510.2 are included. The following provisions are hereby excluded: Chapter 3, Sections 308.1.4, 311.5 through 311.5.5, 318, and 319; Chapter 58, Section 5809. Other modifications are made as hereinafter set forth in this Title of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code and appropriate findings have been made and filed where required. The California Fire Code, which is based on the International Fire Code, is adopted as noted above and a copy is on file in the office of the city clerk. This document shall be known and referred to hereafter as the “Fire Code” for the city of Fountain Valley. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.02.040 Penalties.
    Persons who violate a provision of Title 17 or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

17.02.060 Appeals.
    Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

Notwithstanding Section 109.1, the Board of Appeals shall be the city manager. If he or she determines an outside board is needed, he or she shall designate an outside hearing officer to hear the appeal.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.04 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
17.04.020 Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar devices.
    Section 307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies is hereby added to Chapter 3 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R occupancies shall comply with this section.

 

Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.04.040 Sky lanterns prohibited.
    Section 308.1.6.3 is hereby revised as follows:

 

308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns. A person shall not ignite, release, or cause to be released a sky lantern.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.06 EMERGENCY RESPONSE SYSTEMS AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
17.06.020 Inventory statement for hazardous materials.
    Section 407.5 is amended to read as follows:

 

407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall be submitted in accordance with Section 5001.5.2.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.06.040 Radio coverage system in new buildings.
    Section 510.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings.

(a)        All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems utilized by the jurisdiction, measured at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System shall comply with the Orange County Sheriff’s Department, Communications and Technology Division guidelines and specifications and, where the functionality or performance requirements in the California Fire Code are more stringent, this code.

(b)        Subsection (a) shall not apply when it is determined by the fire code official that a radio coverage system is not needed for a building or structure, including but not limited to the following circumstances:

1.     Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and Fire Official for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion.

2.     Elevators.

3.     Structures that meet all of the following:

i.      Three stories or less;

ii.     Do not have subterranean storage or parking; and

iii.    Do not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story.

4.     Structures that meet all of the following:

i.      Residential structures four stories or less;

ii.     Constructed of wood;

ii.     Do not have subterranean storage or parking; and

iv.    Are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure.

(c)        If a structure is three stories or less, 50,000 square feet or smaller on any single story, and includes subterranean storage or parking, then subsection (a) shall apply only to the subterranean areas.

(d)        In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of the facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency radio coverage system.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.06.060 Storage of extremely hazardous substances.
    Section 5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances is hereby added to Chapter 50 of the California Fire Code as follows:

 

5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et al) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.08 FEES
17.08.020 Work commencing before permit issuance.
    Any person who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty equal to one hundred percent of the required permit fee. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.08.040 Refunds.
    Refunds shall be issued at the permitees request at a rate of sixty percent of the original permit fee if no inspections took place on the permit. Plan review fees in the amount of forty percent will be retained by the city. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.10 FALSE ALARMS
17.10.020 False alarms.
    False alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner.

    (a)    The owner and any person in possession of any building shall be assessed a fee to be set by resolution whenever the fire department is required to respond to more than two false alarms during a one-year period consisting of January 1 – December 31 of any given year. Continued false alarms generated from the same location within the same one-year period shall also be assessed a fee set by resolution for each successive false alarm.

    (b)    Notwithstanding subsection (a), whenever the fire department is required to respond to a false alarm while the system is being repaired or otherwise modified, and the person performing the work has failed to notify the fire department in advance that such work was being done, the persons performing the work shall also be assessed a fee set by resolution for each such occurrence.

    (c)    For purposes of this section, “false alarm” shall mean the activation of any local or central station alarm because of malfunction, including, but not limited to, mechanical or electrical defects, water surges, or because of improper installation, operation testing or maintenance of such system. Whenever the fire department responds to the location of a false alarm and finds that there is no evidence of a fire or of external causes beyond the control of the owner or person in possession that may have caused the alarm, the activation shall be presumed to be a false alarm. Not included as a false alarm will be those activations caused by earthquakes or other phenomena beyond the control of the owner or person in possession.

    (d)    Whenever an owner, person in possession or alarm system worker is notified of such assessment and believes that he or she should be excused from paying because any occurrences did not constitute a false alarm, as defined above, he or she shall have the right to appeal said assessment to the fire chief within ten calendar days of his receipt of the notice of assessment. The fire chief is authorized to excuse the assessment if he or she determines that a false alarm, as defined, did not occur.

    (e)    Any person, firm or corporation who receives notification of penalties due and fails to pay such penalties within the specified amount of time, no less than thirty days, a ten percent per month late fee will be assessed until penalties have been paid. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.12 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
17.12.020 Sprinkler systems required.
    California Fire Code Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows:

 

903.2 Where Required. Automatic Fire Sprinklers shall be provided for the following:

(a)    Notwithstanding any provision in Section 903.2 of the CFC and Section 903.2 of the CBC, approved automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with N.F.P.A., Standard 13, when total square footage equals 3,500 square feet or more throughout all buildings as set forth.

(b)    Any existing building shall retrofit with automatic fire sprinklers when a structure exceeds 3,500 square feet and additions or tenant improvements are made which exceed thirty (30) percent of the original building square footage.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.14 FIREWORKS
17.14.020 Fireworks prohibited.
    The storage, sale, offer for sale or handling of fireworks is prohibited. The provisions of this section do not apply to fireworks displays conducted in accordance with the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter and Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6 – Fireworks. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.16 FLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES
17.16.020 On demand mobile fueling.
    Section 5707 of Chapter 57 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 5707 On Demand Fueling Operations:

 

    Section 5701.1.1 On Demand Mobile fueling is added as follows:

 

Section 5701.1.1 Mobile fueling. On demand mobile fueling of Class I, II, and III liquids into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.16.040 Mobile fueling prohibition.
    Section 5801.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 5801.1 Scope. Mobile fueling of gaseous and liquid hydrogen, compressed natural gas (CNG), and liquefied natural gas (LNG) into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.18 APPENDIX B
17.18.020 Appendix B105.1 amended.
    The minimum fire flow and flow duration for building other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1

   

Exceptions:

1.     A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2. the resulting fire flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1.

(Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.20 PARAMEDIC FEES
17.20.020 Paramedic fees.
    (a)    Paramedic assessment fees are hereby established to be charged in connection with emergency medical services provided by the Fountain Valley fire department. The amount of such fees shall be set by resolution of the city council on the basis of voluntary subscription or actual use of the service.

    (b)    There shall be two types of user fees as follows:

    (1)    The “voluntary subscription fee” shall be offered to residents of the city of Fountain Valley on a voluntary basis for the purpose of assuring subscribers they will not incur a higher direct fee should they require an emergency medical assessment. The voluntary subscription fee covers unlimited initial responses and assessments for medical emergencies to a residence, its inhabitants and guests. The voluntary subscription fee does not cover separate advanced life support transport or service fees for services not rendered by the city of Fountain Valley.

    (2)    The “fee for services” shall be a charge designed to recover costs associated with the delivery of emergency medical assessment to persons that do not participate in the voluntary subscription fee system. Such fee for services shall be based on the actual cost of providing a paramedic assessment of the condition of the patient and covers services by paramedics and/or engine companies of the Fountain Valley fire department, when a transport of the patient occurs. Different fees may be charged residents and nonresidents that reflect the support provided to the fire department provided by general taxes, including property taxes.

    (c)    Any person requesting or benefitting from the services for which a fee for services is charged shall be jointly and severally civilly liable and indebted to the city of Fountain Valley for such fee for service. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.20.040 Advanced life support fees.
    In addition to the paramedic assessment fee, in cases in which a paramedic must accompany the patient to the hospital in an ambulance or other emergency vehicle, an advanced life support fee shall also be charged. The fee for such services shall cover the paramedic time and materials spent providing medical accompaniment to the hospital and providing said accompaniment until the emergency room or other qualified staff of the hospital relieve the paramedic(s) of that responsibility. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.20.060 Fees to be established by resolution.
    The city council shall by resolution establish all paramedic assessment fees and advanced life support fees. Said fees shall be billed and collected by the city of Fountain Valley for voluntary subscription or fee for services charges for residents and nonresidents. Advanced life support fees shall also be established by resolution. Such fees shall be established based on an analysis of the estimated reasonable cost of providing those services. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

 

17.20.080 Collection of fees.
    It shall be the duty of the fire department in coordination with the finance department to collect paramedic assessment fees and advanced life support fees. By contract, some or all of these fees may be collected by outside agencies, including, but not limited to, the city’s ambulance provider. (Ord. 1553 § 2, 2019)

Title 18 BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 18.02 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Chapter 18.04 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 18.06 GRADING
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 18.08 RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS
Chapter 18.12 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 18.16 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 18.20 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 18.22 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
Chapter 18.24 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 18.26 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 18.27 SOLAR PERMITTING PROCESS
Chapter 18.28 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 18.30 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Chapter 18.32 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Chapter 18.33 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Chapter 18.34 PAVING PERMITS
Chapter 18.36 STRONG MOTION INSTRUMENTATION PROGRAM
Chapter 18.37 POST-DISASTER RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION

Chapter 18.02 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
18.02.010 Administrative provisions.
    The provisions of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code 2019 Edition and the 2019 California Administrative Code are hereby adopted as the administrative provisions for all of the state building standards adopted in this Title 18 and shall be the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes set forth in Title 18. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.02.020 Building official.
    The building official is appointed by the city manager, or by the city council, if an independent contractor. The building official and his/her authorized representatives that enforce the technical codes set forth in this title may be employees of the city or an independent contractor. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.02.030 Penalties.
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of the Building Codes as set forth in this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of the Building Codes occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.04 BUILDING CODE
18.04.010 California Building Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, incorporating the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendices I and J published by the International Code Council, with the amendments set forth in this chapter is hereby adopted. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.020 Work exempt from permit.
    Section 105.2 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended in the following categories of work that are exempt from building permit:

 

1.     One story detached accessory structures used as storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 120 square feet and the ceiling height is not over 7 feet.

2.     Fences not over six feet high and block walls not over three feet high.

4.     Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.

9.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R occupancy that are less than 18 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.025 Section 105.8 added.
    Section 105.8 Reconstruction is added to Chapter 1 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

 

105.8. Reconstruction. If the value of the reconstruction (or renovation) of a building is equal to or exceeds 75 percent of the existing habitable square footage of the building, the entire building shall comply with the code provisions for new construction. The value of the reconstruction (or renovation) for a property shall include the value of all construction stemming from construction-related permits issued within the last two years.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.030 Work commencing before permit issuance.
    Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance is amended to read:

 

Any person who commences work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty equal to double the permit fees. In addition, when required by the Building Official, a special investigation shall be performed at a cost established by separate resolution.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.040 Refunds.
    Section 109.6 Refund is deleted and amended to read:

 

The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

 

The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the permit fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

 

The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the plan review fee when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before the plan is reviewed.

 

The Building Official Shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.045 Section 202 Definitions amended.
    Section 202 Definitions of the California Building Code is amended by adding and/or amending the following definitions:

 

a)     ENCLOSED STRUCTURE is a structure with a roof and two or more sides.

b)     UNENCLOSED STRUCTURES includes structures with a roof and no more than one side and structures having no roof or other covering. Unenclosed structures include patio covers, decks, and balconies.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.050 Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
    California Building Code Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows:

 

903.2 Where Required. Automatic Fire Sprinklers shall be provided for the following:

(a)    Notwithstanding any provision in Section 903.2 of the CFC and Section 903.2 of the CBC, approved automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with N.F.P.A., Standard 13, when total square footage equals 3,500 square feet or more throughout all buildings as set forth.

(b)    Any existing building shall retrofit with automatic fire sprinklers when a structure exceeds 3,500 square feet and additions/tenant improvements are made which exceed thirty (30) percent of the original building square footage.

 

Exception: The Fire Official may approve alternative methods and materials when an equivalent or greater level of fire protection is achieved.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.060 Minimum roof covering.
    (a) Table 1505.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

TABLE 1505.1a

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

 

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.   Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A.

 

    (b) Section 1505.1.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas.

 

a)     The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

b)     Section 1505.5 is amended, by the deletion of the entire section.

c)     Section 1505.7 is amended, by the deletion of the entire section.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.070 Preliminary soils reports.
    As required by Chapter 18 California Building Code Section 1803.1.1, California Building Code Section 1803.1.1.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

The Building Official may require a geologic or geotechnical report or both, in accordance with the 2019 California Building Code; a geologic report shall be prepared by a Certified Engineering Geologist licensed by the State of California. A geotechnical report shall be prepared by a registered Civil Engineer versed in soils engineering and qualified to perform this work. When both a geotechnical and geologic report are required, the two reports shall be coordinated before submission to the Building Official. The Building Official, at his/her discretion shall obtain any technical support necessary to approve the report. Submitted reports shall contain a finding regarding the safety of the site from any variety of geologic hazard and a finding regarding the effect the proposed improvements, grading and/or construction and use of the site will have on the stability of the site and/or property outside the site. Any recommendation or action presented in the approved reports along with any conditions of approval shall be incorporated into the construction of site improvements. A fee shall be collected for the cost of review of the reports and any required addendums.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.080 Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices.
    CBC Sections 202, Barrier is added to the CBC and Swimming Pools is amended to read as follows:

 

Barrier. Barrier is a fence, wall, building wall, or any combination of these that completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.

 

Swimming Pools. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading pools.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.090 Residential swimming pools.
    Sections 3109.3 is added to the CBC to read as follows:

 

3109.3 Residential swimming pools. Residential swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a barrier complying with Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.3.3.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.04.095 Barrier height and clearances.
    Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.3.3 are added to read as follows:

 

3109.3.1 Barrier Height and Clearances. The top of the barrier must be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier must be two inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier must be four inches.

 

3109.3.1.1 Openings. Openings in the barrier must not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter sphere.

 

3109.3.1.2 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barrier surfaces which do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

 

3109.3.1.3 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing with the cutouts shall not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width.

 

3109.3.1.4 Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members must not be greater than 4 inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing must not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width.

 

3109.3.1.5 Chain link dimensions. Mesh size for chain link fences must not be greater than 1 ¾ inches in width, unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or bottom that reduce the openings to not more than 1 ¾ in width.

 

3109.3.1.6 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members shall not be greater than 1 ¾ inches.

 

3109.3.1.7 Gates. Access gates must comply with the requirements of Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.3.1.6 and must be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates must open outward away from the pool and must be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or gates other than pedestrian access gates must have a self-latching device and must be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and must remain locked at all times when not in use. Release mechanisms must comply with Sections 1010.1.9 and 1109.13. Where release mechanisms of the self-latching device are located less than 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool, the release mechanism must be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate and the gate barrier may have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism.

 

3109.3.1.8 Dwelling wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, two safety devices must be provided in accordance with Section 115922 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

3109.3.1.9 Pool structure as barrier. Where an above-ground pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of Sections 3109.3.1.1 through 3109.3.1.8. Where the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch-diameter sphere.

 

3109.3.2 Indoor swimming pools. Wall surrounding indoor swimming pools shall not be required to comply with Section 3109.3.1.8. through 3109.3.3

 

3109.3.3 Prohibited Locations. Barriers shall be located as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. There shall be a clear zone of not less than 36″ between the exterior of the enclosure and any permanent structures or equipment such as pumps, filters and heaters that can be used to climb the enclosure.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.06 GRADING
18.06.010 Purpose.
    This chapter imposes grading requirements in accordance with the California Construction Codes and also addresses the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) in enacting these regulations to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter “NPDES”) permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. This code sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and establishes administrative requirements for issuance of permits and approval of plans and inspection of grading construction in accordance with the requirements for grading and excavation as contained in the California Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by city ordinance as well as water quality requirements relevant to activities subject to this chapter. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.020 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall apply in interpreting this chapter:

    “Approval” means a written engineering or geological opinion by the responsible engineer, geologist of record or responsible principal of the engineering company concerning the progress and completion of the work unless it specifically refers to the building official.

    “Approved Plans” means the current grading plans, which bear the stamp of approval of the building official.

    “As-graded” means the extent of surface conditions on completion of rough or precise grading.

    “Bedrock” means in-place solid rock.

    “Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into earth materials on which fill is to be placed.

    “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

    “Building official” means, for purposes of this chapter only, or any reference to building official in the California Building Code or state equivalent, shall mean the city of Fountain Valley building official.

    “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the state of California to practice in the field of civil engineering.

    “Civil engineering” means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works.

    “Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

    “Earth Material” means any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination thereof.

    “Engineering geologist” means a geologist certified in the state of California to practice engineering geology.

    “Engineering geology” means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

    “Erosion” means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice.

    “Erosion control system” means a combination of desilting facilities, and erosion protection, including effective planting, to protect adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities, and receiving waters from an abnormal deposition of sediment or dust.

    “Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.

    “Existing grade” means the ground surface prior to grading.

    “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

    “Finished grade” means the final grade of the site, which conforms to the approved precise grading plan.

    “Geotechnical engineer.” See “Soils engineer.”

    “Grade” means the vertical location of the ground surface.

    “Grading” means any excavating or filling or combination thereof and movement or redistribution of material to achieve the desired rough grade or finished grade.

    “Grading contractor” means a contractor licensed and regulated by the state of California who specializes in grading work or is otherwise licensed to do grading work.

    “Grading permit” means an official document or certificate issued by the building official authorizing grading activity as specified by approved plans and specifications.

    “Key” means a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.

    “Natural grade” means the ground surface unaltered by artificial means.

    “Owner” means any person, agency, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a given real property.

    “Permanent erosion control devices” means improvements, which remain throughout the life of the development, include: terrace drains, slope landscaping, storm drains, etc.

    “Precise grading permit” means a permit that is issued on the basis of approved precise grading plans, which shows the precise structure location, finish elevations, and related on-site improvements.

    “Preliminary grading permit” means a permit that is issued on the basis of approved rough grading plans which need not show a structure location but must show interim building pad drainage to the degree required by the building official.

    “Professional inspection” means the inspection required by this code to be performed by the civil engineer soils engineer or engineering geologist. Such inspections include that performed by persons supervised by such engineers or geologists and shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work.

    “Rough grade” means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved rough grading plan.

    “Semi-permanent erosion control devices” means devices that are used primarily during construction, including earthen berms, concrete spillways, desilting basins, etc.

    “Site” means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.

    “Slope” means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

    “Soil” means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock.

    “Soil Engineer” means a civil engineer duly registered in the state of California whose field of expertise is soil mechanics.

    “Soils engineer (geotechnical engineer)” means an engineer duly registered in the state of California experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering (geotechnical engineering).

    “Soils engineering (geotechnical engineering)” means the application of the principals of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection or testing of the construction thereof.

    “Stormwater permits” means any permits issued by a local, state, or federal regulatory agency regulating stormwater flow over and from any project subject to this chapter including but not limited to NPDES permits and state general permits.

    “Temporary erosion control devices” means devices that are removable, including: sandbags, gravel bags, plastic sheeting, silt fencing, straw bales, and similar items.

    “Terrace” means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

    “Water quality requirements” means the requirements relevant to activities that are subject to this chapter found in the water quality ordinance, the DAMP, and guidance documents included in the DAMP, as well as requirements relevant to the activities that are subject to this chapter found in stormwater permits. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.030 Standards.
    The city does hereby adopt those standards set forth in Appendix Chapter J of the 2019 California Building Code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.040 Application.
    To obtain a grading permit, the applicant must first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the building official. The permit application shall be accompanied by information required by the building official. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a plan prepared by a licensed engineer in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and the name of the person who prepared the plan. The plan shall include the following information:

    (a)    General vicinity of the proposed site;

    (b)    Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill; and

    (c)    Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed and, the location of any buildings or structures within fifteen feet (four thousand five hundred seventy-two mm) of the proposed grading.

    Prior to the approval of any building or grading plans and specifications, the building official, or authorized representative, may inspect the site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions. Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty days following the date of application shall expire and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action for an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.050 Denial of permit.
    (a)    The building official shall not issue a permit where the work as proposed by the applicant will be in violation of this chapter or is likely to constitute a hazard to property or result in the deposit of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course. If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the building official that the hazard can be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, drainage devices or by other means, the building official may issue the permit with the condition that such work be performed.

    (b)    If, in the opinion of the building official, the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological or flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life or property, the grading permit and the building permits for habitable structures shall be denied.

    (c)    The building official may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to mitigate anticipated adverse environmental effects of proposed grading projects and may, under circumstances where the significant adverse environmental effects of a proposed project cannot be mitigated, deny the issuance of a grading permit.

    (d)    The building official may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to make them consistent with the general plan, any specific plan zoning code water quality requirements, or other rules regulations or conditions applicable to the project. The grading permit may be denied if the proposed project cannot be designed in accordance with these rules, regulations or conditions. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.060 Engineered grading requirements.
    Application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans and specifications when required by the building official. Specifications shall contain information conveying construction and material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale in ACAD last edition format upon twenty-four by thirty-six inch substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner, and the person by whom they were prepared. The plans shall include the following information:

    (a)    General vicinity of the proposed site;

    (b)    Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage;

    (c)    Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction;

    (d)    Detailed plans and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as part of, the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains;

    (e)    Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within fifteen feet (four thousand five hundred seventy-two mm) of the property, or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations;

    (f)    Recommendations included in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the building official, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology reports, which are applicable to grading, may be included by reference; and

    (g)    The dates of the soils, engineering, and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the firms or individuals who prepared the reports. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.070 Soils engineering report.
    The soils engineering report required by Section 18.06.130 of this chapter shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions, and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress fills, when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by soils engineering factors, including the stability of slopes. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.080 Engineering geology reports.
    The engineering geology report required by Section 18.06.130 of this chapter shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and opinion on the adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading, as affected by geologic factors. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.090 Liquefaction study.
    The building official may require a geotechnical investigation when, during the course of an investigation, any of the following conditions are discovered, the report shall address the potential for liquefaction:

    (a)    Shallow ground water, fifty feet (fifteen thousand two hundred forty mm) or less;

    (b)    Unconsolidated sandy alluvium;

    (c)    Seismic Zones D and E; or

    (d)    The property is located within the city’s seismic hazard overlay zone. (Section 21.14.050 of this code). (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.100 Erosion control and water quality requirements systems.
    The city adopts the erosion control provisions imposed by the NPDES permit, including the following:

    (a)    The project site shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion in accordance with this chapter. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted upon approval by the building official and/or director of public works.

    (b)    Where necessary, temporary, and/or permanent erosion control devices such as desilting basins, check dams, riprap, or other devices, as approved by the building official and/or director of public works, shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety.

    (c)    Paved streets, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition free of loose soil, construction debris, and trash. Street sweeping using a vacuum sweeper or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to prevent storm flows from carrying sediment and debris outside the project boundaries.

    (d)    Unless otherwise approved by the building official and/or director of public works, the owner shall be required to retain a civil engineer who will be responsible for the design of all erosion control improvements and initial approval of the installation of permanent and semi-permanent erosion control devices during each rainy season until the work authorized by the permit is given final approval. The owner shall retain the civil engineer to periodically review the field condition and modify, as needed, the design of the permanent and semi-permanent erosion control devices during the rainy season. Installation and maintenance of all erosion control devices shall be the responsibility of the owner.

    (e)    Desilting facilities shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded site where necessary.

    (f)    Desilting basins constructed of compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative compaction of ninety percent of maximum density. A soil engineering report, prepared by the soil engineer, which includes the type of field-testing performed, location, and results of testing shall be submitted to the building official and/or director of public works for approval upon completion of the desilting basins.

    (g)    Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times. Necessary materials shall be available on-site and stockpiled at convenient locations to facilitate rapid construction of temporary devices when rain is imminent.

    (h)    Erosion protection shall consist of effective planting of all slopes in excess of five feet high unless otherwise approved by the building official and/or director of public works. Protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable which may be prior to rough grade approval. Effective planting shall be installed, fully germinated, and effectively cover the required slopes prior to final approval unless otherwise approved by the building official and/or director of public works.

    (i)     The erosion-control provisions shall take into account drainage patterns during the current and future phases of grading.

    (j)     All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when the five-day rain probability forecast exceeds forty percent.

    (k)    Graded areas around the tract perimeter must drain away from the face of slopes at the conclusion of each working day.

    (l)     Any violation of an applicable federal or state-issued stormwater permit, or failure to conform to the city’s water quality ordinance, including but not limited to the stormwater regulations set forth in Chapter 14.40 of this code, or failure to comply with stormwater related provisions of a grading permit or of a grading plan prepared to secure such a permit, is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.110 Erosion control and water quality requirement system maintenance.
    (a)    After each rainstorm, silt and debris shall be removed from check berms and desilting basins and the basins pumped dry.

    (b)    After each rainstorm, the performance of the erosion control system shall be evaluated, revised, and repaired as necessary.

    (c)    Devices shall not be moved or modified without the approval of the building official and/or director of public works.

    (d)    The contractor shall be responsible and shall take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass onto areas where impounded water creates a hazardous condition.

    (e)    The contractor, permittee, or project owner shall be responsible for continual maintenance of the devices. In the event of failure or refusal by the contractor, permittee, or project owner to properly maintain the devices, the building official may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property and environmental resources. The cost shall be charged to the owner and shall include an initial mobilization cost plus the cost of doing the work, including salaries, equipment, and materials.

    (f)    In the event the building official must cause emergency maintenance work to be done, he/she may revoke the grading permit in writing. The permit shall not be renewed until an erosion control system and/or other systems necessary to comply with water quality requirements approved by the director are installed.

    (g)    If any grading subject to Section 18.06.040 of this chapter has commenced on private property without a valid grading permit, the property owner may be required to prepare and implement an erosion control plan which has been approved by the building official. In the event of failure by the property owner to install an approved erosion control system and/or other systems necessary to comply with the city’s water requirements, the building official may cause emergency work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property. The procedures of Section 18.06.120 of this chapter shall apply for emergency erosion control work and emergency work necessary to protect environmental resources. The cost shall be charged to the owner. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.120 Inspections—Responsibilities.
    (a)    Grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspections by the building official. Professional inspection of grading operations shall be provided by the professional listed hereafter.

    (b)    It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to be knowledgeable of the conditions and/or restrictions of the grading permit as outlined in this code and as contained on the approved grading plans. The permittee shall also maintain in an accessible location on the site, a copy of the approved grading plan.

    (c)    All permits, waivers, or exemptions issued hereunder shall be deemed to include the provisions that the permittee, his/her agents, contractors, and employees shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in accordance with any applicable water quality requirements prepared and maintained pursuant to federal, state, or city regulation, and in compliance with all requirements of the permit and this chapter. Failure to carry out the work in accordance with approved plans and specifications, the applicable water quality requirements, and in compliance with all requirements of the permit and this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter.

    (d)    The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and written approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. The engineering geologist shall report his/her finding to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis.

    (e)    The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning this preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, and design of buttress fills, subdrain installation, and incorporation of data supplied by the engineering geologist. The soils engineer shall also provide professional inspection within such engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall include observation during grading and testing for required compaction. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. Reapproved recommendations relating to conditions, differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be submitted to the permittee, the building official, and the civil engineer.

    (f)    It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer, architect, or other qualified individual who prepares the grading plan approved by the building official or the building official’s designee to incorporate all recommendations from the soils engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He/she shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within his/her area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line grade and drainage of the development area. The project civil engineer and/or general contractor shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the project professional, grading contractor and the director. The civil engineer or other qualified person who prepares and signs the grading plan shall control plans and the submission of as-graded grading plans when required by the building official upon completion of the work.

    (g)    The permittee shall notify the building official prior to any clearing, brushing, or grubbing and when the grading operations are ready for inspection.

    (h)    If the building official finds that the soil or other conditions are not as stated in the approved plans and soil or geology reports, he/she may, using reasonable judgment, refuse to allow further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the conditions.

    (i)     No person shall conduct any grading, clearing, brushing, or grubbing on natural or existing grade that is preparatory to grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the city. Exemptions to this requirement are as provided in this chapter or as otherwise determined by the building official. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.130 Final reports.
    Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto are required for engineered grading or when professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable.

    (a)    An as-built grading plan prepared by the civil engineer showing original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and of the outlets of subsurface drains. As-constructed locations elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the soils engineer. Civil engineers shall state that to the best of their knowledge the work within their area of responsibility was done in substantial conformance with the final approved grading plan.

    (b)    A report prepared by the soils engineer retained to provide such services, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering investigation report. Soils engineers shall submit a statement that to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report and applicable provisions of this chapter.

    (c)    A report prepared by the engineering geologist retained to provide such services including a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. Engineering geologists shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering geologist report and applicable provisions of this chapter.

    (d)    The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the building official a statement of conformance to said as-built plan and specifications. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.140 Notification of completion.
    The permittee shall notify the building official when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.150 Hazards.
    Whenever the building official determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the requirements of this code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.160 Fees.
    The city council shall establish, by resolution, fees for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.170 Nuisance.
    Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge shall constitute a threat to the public health safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. At the request of the director of public works, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.06.180 Violations.
    Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions, and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, a notice of noncompliance, an administrative compliance order, a cease-and-desist order, or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.08 RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


18.08.010 Permit—Required.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move or cause to be moved any building or structure or any section of any building or structure into the city of Fountain Valley for permanent establishment in the city or from one location to another in the city, without first obtaining a relocation permit from the building and planning department of the city. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.020 Permit—Building inspection required.
    All applications for relocation permits shall first be filed with the planning and building department for initial inspection of the building to be moved. The planning and building department shall complete their inspection within a reasonable time after filing. The building and safety director or his or her authorized representative, shall then forward his or her report to the planning commission with his or her correction list, improvement bond estimate and recommendations as the planning and building department is presently required to do under existing ordinances. Inspection fees required by the building code and/or city council shall be required. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.030 Permit—Application contents.
    All applicants desirous of relocating a building or structure within the city after initial inspection by the planning and building department shall, then make an application to the planning commission of the city, which application shall contain the following:

    (a)    Name of owner;

    (b)    Complete description of the building or structure to be moved, designating its type, construction material, age, size, and any other pertinent information that may be required by the city engineer, planning department, or planning and building department;

    (c)    A description of the route over, along, across, and upon which such building or structure, section, or portion thereof, is to be moved within the city and the time within which the work of moving will be commenced and completed;

    (d)    A complete description of any proposed addition, alteration, or repair or improvement to be made to said building or structure either before or after it is moved and a statement of the approximate commencement and completion of such proposed addition, alteration, repair or improvement;

    (e)    Four eight and one-half inch by eleven inch photographs, showing front, rear, left, and right side elevations;

    (f)    A statement supported by relevant evidence indicating that all necessary authorizations and permits have been obtained from the operator of any public utility which might be affected by such moving operations;

    (g)    The proposed use to which such relocated building and structure will be put;

    (h)    A termite inspection report by a reliable termite exterminator company, licensed by the state of California; and

    (i)     The name of the mover. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

18.08.040 Hearing—Application fee.
    All such relocations shall require a hearing before the planning commission. The application set out in the previous section shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council, to cover the cost of making maps, mailing notices, and other administrative expenses involved. Such fee shall not be refundable, whether a permit is issued or not. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.050 Hearing—Department recommendations.
    Prior to the hearing held by the planning commission, the planning and building director shall advise all affected city departments of such application. These departments shall submit recommendations to the planning commission for consideration prior to the time of the public hearing. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.060 Hearing—Notices.
    At least ten days before the hearing before the planning commission, notices of the time and place of such hearing and the purpose thereof shall be given by the mailing of notices, to all property owners, within a distance of five hundred feet from the exterior limits of the property to which any such building or structure is to be moved. A notice of such hearing shall also be mailed to the applicant at the address listed in the applicant’s application. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.070 Restricted buildings.
    No permit shall be issued for the relocation of any building or structure from one location to another location within the city if said building or structure, in the opinion of the planning commission, is so old, dilapidated, and in such a state of disrepair as to be unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy, or use, or would by reason of its exterior appearance be detrimental to the property value and residential character of other properties within one thousand feet from its new location, (vacant area shall be considered developed to highest and best use permitted by the existing zone), or the proposed use of said building or structure is prohibited by the zoning ordinance of said city; or if the building or structure is of a type prohibited in the proposed location by the building code, or any other law or ordinance, or if the cost to repair such building is such that it would be prohibitive under the present laws and ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.080 Plans and bond required.
    No permit shall be issued, nor shall the planning commission make any decision concerning any application for the movement of any building or structure until;

    (a)    A set of architectural plans of the completed structure is submitted;

    (b)    A faithful performance bond, executed by a responsible surety company authorized to do business in the state of California, or by two responsible private individuals, in an amount as recommended by the planning and building department as being necessary to bring such structure or building up to existing building codes and other applicable laws or ordinances is submitted. Said bond and corrections shall be limited to ninety days from the date of issuance of building permits. One thirty-day extension may be granted by the building and safety director when extenuating circumstances are evident; and

    (c)    A bond on file with the city clerk which shall be a good and sufficient surety bond issued by a company acceptable to the attorney for the city, or a cash deposit in the principal sum of two thousand dollars in favor of the city for the benefit of any person, firm, or corporation who may be damaged directly or indirectly by the moving of said building or structure, provided that any person, firm, or corporation engaged regularly in the business of moving buildings may deposit with the city clerk a surety bond approved by the attorney for the city, or a cash deposit in the sum of ten thousand dollars indemnifying the city for like purposes and in that event such person, firm, or corporation need not file the said two thousand dollar bond or cash deposit hereinabove required for any single moving operation. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.090 Terms or conditions imposed by planning commission.
    The planning commission, in authorizing the issuance of a relocating permit, may impose thereon such terms and conditions as it may deem reasonable and proper in the interest of public safety, welfare, morals, and well-being, including, but not limited to, the requirements of changes, alterations, additions, or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure, or removal of any nonconforming uses or structures. Further terms or conditions may be imposed by the planning commission in accordance with the building code, zoning, and fire code regulations. The terms and conditions upon which any permit is granted, either by the planning commission or by the city engineer shall be written upon the permit or appended thereto. Upon authorization of the relocation permit, the applicant shall in addition comply with other city ordinances as they pertain to oversize and overweight loads and shall obtain the necessary additional permits and pay the additional fees. Drainage, sewerage, and other charges as required by the laws, rules, and regulations of the city shall be required. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.100 Damage of public property.
    In case of any damage to any street, or other public property, or public utility owned by the city, the city shall do or cause to be done such work as may be necessary to restore the street or other public property, or public utility, to as good a condition as the same was in prior to such damages and shall charge the cost thereof to the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit was issued for the moving of such building or structure, or section or portion thereof. A final inspection will not be made or passed on the condition or repair of any building or structure until all charges, costs and fees to the city incidental to said relocation have been paid. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.110 Chapter application—Waiver.
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, firms, associations, or other corporations moving buildings or structures through or within said city, or to be located within said city, providing that upon a proper showing the planning commission may waive one or more of the requirements of this chapter or may reduce or waive filing or permit fees where the building or structure to be moved is known by or is to be used or occupied by another public agency or where the distance which such building or structure is to be moved is so small as to warrant a modification of the fees or other requirements hereof. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.08.120 Hearing decision—Appeal.
    Within fifteen days after completion of said hearing by the planning commission, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter. The decision of the planning commission and any provision or restriction imposed shall be final unless an appeal in writing to the city council is filed with the city clerk in accordance with the appeal provisions of Title 21. If the application is approved and no appeal filed within the twenty-day stay period, the planning commission shall return the application to the planning and building department for the issuance of a permit noting the restrictions and the requirements imposed by the planning commission, and a certification that all necessary charges and fees have been paid. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.130 Inspection and code provisions.
    The permit or permits herein authorized shall be in addition to all permits required under any other ordinance of the city and all such relocated buildings or structures shall be subject to the inspection of the planning and building department, planning department, and city engineer and must conform to all requirements of the building code and other codes or ordinances relating to building, construction, relocation, and necessary installations incident thereto. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.08.140 Violation—Penalty.
    Every person, as principal, agent, or otherwise, violating or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person as principal, agent, or otherwise, shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of or the failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.12 RESIDENTIAL CODE
18.12.010 Residential Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Residential Code, California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5 incorporating the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix H published by the International Code Council, with the amendments set forth in Section 18.12 is hereby adopted. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. This shall be the city’s residential building code for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all residential buildings in the city, except as modified herein. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.020 Work exempt from permit.
    Section R105.2 is amended in the following categories of building work that are exempt from permit:

 

1.     One story detached accessory structures used as storage sheds, playhouses, or similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 120 square feet and the ceiling height is not over 7 feet

2.     Fences not over six feet high and block walls not over three feet high.

3.     Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.

11.   Platforms, walks, and driveways not more than thirty inches (762 mm) above gradeand not over any basement or story below.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.025 Expiration.
    Section R105.5 is amended as follows:

 

R105.5. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced with 12 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

 

Time limitation for permit expiration as the result of code enforcement shall be as per notice of violation or as otherwise determined by the Building Official.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.030 Section R105.10 added.
    Section R105.10 Reconstruction is added to Chapter 1 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

 

R105.10. Reconstruction. If the value of the reconstruction (or renovation) of a building is equal to or exceeds 75 percent of the habitable square footage of the building, the entire building shall comply with the code provisions for new construction. The value of the reconstruction (or renovation) for a property shall include the value of all construction stemming from construction-related permits issued within the last two years.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.040 Refunds.
    Section R108.5 Refunds is deleted and amended to read;

 

The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the permit fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the plan review fee when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before the plan is reviewed. The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.050 Penalties.
    Section R108.6 Work Commencing before Permit Issuance is amended to read:

 

Any person who commences work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to double the permit fees as a penalty. In addition, when required by the building official, a special investigation shall be performed at a cost established by separate ordnance.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

 

 

18.12.060 Climatic and geographic design.
    Table R301.2 (1) is revised to read:

TABLE R301.2(1)

CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA

 

GROUND SNOW LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY

f

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

WINTER DESIGN TEMPe

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIREDh

FLOOD HAZARDSg

AIR FREEZING INDEXi

MEAN ANNUAL TEMP j

Speedd

(mph)

Topographic effectsk

Weathering

a

Frost line depthb

Termitec

Zero

110

No

D2 or E

Negligible

12-24″

Very Heavy

50

No

Section 21.14.040

0

64

 

MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIA n

ELEVATION

LATITUDE

WINTER HEATING

SUMMER COOLING

ALTITUDE CORRECTION FACTOR

INDOOR DESIGN TEMPERATURE

DESIGN TEMPERATURE COOLING

HEAT TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCE

60

34

40

88

 

70

75

 

COOLING TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCE

WIND VELOCITY HEATING

WIND VELOCITY COOLING

COINCIDENT WET BULB

DAILY RANGE

WINTER HUMIDITY

SUMMER HUMIDITY

 

7

 

 

69

18

 

11 (50% RH)

 

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.   Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., “negligible,” “moderate” or “severe”) for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652.

b.  The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1 (1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.

d.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R30l.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e.   Temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.

f.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction’s entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended.

h.  In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1, and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “NO.”

i.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3 (2) or from the l00-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32°)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

j.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

k.  In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

l.   In accordance with Figure R301.2(4) A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

m. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

n.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this section of the table to establish the design criteria using Table 1a or 1b from ACCA Manual J or established criteria determined by the jurisdiction.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

 

18.12.070 Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
    Section R313.1 exception and R313.2 exceptions are deleted. The following will be added to R313.1 and R313.2:

 

Exception: Any addition or alteration to an existing residential building shall retrofit with automatic fire sprinkler system when a structure exceeds 3,500 square feet and the addition or alteration that is made exceeds thirty (30) percent of the original building square footage.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.080 Preliminary soils report.
    As required by Chapter 4 California Residential Code Section R401.4. is added to Chapter 4:

 

The Building Official may require a geologic or geotechnical report or both, in accordance with the 2019 California Residential Code Section R401. This section shall include any new residential construction or additions to existing structures. As part of this evaluation the Building Official shall require a site visit to determine the need for a geologic or geotechnical report or both. A fee shall be collected for each site visit.

 

A geologic report shall be prepared by a certified engineering geologist licensed by the State of California. A geotechnical report shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer versed in soils engineering and qualified to perform this work. When both a geotechnical and geologic report are required, the two reports shall be coordinated before submission to the building official. The Building Official, at his/her discretion shall obtain any technical support necessary to approve the report. Submitted reports shall contain a finding regarding the safety of the site from any variety of geologic hazard and a finding regarding the effect the proposed improvements, grading, and/or construction and use of the site will have on the stability of the site and/or property outside the site. Any recommendation or action presented in the approved reports along with any conditions of approval shall be incorporated into the construction of site improvements. A fee shall be collected for the cost of review of the reports and any required addendums.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.100 Roofing covering materials.
    Section R902.1 is amended by revising it to allow only class A or B roofs as follows:

 

R902.1 Roofing covering materials.

 

Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section or where the edge of the roof I less than 3 feet (914 mm) from a lot line. Class A and B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.

2.     Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.110 Roof coverings within all other areas.
    Section R902.1.3 is amended by revising it to require a minimum Class B roof as follows:

 

R902.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas.

 

The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair, or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.120 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes.
    Section R902.2, first paragraph is amended by revising it to allow only Class A or B treated wood roofs as follows:

 

R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes.

 

Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A or B roofs.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.12.130 Chimney spark arresters.
    Section R1001.13 Chimney spark arresters of the California Residential Code is hereby added as follows:

 

R1001.13 Chimney spark arresters. All chimneys attached to any appliance or fireplace that burns solid fuel shall be equipped with an approved spark arrester. Chimneys serving outdoor appliances or fireplaces shall be equipped with a spark arrester. The spark arrester shall meet the requirements of Section 2113.9.2 of the California Building Code.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.16 PLUMBING CODE
18.16.010 Plumbing Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Plumbing Code, California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, incorporating the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix D, and Appendix I published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, with the amendments set forth in this chapter is hereby adopted. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 §2, 2019)

Chapter 18.20 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
18.20.010 Electrical Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Electrical Code, California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3, incorporating the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition including Annex A, Annex B, Annex C, Annex D, Annex E and Annex I, published by the National Fire Protection Association with the amendments set forth in Section 18.20 is hereby adopted. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.20.020 Conductor material.
    Article 310.106(B) is hereby amended by the deleting of a second paragraph replacing it to read:

 

Copper wire shall be used for wiring No. 6 and smaller in all installations. Consideration for use of aluminum wiring can be made by the building official for feeder lines only on an individual basis where adequate safety measures can be ensured.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.20.030 Continuous inspection of aluminum wiring.
    Article 310.16 is hereby added to read:

 

Aluminum conductors of No. 6 or smaller used for branch circuits shall require continuous inspection by an independent testing agency approved by the building official for proper torqueing of connections at their termination point.

(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.22 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
18.22.010 California Energy Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Energy Code known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6, published by the International Code Council. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.24 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
18.24.010 California Mechanical Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Mechanical Code, California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4, incorporating the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition including Appendix B, Appendix D, and Appendix F published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, with the amendments set forth in Section 18.24 is hereby adopted. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.26 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
18.26.010 California Existing Building Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Existing Building Code, California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 10, incorporating the International Building Code, 2018 Edition. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.27 SOLAR PERMITTING PROCESS
18.27.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. Moreover, allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.27.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

    (a)    In accordance with Civil Code Section 801.5, a “solar energy system” means, either of the following:

    (1)    Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

    (2)    Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

    (b)    A “small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

    (1)    A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

    (2)    A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted by the city of Fountain Valley and all state health and safety standards, including, but not limited to, Civil Code section 714(c)(3).

    (3)    A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

    (4)    A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city of Fountain Valley.

    (c)    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of the following:

    (1)    The Internet.

    (d)    An “association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

    (e)    A “common interest development” means any of the following:

    (1)    A community apartment project.

    (2)    A condominium project.

    (3)    A planned development.

    (4)    A stock cooperative.

    (f)    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

    (g)    “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

    (h)    “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

    (1)    For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent, as originally specified and proposed.

    (2)    For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.27.030 Applicability.
    (a)    This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

    (b)    Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.27.040 Solar energy system requirements.
    (a)    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city fire department.

    (b)    Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

    (c)    Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.27.050 Duties of building department and building official.
    (a)    All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

    (b)    Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by the Internet shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

    (c)    An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

    (d)    The city’s building department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

    (e)    The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

    (f)    All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply with Government Code Section 65850.55, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.27.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
    (a)    The city building department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems within thirty days of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The building department shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or within one to three business days for electronic applications of receipt of a complete application and meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. A building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning and building director.

    (b)    Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

    (c)    If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning and building director.

    (d)    Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

    (e)    “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

    (f)    The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

    (g)    If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

    (h)    Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

    (i)     The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within one business days.

    (j)     If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.28 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
18.28.010 California Green Building Standards Code adopted.
    The 2019 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, California Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11, also known as the CALGreen Code, published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as the Green Building Standards Code for the city. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.30 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
18.30.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with AB 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations. The provisions of this chapter encourage the use of electric vehicle charging stations by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to the property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install electric vehicle charging stations. The provisions of this chapter further allow the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public’s health, welfare and safety. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.30.020 Applicability.
    (a)    This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging station systems in the city.

    (b)    Electric vehicle charging station systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of an electric vehicle charging station system. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements of electric vehicle charging stations shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.30.030 Definitions.
    (a)    “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

    (b)    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

    (c)    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

    (1)    Electronic mail or email.

    (2)    The Internet.

    (3)    Facsimile.

    (d)    “Community Readiness Guidebook” means the guidebook published by the Office of Planning and Research, with recommendations in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California.” (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.30.040 Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.
    (a)    Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability.

    (b)    Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

    (c)    Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

    (d)    Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.30.050 Duties of the building division, and building official.
    (a)    All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

    (b)    Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station system permit applicants.

    (c)    An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

    (d)    The electric vehicle charging station system permit process and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” contained in the most current version of the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook published by the Office of Planning and Research.

    (e)    The city council, by resolution, may establish a fee for the processing of electric vehicle charging station system applications. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.30.060 Permit review requirements.
    (a)    The building division shall administratively approve an application to install electric vehicle charging stations through issuance of a building permit or similar nondiscretionary permit.

    (b)    The building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety.

    (c)    Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

    (d)    If a use permit is required, the city may deny an application for the use permit if the city makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact.

    (e)    Decisions regarding an electric vehicle charging station system permit application may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 21.60, or any successor chapter.

    (f)    Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health or safety at the lowest possible cost.

    (g)    If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.32 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
18.32.010 International Property Maintenance Code adopted.
    The 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code for the city. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.33 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
18.33.010 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted.
    The 2018 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as published by the International Code Councils is hereby adopted as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the city. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.34 PAVING PERMITS
18.34.010 Parking area.
    A parking area is an area or space designed, used, or intended to be used for the storage, parking, maintenance, service, driving, repair, display, or operation of vehicles, and includes areas used or intended to be used for driveway or access to such parking areas from the public right-of-way to such area, but does not include public roads, streets, highways, and alleys. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.020 Scope.
    No areas shall be used for the storage, parking, maintenance, service, driving, repair, display, or operation of vehicles unless constructed and maintained in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, except:

    (a)    That portion of any land coming within the definitions of parking area in use for such purposes on the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter and which is paved and is being maintained in a safe manner so as not to become a nuisance may continue in use without meeting the provisions of this chapter; however, any extension, alteration, or reconstruction of such areas in whole or in part shall be subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter.

    (b)    The building official may authorize temporary parking areas to be used in connection with special events, new construction, or areas to be used for a limited period of time not exceeding six months where construction of permanent facilities in accordance with the standards of this chapter would be impractical. The building official may impose requirements for dust control, temporary paving, or such other requirements as may be necessary to accomplish the intent of this chapter, as conditions pursuant to authorization. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.030 Permit required.
    (a)    No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter, enlarge, or pave any parking area without first obtaining a separate parking paving permit from the building official. Including:

    (1)    Resurfacing of an existing parking lot that will require parking lot re-striping.

    (2)    Re-striping of an existing parking lot with or without resurfacing.

    (3)    Re-grading of an existing parking lot that will require parking lot re-striping.

    (b)    Permits will only be issued to those persons having the appropriate contractor’s license as determined by the Contractors State License Board and the applicable state law. Separate paving permits shall not be required in the following situations:

    (1)    No paving permit shall be required for any paving work within or under a building for which a valid building permit has been issued.

    (2)    No paving permit shall be required for paving work serving residential occupancies where the areas to be paved do not exceed one thousand square feet in area. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.040 Standards.
    Parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 21.60.060 of this code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.050 Plans.
    Plans for parking areas shall be included in the grading plans and shall be submitted to the building official for checking. Also to be included in the plans shall be the specifications for the composition of the paving materials. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.060 Fees.
    Fees for paving permits shall be set forth by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.070 Approvals required.
    (a)    No work shall be done on any parking area beyond the point authorized in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. Such approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the inspections required by subsection (b) of this section.

    (b)    The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent, shall make the following inspections of parking areas and shall approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent wherein the same fails to comply with the law:

    (1)    Subgrade Inspection. To be made when the compaction report has been received by the building official and after the site has been cleared and is prepared to receive fill material or aggregate base. When no fill operation is to be done, or the fill is minor in nature, subgrade inspection may be waived by the building official;

    (2)    Base Inspection. To be made after base or subgrade has been brought to proper grade and alignment for placing of paving materials and after all required curbing and gutters are in place;

    (3)    Final Inspection. To be made when parking area is complete and all requirements of this chapter have been met. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.080 Testing.
    When there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter or evidence that any material or any construction does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of constructions, the building official may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the owner or his or her agent by an approved agency. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.090 Preparation of surface to be paved.
    (a)    Preparation of surfaces to be paved shall be performed in accordance with the standard specifications for public works construction.

    (b)    Soil sterilization shall be used in all areas to be paved. Sterilants shall be applied in accordance with manufacturers’ recommendations and shall be evidenced by a certification of compliance from the permit holder. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.100 Maintenance.
    All parking areas shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be kept in good repair. Any alteration, enlargement, or reconstruction, in whole or in part, other than normal maintenance repairs, shall be pursuant to permit and subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.34.110 Penalties.
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in this section. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.36 STRONG MOTION INSTRUMENTATION PROGRAM
18.36.010 Scope and purpose.
    In accordance with Chapter 8, Division 2 of the California Public Resources Code, the city imposes a fee upon all construction permits for purposes of administering the state of California Strong Motion Instrumentation Program. Said fees are in addition to any and all other fees required of applicants for the issuance of a construction permit. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.36.020 Definitions.
    “Construction permit” is defined as a general permit for the construction or erection of a new structure or the renovation of an existing structure; or a permit for the installation or repair of electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment in a structure; or the installation of a sewer; or the grading or excavation of earth materials; or the installation of paving materials. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.36.030 Fee schedule.
    Every applicant for a construction permit shall pay a strong motion instrumentation program fee as prescribed and stated in Public Resources Code Division 2, Chapter 8. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.36.040 Administration.
    The director of finance shall file all reports and pay all fees as required by the provisions of Chapter 8, Division 2 of the California Public Resources Code and shall comply with all rules and regulations of the state of California Department of Conservation, as administrative agency for the program. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 18.37 POST-DISASTER RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION
Article 1. Post-Disaster Safety Assessment Placards and Security
18.37.020 Scope.
    This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or man-made disaster. It further authorizes the building and safety department, as well as authorized representatives, to post appropriate placards at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.030 Application of provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures, of all occupancies, regulated by the city following each natural or man-made disaster. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.040 Definitions.
    “Building official” is defined in Chapter 2 of the California Building Code.

    “Safety Assessment” is a visual examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining whether continued use or occupancy is appropriate following a natural or man-made disaster. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.050 Placards.
    The following official placards must be used to designate the condition of buildings or structures following a disaster.

    (Green) Inspected - Lawful Occupancy Permitted. Posted on any building or structure where no apparent hazard has been found. Placement of this placard does not mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

    (Yellow) Restricted or Limited Entry. Posted on each damaged building or structure where damage has created a hazardous condition which justifies restricted occupancy. The building official who posts this placard will note in general terms the hazard created and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on occupancy.

    (Red) Unsafe – Do Not Enter or Occupy. Posted on each damaged building or structure such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life or health. Buildings or structures posted with this placard may be entered only after authorization in writing by the building official. Safety assessment teams are authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard may not be used or considered as a demolition order. The official who posts this placard must make a note in general terms of the damage encountered. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.060 Securing of unsafe buildings or structures.
    Buildings or structures that have been determined by the building official to pose a threat to life safety or to be unsafe due to damage may be required by the building official to be secured from entry by fencing or other approved means until such time that the damage or threat to life is removed by repair, reconstruction, or demolition. The fencing or security measures may not be removed without authorization from the building official. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.070 Removal of placards.
    Once the placard has been attached to a building or structure, it may not be removed, altered, or covered until authorized by the building official. Placards may be removed upon issuance of a permit to repair the damage. Issuance of a permit may not necessarily constitute approval to reoccupy the structure. The structure may not be occupied until authorized by the building official. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.080 Violation.
    Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and will be subject to punishment according to the provisions of Section 106 of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

Article 2. Post Disaster Abatement
18.37.110 Intent.
    This chapter establishes abatement criteria for all buildings and structures damaged as a result following each natural or man-made disaster. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.120 Application of Provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.130 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

    “Event” means any occurrence, which results in the declaration of a disaster, including, but not limited to, fires, debris flows, landslides, wind storms, earthquakes, explosions, and floods.

    “Safety Assessment” is a visual examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining whether continued use or occupancy is appropriate following a natural or man-made disaster. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

 

Article 3. Abatement Criteria
18.37.210 Notice of determination.
    Except as provided in Section 18.37.220 below, the building official must serve a written notice of determination to each property owner as found on the latest available copy of the last equalized assessment roll. Such notice of determination must be delivered by hand-delivery, telephone, telegram, facsimile, or other reasonable means, and must clearly indicate that the structure or part of the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous and that, as such, it constitutes a public nuisance. The notice must set forth those factors which, in the opinion of the building official, make the structure an imminent hazard and dangerous, and must also include a directive from the building official of the specific action or actions to be taken by the property owner. The notice must specify that within seventy-two hours from the time of issuance of the notice of determination, the owner or other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in the property must submit a hazard abatement plan and abate the nuisance in accordance with the directives written in the notice of determination by the building official. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.220 Notice of determination exception.
    No prior notice is required, when the building official, after considering all the facts, determines, in writing, that the structure or part of the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous, and that it must be abated immediately and that time and circumstances do not permit the giving of prior notice to the owner. In those cases, where time and circumstances do not permit the city to give the owner notice prior to abatement, the building official may cause the nuisance to be summarily abated. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.230 Appeal of notice of determination.
    A notice of determination delivered by the building official, that a building or structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous and therefore must be abated, may be appealed by the property owner or any other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in the property. Such appeal must be made to the building official within forty-eight hours of delivery of such notice of determination by the building official. Such appeal must be accompanied by a written hazard abatement plan signed by a state of California licensed engineer or architect or by a written report by a state of California licensed engineer or architect stating why the engineer or architect feels the building or structure is not an imminent hazard or dangerous at this time. Such report must include a recommendation by the engineer or architect as to what should or should not be done at this time. If the building official accepts the proposed hazard abatement plan in lieu of the notice of determination, the hazard abatement plan must be implemented within twenty-four hours of acceptance by the building official. If the building official accepts an engineer’s report and agrees there is no imminent hazard, the building official must rescind, in writing, the notice of determination. Should the building official disagree with the hazard abatement plan, or should the building official disagree with the engineer’s or architect’s report, a hearing must be conducted by the board of appeals, as soon as a quorum can be assembled. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.240 Board of appeals hearing.
    At the hearing, the appellant has the right to call witnesses, to submit evidence, and to cross-examine the witnesses of the city. All witnesses must be sworn. A record of the proceedings must be made by tape recording. Any relevant evidence may be submitted, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in the courts of this State. At the close of the hearing, the board of appeals must act to either uphold, overrule, or modify the determination and order of the building official. The determination and order of the building official will be upheld, unless the board of appeals finds, based upon the evidence in the record, that the building official erred in determining that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous. The decision of the board of appeals, with the reasons therefore, may be given orally on the record. If given orally, the decision must be memorialized in writing and served upon the applicant within twenty-four hours of the time the oral decision is rendered. If the board of appeals upholds the decision of the building official, the property owners of record will be ordered to abate the public nuisance within the time set forth in the order. If the structure is determined not to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, the building official’s determination and order will be vacated. The decision of the board of appeals will be final on the date it is rendered. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.250 Hazard abatement plan.
    Before any work is started to abate the hazard, a hazard abatement plan shall be submitted for approval. Unless waived by the building official, a hazard abatement plan shall be signed by a state of California licensed engineer or architect. If a hazard abatement plan is approved by the building official, the owner or other interested party of record must execute such plan within twenty-four hours of obtaining approval of the plan and permit from the building official. Within twenty-four hours of completion of the abatement work the owner or other interested party of record must provide the building official with a written certification that the public nuisance, as described in the building official’s notice of determination, has been abated. If the work performed pursuant to the hazard abatement plan amounts to temporary abatement, the owner or other party of record, prior to proceeding with permanent repairs, must obtain required permits and file a damage assessment report with the building official. The damage assessment report must be reviewed and approved by the building official prior to proceeding with permanent repairs. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.260 Failure to perform.
    In those instances, where the property owner or other interested party of record either does not respond to the building official’s notice of determination or approved hazard abatement plan, responds untimely, or responds timely but fails to abate the public nuisance within the required time period, the imminent hazard and dangerous structure will be subject to immediate abatement by the building official. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.270 Public nuisance.
    All structures or portions of such structures which, after inspection by the building official, are determined to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, either to the public, occupants of the subject structure, or to any adjacent structures, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and must be abated by the owner in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 18.37.250. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.280 Suspension of abatement of work.
    Notwithstanding any code provisions to the contrary, the building official is authorized to suspend abatement work by the city’s contractors, and to allow the property owner or other party of legal interest to complete the abatement work. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.290 Change of status.
    When the conditions making a structure an imminent hazard and dangerous have been abated, the structure will no longer be considered an imminent hazard and dangerous. However, if the abatement work is temporary in nature, as determined by the building official, the structure will remain subject to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.300 Demolition permit.
    If the owner of any building or structure has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or the owner’s representative, must obtain a demolition permit. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

 

Article 4. Disaster Repair and Reconstruction
18.37.410 Intent.
    This section establishes standards and regulations for the expeditious repair and reconstruction of structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.420 Application of provisions.
(Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.430 Declaration of emergency.
    The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city following each disaster after a local emergency has been declared. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.440 Waiver for engineering evaluation.
    The requirements of this chapter may be waived by the building official subject to an engineering evaluation as defined in Section 18.37.450. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.450 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply:

    “Architect” is a person licensed by the state of California to practice architecture, as prescribed by the state of California Business and Professions Code.

    “Civil engineer” is a person registered by the state of California to practice civil engineering, as prescribed by the state of California Business and Professions Code.

    “Current Code means those codes adopted by the city pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5.

    “Engineering evaluation” is an evaluation of a damaged building or structure, or suspected damaged building or structure, performed under the direction of a structural engineer, civil engineer, or architect retained by the owner of the building or structure. Engineering evaluations must, at a minimum, contain recommendations for repair and an appropriate opinion of the construction cost for those repairs. All engineering evaluations must include the engineer’s or architect’s stamp, wet-signature, and license expiration date.

    “Essential service facility” means those buildings or structures designated by the city to house facilities necessary for emergency operations subsequent to a disaster.

    “Replacement value” is the dollar value, as determined by the building official, for replacing a damaged structure with a new structure of the same size, same type of construction, and same occupancy, and located on the same site.

    “Structural engineer” is a person registered by the state of California to practice civil engineering and to use the title, structural engineer, as defined in Section 5537.1 of the state of California Business and Professions Code.

    “Value of repair” is the dollar value, as determined by the building official, for making necessary repairs to the damaged structure. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

Article 5. Repair Criteria
18.37.510 General.
    Buildings and structures of all occupancies which have been damaged as the result of a disaster, except as otherwise noted, must be repaired in accordance with the following criteria. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.520 Up to ten percent repair value.
    When the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged portion may be restored to the pre-disaster condition; except that when the damaged elements include suspended ceiling systems, the ceiling system must be repaired with all bracing required by current code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.530 Up to fifty percent repair value.
    When the estimated value of repair is greater than ten percent but less than fifty percent of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged elements must be repaired and brought into conformance with the structural requirements of the current code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.540 More than fifty percent repair value.
    When the estimated value of repair is fifty percent or more of the replacement value of the structure, the entire structure must be brought into conformance with the fire and life safety and structural requirements of the current code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.550 Chimney value exclusion.
    In Group R, Division 3, occupancies, the repair value of damaged chimneys may be excluded from the computation of percentage of replacement value. Damaged chimneys must be repaired in accordance with Section 18.37.600. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

Article 6. Repair Criteria for Fireplaces and Chimneys
18.37.610 General.
    All damaged chimneys must be repaired or reconstructed to comply with the requirements of Chapter 21 of the California Building Code. Damaged portions of chimneys must be removed in accordance with the following criteria. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.620 Damage above the roof line.
    When the damaged portion of the chimney is located between the roof line and the top of the chimney, the damaged portion may be removed to the roof line provided the roof and ceiling anchorage are in sound condition. The reconstruction portion of the chimney must be braced to the roof structure using an approved method. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.630 Single-story structure damage below the roof line.
    For a single-story structure in which the damaged portion of the chimney is below the roof line, or the damaged portion extends from above the roof line to below the roof line, the chimney must be removed to the top of the firebox. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.640 Multi-story structure damage below the roof line.
    For a multi-story structure, the damaged portion of the chimney must be removed from the top to a floor line where anchorage is found. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.650 Firebox damage.
    In any structure where the firebox has been damaged, the entire chimney and firebox must be removed to the foundation. If the foundation is in sound condition, the firebox and chimney may be reconstructed using the existing foundation. If the foundation has been damaged, the foundation must be removed and replaced. Such reconstruction and replacement must be in accordance with Chapter 21 of the California Building Code. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.660 Engineered alternate solutions.
    Where existing conditions preclude the installation of all anchorage required by Chapter 21 of the California Building Code, alternate systems may be used in accordance with the alternate methods and materials provisions of the California Building Code when approved by the building official. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

 

18.37.670 Bracing.
    Where the portion of the chimney extending above the roof line exceeds two times the least dimension of the chimney, that portion above the roof line must be braced to the roof structure using an approved method. (Ord. 1552 § 2, 2019)

Title 19 (RESERVED)

Title 20 (RESERVED)

Title 21 DEVELOPMENT CODE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1558, 1561, 1562 and 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 21.01 ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY OF TITLE
Chapter 21.02 INTERPRETATION OF TITLE PROVISIONS
Chapter 21.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS—ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
Chapter 21.06 DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.08 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.10 COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS
Chapter 21.12 SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS
Chapter 21.14 OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
Chapter 21.16 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Chapter 21.18 GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS
Chapter 21.20 LANDSCAPING
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.22 PARKING AND LOADING
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.24 SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Chapter 21.25 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 21.26 TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.28 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 21.30 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
Chapter 21.32 APPLICATIONS, PROCESSING AND FEES
Chapter 21.34 AMENDMENTS
Chapter 21.36 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Chapter 21.38 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Chapter 21.40 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
Chapter 21.42 HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
Chapter 21.44 PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN
Chapter 21.46 SPECIFIC PLANS
Chapter 21.48 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
Chapter 21.50 VARIANCES
Chapter 21.52 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.54 ENTITLEMENT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS AND EXTENSIONS
Chapter 21.56 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND PARCELS
Chapter 21.58 PUBLIC HEARINGS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.60 APPEALS
Chapter 21.62 REVOCATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Chapter 21.64 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
Chapter 21.66 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 21.68 SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 21.70 TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
Chapter 21.72 PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
Chapter 21.74 CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Chapter 21.76 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS AND PARCEL MERGERS
Chapter 21.78 DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS
Chapter 21.80 IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS
Chapter 21.82 SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS
Chapter 21.84 CONDITIONS, COVENANTS OR RESTRICTIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 21.90 DEFINITIONS/GLOSSARY

Chapter 21.01 ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY OF TITLE
21.01.010 Title.
    Title 21 of this code is and may be cited as the Fountain Valley Development Code, hereafter referred to as “development code.” (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.01.020 Purpose.
    The purpose of this title is to implement the policies of the general plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the city. In addition, this title is adopted to protect and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of residents, and preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the city. To fulfill these purposes, it is the intent of this title to:

    (1)    Enhance and implement the general plan;

    (2)    Provide a guide for the growth and development of the city and the social and economic advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of its resources;

    (3)    Classify, designate, regulate and segregate the uses of land and structures to serve the needs of agriculture, commerce, industry, residences and other purposes in appropriate places;

    (4)    Establish conditions that will allow all of these land uses to exist in harmony within the community;

    (5)    Prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid the undue concentration of population and to maintain a suitable balance between structures and open spaces;

    (6)    Lessen congestion on streets and promote a safe, efficient traffic circulation system;

    (7)    Ensure that adequate off-street parking and loading facilities will be installed and maintained;

    (8)    Facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities, including transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements;

    (9)    Protect and enhance property values; and

    (10)  Promote the stability of existing land uses and to protect them from incompatible and harmful intrusions. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.01.030 Authority—Relationship to general plan.
    (a)    This title is enacted based on the authority vested in the city by the state of California, including but not limited to: the State Constitution; the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Sections 65000 et seq.); the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410 et seq.) and the California Health and Safety Code.

    (b)    This title and the zoning map (Section 21.04.030 of this title) are the primary tools used by the city to implement the goals, objectives and strategies of the general plan, which is the overall policy document of the city, hereafter referred to as the “general plan.” (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.01.040 Applicability.
    This title applies to all land uses, structures, subdivisions and development within the city, as provided by this section.

    (1)    New Land Uses or Structures—Changes to Land Uses or Structures. Compliance with the requirements of Chapter 21.06 (General Requirements for Development and New Land Uses) of this title or, where applicable, Chapter 21.56 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Parcels) of this title, is necessary for any person or public agency to lawfully establish, construct, reconstruct, alter or replace any use of land or structure.

    (2)    Issuance of Building or Grading Permits. The building department may issue building or other construction permits and the department of public works may issue grading permits only when:

    (A)   The proposed land use and/or structure satisfy the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, and all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations; and

    (B)   The city engineer determines that the site was subdivided in compliance with Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title.

    (3)    Subdivision of Land. Any subdivision of land proposed within the city after the effective date of this title shall be consistent with: the minimum lot size requirements of Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, all other applicable requirements of this title and the city’s subdivision regulations.

    (4)    Continuation of an Existing Land Use. An existing land use is lawful only when it was legally established in compliance with all applicable regulations, and when it is operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this title, including Chapter 21.56 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Parcels) of this title.

    Existing land uses that were in violation of city zoning regulations applicable before the effective date of this title, are in violation of this title. These uses shall continue to be in violation unless they conform to the current provisions of this title, except as otherwise provided in this title.

    (5)    Effect of Changes to this Title on Projects in Progress. A land use permit application that has been accepted by the department as complete prior to the effective date of this title or any amendment shall be processed according to the requirements in effect when the application was accepted as complete.

    (6)    Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this title shall be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. When this title provides for discretion on the part of a city official or body, that discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements than set forth in this title as may be necessary to promote orderly land use development and the purposes of this title.

    (7)    Other Requirements May Still Apply. Nothing in this title eliminates the need for obtaining any permit, approval or entitlement required by other provisions of this code or complying with the regulations of any city department, or any county, regional, state or federal agency.

    (8)    Conflicting Requirements. Any conflicts between different requirements of this title, or between this title and other regulations, shall be resolved in compliance with subsection (d) of Section 21.02.020 (Conflicting requirements) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.01.050 Responsibility for administration.
    This title shall be administered by the city council, planning commission, planning director, and the planning department, in compliance with this code and Chapter 21.32 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.02 INTERPRETATION OF TITLE PROVISIONS
21.02.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this title. The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the requirements of this title and the general plan. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.02.020 Rules of interpretation.
    (a)    Authority. The planning director or designee of the director shall have the responsibility and authority to interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions and requirements of this title.

    (b)    Language.

    (1)    Terminology. When used in this title, the words “shall,” “will,” “is to,” and “are to” are always mandatory. “Should” is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and “may” is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words “include,” “includes,” and “including” mean “including but not limited to . . .”.

    (2)    Definitions. In addition to the definitions in Chapter 21.90 of this title,  the following definitions shall apply:

    “City council” means the city of Fountain Valley city council, referred to in this title as the “council.”

    “Planning commission” means the city of Fountain Valley planning commission, appointed by the city council in compliance with Government Code Section 65101, referred to throughout this title as the “commission.”

    “Planning department” means the “department” within the organizational structure of the city responsible for implementation and enforcement of the general plan, this title and other planning-related duties as assigned by the city council, referred to throughout this title as “department.”

    (3)    Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this title, or in any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as provided in this title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, unless business days are specified. Time limits will extend to the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a day that the city is not open for business, except as otherwise provided for by the Map Act.

    (4)    State Law Requirements. Where this title references applicable provisions of state law (e.g., the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable state law provisions as they may be amended from time to time.

    (c)    Calculations—Rounding. Where provisions of this title require calculations to determine applicable requirements, any fractional/decimal results of the calculations shall be rounded as provided by this subsection.

    (1)    Minimum Lot Area and Number of Lots. The fractional/decimal results of calculations of the number of housing units allowed within a zoning district shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number.

    (2)    Residential Density. The fractional/decimal results of calculations of the number of housing units allowed within a zoning district shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number.

    (3)    All Other Calculations. For all calculations required by this title other than those described in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this subsection, the fractional/decimal results of calculations shall be rounded to the next highest whole number when the fraction/decimal is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than 0.5.

    (d)    Conflicting Requirements. Any conflicts between different requirements of this title, or between this title and other regulations, shall be resolved as follows:

    (1)    Development Code Provisions. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this title, the most restrictive requirement shall control, except in case of any conflict between the zoning district regulations of Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this code and the provisions of Chapters 21.16 through 21.30 of this code, the provisions of the latter shall control.

    (2)    Development Agreements or Specific Plans. In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this title and standards adopted as part of any development agreement or specific plan, the requirements of the development agreement or specific plan shall control.

    (3)    Municipal Code Provisions. In the event of any conflict between requirements of this title and other regulations of the city, the most restrictive shall control.

    (4)    Private Agreements. It is not intended that the requirements of this title shall interfere with, repeal, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement that existed when the ordinance codified in this title became effective. This title applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than an applicable private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The city shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement.

    (e)    Zoning Map Boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map, the following rules are to be used in resolving the uncertainty.

    (1)    Where the zoning map shows any lot or area within a particular zoning district, the zoning district shall extend to the centerline of any adjacent road, street, parkway or highway.

    (2)    If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the director shall determine the location of the boundary by using the scale appearing on the zoning map. See also Section 21.06.050 (Requirements for sites divided by a zoning boundary) of this title.

    (3)    Where a public street, alley, railroad or other public-right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, property that was within the former right-of-way shall be deemed to be included within the zoning district applicable to the property to which the abandoned right-of-way is being attached.

    (f)    Allowable Uses of Land. If a proposed use of land is not specifically listed in Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, the use shall not be allowed, except as follows:

    (1)    Similar Uses Allowed. The director may determine that a proposed use not listed in Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title may be allowed as a permitted or conditional use, or is not allowed. In making such a determination, the director shall first find that:

    (A)   The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the proposed use are equivalent to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zoning district as allowable, and will not involve a greater level of activity, population density, traffic generation, parking, dust, noise or intensity than the uses listed in the district;

    (B)   The proposed use will meet the purpose/intent of the zoning district that is applied to the site; and

    (C)   The proposed use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan.

    A determination by the director that a use is not allowed may be appealed to the commission in compliance with Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title.

    (2)    Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. When the director determines that a proposed, but unlisted use is equivalent to a listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where the use is allowed, what permits are required and what other standards and requirements of this title apply. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.02.030 Procedures for interpretations.
    Whenever the director determines that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this title are subject to interpretation generally, or as applied to a specific case, the director may issue an official interpretation or refer the question to the planning commission for determination.

    (1)    Request for Interpretation. The request for an interpretation or determination shall be made to the department, shall include all information required by the department, and the fee established by the city’s fee resolution.

    (2)    Findings—Basis for Interpretation. The issuance of an interpretation by the director shall include findings stating the basis for the interpretation. The basis for an interpretation may include technological changes or new industry standards. The issuance of an interpretation shall also include a finding documenting the consistency of the interpretation with the general plan.

    (3)    Record of Interpretations. Official interpretations shall be:

    (A)   Written, and shall quote the provisions of this title being interpreted, and the applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretations, and the determination; and

    (B)   Distributed to the council, commission, city attorney, city clerk, and department staff.

    Any provision of this title that is determined by the director to need refinement or revision will be corrected by amending this title as soon as is practical. Until an amendment can occur, the director will maintain a complete record of all official interpretations as an appendix to this title, and indexed by the number of the chapter or section that is the subject of the interpretation.

    (4)    Referral of Interpretation. The director has the option of forwarding any interpretation or determination of the meaning or applicability of any provision of this title directly to the commission for consideration.

    (5)    Fees. The applicant shall pay applicable fees for commission resolutions on interpretations as established by council resolution.

    (6)    Appeals. Any interpretation of this title by the director may be appealed as provided by Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS—ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
21.04.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes the zoning districts applied to property within the city. It also determines how the zoning districts are applied on the zoning map, and provides general permit requirements for development and new land uses. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.04.020 Zoning districts established.
    The city shall be divided into zoning districts which implement the general plan land use designations. The zoning districts shown in Table 2-1 are hereby established, and shall be shown on the official zoning map (see Section 21.04.030 of this chapter).

 

 

 

TABLE 2-1

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

Zoning District Symbol

Zoning District Name

General Plan Designation
Implemented by Zoning District

 

Residential Districts

 

R1

Single Family Residential

Low Density Residential

GH

Garden Homes

Low-Medium Density Residential

R2

Low Density Multiple Dwelling

Low-Medium Density Residential

R3

Medium Density Multiple Dwelling

Medium Density Residential

R4

High Density Multiple Dwelling

High Density Residential

 

Commercial Districts

 

CP

Professional Office

Office Commercial

C1

Local Business

Local Commercial

General Commercial

C2

General Business

General Commercial

 

Manufacturing Districts

 

CM

Commercial Manufacturing

Commercial Manufacturing

M1

Manufacturing

Commercial Manufacturing

 

Special Purpose Districts

 

PI

Public and Institutional

Public Facilities

P/OS

Parks and Open Space

Parks and Open Space

-SP

Specific Plan

Specific Plan

 

Overlay Districts

 

-AH

Affordable Housing

Any General Plan designation

-FP

Floodplain

Any General Plan designation

-SH

Seismic Hazard

Any General Plan designation

-PD

Planned Development

Any General Plan designation

(Ord. 1386 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.04.030 Zoning map adopted.
    The council hereby adopts the city zoning map (hereafter referred to as the “zoning map”), which is on file with the department. The zoning map is hereby incorporated into this title by reference as though it were fully included here. The boundaries of the zoning districts established by this chapter shall be shown upon the zoning map. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.04.040 Permitted and prohibited uses.
    The zoning districts established by this title represent the uses that are permitted or permitted subject to a conditional use permit in that district. Unless such a use has the status of a lawful nonconforming use, or unless an interpretation has been made in accordance with Chapter 21.02 of this title that the use is substantially similar to a listed permitted use, uses not listed in such zoning districts or any table thereof are prohibited. It is unlawful and a public nuisance to operate a use in such district that is so prohibited. (Ord. 1469 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1358 § 1, 2004)

 

21.04.050 Illegal uses prohibited.
    Uses that involve an illegal activity under federal or state law are unlawful, prohibited uses and constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1469 § 2, 2012)

Chapter 21.06 DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
21.06.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides general requirements for the approval of proposed development and new land uses in the city. The land use permit requirements established by this title for specific land uses are in Chapters 21.08 through 21.14 of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.06.020 General requirements for development and new land uses.
    All uses of land and/or structures shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered or replaced, in compliance with the following requirements:

    (1)    Allowable Uses. The use of land shall be identified by Chapters 21.08 (Residential Zoning Districts), 21.10 (Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts) or 21.12 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) of this title, as being allowable in the zoning district applied to the site. The director may determine whether a particular land use is allowable, in compliance with subsection (f) of Section 21.02.020 (Rules of interpretation—Allowable uses of land) of this title.

    (2)    Permit/Approval Requirements. All land use permits or other approvals required by Section 21.06.030 (Allowable land uses and permit requirements) of this chapter shall be obtained by the applicant before the proposed use is constructed, established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is exempt as provided in Section 21.06.040 (Exemptions from development and land use approval requirements) of this chapter.

    (3)    Development Standards. The use of land and/or structure shall comply with all applicable requirements of this title, including the zoning district standards of Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, and the provisions of Chapters 21.16 through 21.30 of this title.

    (4)    Conditions of Approval. The use of land and/or structure shall comply with any applicable conditions imposed by any previously granted land use permit or other approval.

    (5)    Legal Parcel. The use of land and/or structure shall only be established on a parcel of land which has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and Chapters 21.32 through 21.50 of this title, as applicable at the time the parcel was created.

    (6)    Development Agreements. The use and/or structures shall comply with any applicable development agreement approved by the city in compliance with Chapter 21.38 (Development Agreements) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.06.030 Allowable land uses and permit requirements.
    The uses of land allowed by this title in each zoning district are identified in Chapters 21.08, 21.10 and 21.12 of this title, together with the type of land use permit required for each use.

    (1)    Allowed Land Uses. Tables 2-2, 2-5 and 2-7 provide for land uses that are:

    (A)   Permitted subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this title and any building permit or other permit required by this code. These are shown as “P” uses in the tables; or

    (B)   Allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit (Chapter 21.36), and shown as “CUP” uses in the tables;

    (2)    Multiple Uses on a Single Site. Where a proposed project includes multiple land uses, and Tables 2-2, 2-5 and 2-7 require different land use permits for some of the uses, the project shall be authorized through the approval of the permit requiring the highest level of review. (For example, a structure proposed in the C2 district with a convenience store on the first floor (CUP required) and offices on the second floor (permitted uses) shall be authorized through conditional use permit approval.)

    (3)    Uses Not Listed. Land uses that are not listed in Table 2-2, 2-5, 2-6 or 2-7, or are not shown in a particular zoning district are not allowed, except as otherwise provided by subsection (f) of Section 21.02.020 (Rules of interpretation—Allowable uses of land), or Section 21.06.040 (Exemptions from land use permit requirements) of this title. (Ord. 1358 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.06.040 Exemptions from land use permit requirements.
    The land use permit requirements of this title do not apply to the activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by this section.

    (1)    Governmental Facilities. Facilities of the city, state, federal government or special districts (e.g., school district, sanitation district) on land owned or leased by a governmental agency, for governmental operations, to the extent that the facilities are exempted by state or federal law.

    (2)    Interior Remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the number of rooms or the gross floor area within the structure, or change the approved use of the structure.

    (3)    Repairs and Maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance, if:

    (A)   The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure, addition to or enlargement/expansion of the land use and/or structure;

    (B)   The exterior repairs in the commercial and manufacturing districts that employ the same materials, colors and design as the original construction; and

    (C)   The exterior repairs, including painting, are being performed on a single-family residence. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.06.050 Temporary uses.
    Requirements for establishing a temporary use (e.g., construction yards, seasonal sales lots, special events, temporary office trailers, etc.) are in Chapter 21.48 (Temporary Use Permits) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.06.060 Additional permits and approvals may be required.
    An allowed land use that has been granted a land use permit, or is exempt from a land use approval, may still be required to obtain city permits or approvals before the use is constructed, or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits or approvals required by other provisions of this code or any applicable county, state or federal agency regulations.

    All necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or establishing new uses. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.08 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1558 and 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.08.010 Purpose.
    This chapter determines which land uses are allowed in each of the residential zoning districts established by Section 21.04.020 (Zoning districts established) of this title, what land use permit is required to establish each use, and the basic development standards that apply to allowed land uses in each district. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.08.020 Purposes of residential zoning districts.
    The purposes of the individual residential zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:

    (1)    R1 (Single-Family Residential) District. The R1 zoning district applies to parcels appropriate for single-family dwellings. The maximum density is up to five dwelling units per net acre. The R1 zoning district is consistent with the low density residential land use designation of the general plan.

    (2)    GH (Garden Homes) District. The GH zoning district applies to parcels appropriate for detached, single-family dwellings on smaller parcels. The maximum density is up to 10.8 dwelling units per acre. The GH zoning district is consistent with the low-medium density residential land use designation of the general plan.

    (3)    R2 (Low Density Multiple Dwelling) District. The R2 zoning district applies to parcels appropriate for small lot single-family, two-family and multifamily residential dwelling units. The maximum density is up to ten dwelling units per net acre. The R2 zoning district is consistent with the low-medium density residential land use designation of the general plan.

    (4)    R3 (Medium Density Multiple Dwelling) District. The R3 zoning district applies to parcels appropriate for detached or attached residential units. The maximum density is fifteen dwelling units per net acre. The R3 zoning district is consistent with the medium density residential land use designation of the general plan.

    (5)    R4 (High Density Multiple Dwelling) District. The R4 zoning district applies to areas appropriate for higher intensity, multifamily residential units. The maximum density is twenty dwelling units per net acre. The R4 zoning district is consistent with the high density residential land use designation of the general plan. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.08.030 Residential zoning district land uses and permit requirements.
    Table 2-2 identifies the uses of land allowed by this title in each residential zoning district, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 21.06.030 (Allowable land uses and permit requirements) of this title.

    Note: where the last column in the tables (“Specific Use Regulations”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this title may also apply.

 

 

TABLE 2-2

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

 

P

Permitted Use

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements

CUP

Conditional Use Permit Required

for Residential Zoning Districts

—

Use Not Allowed

LAND USE (1)

R1

GH

R2

R3

R4

Specific Use Regulations

RECREATION, EDUCATION, PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

Private residential recreational facilities

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Assembly uses

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Schools - private

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

Accessory dwelling units

P

P

P

P

P

21.08.055

Affordable housing

P

P

P

P

P

 

Cottage food operations

P

P

P

P

P

21.42.065

Duplexes

—

P

P

P

P

 

Home businesses

P

P

P

P

P

 

Mobile home parks

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Multi-family dwellings

—

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Residential accessory uses and structures

P

P

P

P

P

 

Residential care home - large

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Residential care home - small

P

P

P

P

P

 

Single-family dwellings

P

CUP

P

—

—

 

Supportive housing

P

P

P

P

P

 

Transitional housing

P

P

P

P

P

 

SERVICES

Adult day care - large

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

21.30.020

Adult day care - small

P

P

P

P

P

21.30.020

Day care - large family day care homes

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

21.30.020

Day care - small family day care homes

P

P

P

P

P

21.30.020

Child day care centers

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

21.30.020

Wireless telecommunications facilities (3)

Administrative wireless facilities permit (3)

—

—

—

—

21.28

 

Notes:

     (1)      See Chapter 21.90 for land use definitions. See Section 21.02.020 regarding uses not listed.

     (2)      Requires approval of a large family day care permit by the planning/building director.

     (3)      Wireless telecommunication facilities are only allowed on church properties in the R1 zone subject to the requirements of Chapter 21.28. Wireless telecommunications facilities may also be permitted by a conditional use when the planning/building director determines that the project’s complexity or the public interest warrants the referral.

 

(Ord. 1527 § 5, 2017; Ord. 1523 § 5, 2017; Ord. 1510 § 5, 2016; Ord. 1497 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1362 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.08.040 Residential zoning district general development standards.
    Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Tables 2-3 and 2-4 in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Chapters 21.16 through 21.30 of this title.

TABLE 2-3

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

R1

GH

Minimum lot size

Minimum area, width, and depth for new parcels

Lot area

7,200 sq. ft.; 6,000 sq. ft. where authorized as a planned development, and in Tract No. 569

Minimum lot area = 1,800 sq. ft.

Lot width

60 ft.; 65 ft. for corner lots; 50 ft. in Tract No. 569; 45 ft. for cul-de-sac and knuckle lots

23 ft.

Lot depth

90 ft.

As approved by the commission

Maximum density (1)

5 dwellings per acre

10.8 dwellings per acre

Maximum number of dwelling units per parcel

1 unit per parcel. See Section 21.08.055 for accessory dwelling unit standards

Setbacks

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 21.18.090 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to required setbacks

Front

20 ft.

As determined by the commission

Sides (each)

5 ft. (2)/10 ft. street side

As determined by the commission

Rear

Single story = 10 ft. (3)

As determined by the commission

Two story = 25 ft. or 20% of the average lot depth, whichever is less (3)

As determined by the commission Minimum 320 sq. ft. private rear yard adjacent to each unit

Large through lots (4)

Front: 20 ft.

As determined by the commission

Side: 10 ft.; 15 ft. corner lots

 

Rear: 25 ft. or 20% of the average lot depth, whichever is less

 

Height limit (5)

27 ft./2 stories

30 ft./2 stories

Ratio of 2nd story building area to 1st story building

70% (6), (9)

As determined by the planning commission

Balconies and decks

Prohibited in side and rear yards when adjacent to other single-family homes(10)

As determined by the planning commission

Site coverage

55%; 45% on parcels of 10,000 sq. ft. or more

30% project building coverage. Maximum 11 units per structure

Floor area ratio (7), (8)

0.5 + 0.08 bonus (subject to Section 21.08.045)

0.5 + 0.10 (subject to Section 21.08.045)

Minimum floor area

As required by Table 2-4

Landscaping

As required by Section 21.20.040 (Landscape area requirements)

Parking

As required by Chapter 21.22 (Parking and Loading)

Attached garages

Maximum size: 2-car 450 sq. ft.; 3-car 650 sq. ft. (11)


 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

R2

R3

R4

Minimum lot size

Minimum area and width for parcels proposed in new subdivisions

Lot area

7,200 sq. ft.

 

10,000 sq. ft.

Lot width

60 ft.; 65 ft. for corner lots

 

Maximum density (1)

10.8 units per acre

15 units per acre

30 units per acre

Maximum number of dwelling units per parcel

1 unit per 3,600 sq. ft. of site area. See Section 21.08.055 for accessory dwelling unit standards.

1 unit per 2,904 sq. ft. of site area See Section 21.08.055 for accessory dwelling unit standards.

1 unit per 1,452 sq. ft. of site area. See Section 21.08.055 for accessory dwelling unit standards.

Setbacks required

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 21.18.090 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to required setbacks

Front

20 ft.

Sides (each)

5 ft.; 10 ft. corner lot

Between residential structures

20 ft., plus 5 ft. for second story; 15 ft. between side walls and front or rear of other buildings, plus 2.5 ft. for each additional story. See Section 21.08.050(B)

Second story

2-story nonresidential or multi-family structures shall be set back 25 ft. from an existing single-family development; 3-story or taller structures shall be set back from single-family residential a minimum of 100 ft.

Rear

25 ft. or 20% lot depth, whichever is less

Height limit (5)

28 ft./2 story

35 ft./3 story

Site coverage

40%

Minimum floor area

As required by Table 2-4

Private open space – multi-family units

100 sq. ft. per unit with no dimension smaller than 10 ft.

Landscaping

As required by Chapter 21.20 (Landscaping)

Parking

As required by Chapter 21.22 (Parking and Loading)

 

Notes:

     (1)      Maximum Number of Dwelling Units Allowed per Net Buildable Acre in a Single-Family Subdivision or Multi-Family Project. The actual number of units allowed is determined through the subdivision or land use permit process, as applicable.

     (2)      Minimum 5-ft. side yard setback required for second story additions in zero lot line developments.

     (3)      At least 1,000 sq. ft. of open area shall remain in the rear yard and subject to other requirements of Section 21.08.050 (Standards for specific land uses), subsection (b) (Accessory uses and structures).

     (4)      These setbacks apply to parcels that are “through-lots” with an area greater than 10,000 sq. ft.

     (5)       Maximum Allowed Height of Structures. See also Section 21.18.050 (Height measurement and height limit exceptions). No architectural features, windows, etc., above second story eave line.

     (6)      Maximum wall height of 10 ft. for first story area used to meet 70% ratio requirement. The square footage of any vaulted ceiling area above the 10-ft. wall height shall be counted toward the second story area when calculating the 70% second to first story ratio.

     (7)      For R1 purposes only, FAR is to be calculated on living area only, including living area for second dwelling units. Garage area is not part of the FAR calculations.

     (8)      FARs for new subdivisions of 5 lots or more shall be determined by the commission.

     (9)      The portion of a second story balcony or deck that is covered by a roofed structure shall be counted toward the 70% ratio.

     (10)    Covered balconies, second story decks, and second floor open courtyards, where more than 50% of the perimeter walls of the covered balcony, second story deck, or second floor open courtyard are enclosed, shall count towards the maximum FAR.

     (11)    Garages in excess of the maximum size requirements shall have the additional square footage counted toward the maximum FAR. Ancillary uses such as workshops, laundry facilities, and storage may be included in the maximum garage area as long as the primary purpose of the garage, which is for vehicle storage, is maintained.

 

 

TABLE 2-4

MINIMUM RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS

 

Minimum Area by District

Dwelling Size

R1, GH (1)

R2, R3, R4 (2)

Studio

N/A

500

1 bedroom

1,150

750

2 bedrooms

1,225

950

3 bedrooms

1,400

1,150

Notes:

     (1)      In tract No. 569, an additional 100 sq. ft. per additional bedroom is required for more than 4 bedrooms.

     (2)      For more than 3 bedrooms, an additional 100 sq. ft. per additional bedroom is required.

 

(Ord. 1548 § 4, 2019; Ord. 1527 § 6, 2017; Ord. 1514 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1476 § 6, 2012; Ord. 1463 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1461 § 4, 2011; Ord. 1459 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1380 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.08.045 Floor area bonus.
    There are certain architectural and design features that promote neighborhood compatibility, reduce building massing, and protect privacy in single-family neighborhoods. When the following specific design elements are incorporated into the home design, the allowable floor area ratio may be increased from 0.50 to a maximum of 0.58, provided a mailed courtesy notice is provided to adjoining owners, unless the planning/building director determines within ten days of the receipt of such plans that the plan will adversely affect an adjoining property due to an unusual design feature. Each design element has a corresponding FAR bonus, which is cumulatively added to base 0.50 FAR. In no case may the allowable FAR exceed 0.58.

 

Design Element

FAR Bonus

Second story façade must be set back a minimum of 10 ft. (as measured from the exterior of the wall) directly behind dominant (meaning longest in linear feet) first story façade. To qualify for this FAR bonus, the width of the second story façade, that is set back 10 ft. behind the first story façade, must be more than ½ the width of the entire house. The second story façade includes any building area including the exterior wall of the house, a second story balcony (covered or not), a second story deck (covered or not), or a second story open courtyard.

0.02

Ratio of second story building area to first story building area:

 

decreased to 60%

0.02

decreased to 50%

0.03

Increase required side yard setback by an additional 5 ft. for both the first and second floor.

0.01 per side yard

Variations of roof lines, building height, and pitches on the first and second floors, visible from all adjoining streets.

0.01

 

(Ord. 1548 § 5, 2019; Ord. 1476 § 4, 2012; Ord. 1380 § 4, 2006)

 

 

 

21.08.050 Standards for specific land uses.
    (a)    Affordable Housing Density Bonus Incentives.

    (1)    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide incentives for the production of affordable housing, senior housing, housing for transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons, or construction of a child care facility located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to a qualifying density bonus project in compliance with State Government Code Section 65915 et seq., regarding density bonuses and other incentives.

    (2)    Qualified Project. To qualify for a density bonus and concessions or other incentives, the developer of a proposed housing project of at least five units, must provide housing units affordable to certain income households, donate land, provide housing units to transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons, construct a child day care facility located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to a qualifying density bonus project, or provide qualifying senior housing pursuant to State Government Code Section 65915 et seq.

    (3)    Application and Review Process.

    (A)   Preliminary Application. A developer of a qualified housing project, senior housing project, housing for transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons, or construction of a child care facility located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to a qualifying density bonus project may submit a preliminary application pursuant to this article prior to the submittal of any formal requests for approvals for a housing project development.

    Within thirty days of receipt of the application, the planning department shall provide to the applicant the procedures for compliance with this section, a copy of this section and related policies, the pertinent sections of the state codes to which reference is made in this section, and an application.

    (B)   Submittal. The completed formal application shall include the following information.

    (i)     A legal description of the total site proposed for development including a statement of present ownership and present and proposed zoning.

    (ii)    A letter signed by the present owner stating how the project will comply with California Government Code Section 65915 et seq., and stating what is being requested of the city, e.g., density bonus and specific concessions or incentives.

    (iii)   A pro-forma for the proposed project to justify the requested concession or incentive and to establish the land valuation per dwelling unit of bonus units. The applicant shall show that any requested waiver or reduction of a development standard is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.

    (iv)   A management plan for complying with the maintenance of the designated units regarding income qualification documentation and rent or sale price documentation.

    (v)    Site plan and supporting plans per the planning application submittal requirements.

    (C)   Review. The review of an application for a density bonus and concession or incentive request shall be processed as a planning application pursuant to Chapter 21.32 of the municipal code. The planning department shall review the application for its conformance with California Government Code Section 65915 et seq., and applicable city codes and make a report to the planning commission. If the application involves a request for direct financial incentives, then any action by the planning commission on the application shall be advisory only, and the city council shall have the authority to make the final decision on the application.

    (b)    Accessory Uses and Structures. This section provides standards for accessory uses and structures allowed in the applicable zoning district (see Section 21.08.030, Residential zoning district land uses and permit requirements), subject to the following criteria and standards:

    (1)    Relationship of Accessory Use to the Main Use. Accessory uses and structures shall be incidental to and not alter the residential character of the site.

    (2)    Attached Structures. An attached accessory structure shall:

    (A)   Be compatible with, and made structurally a part of the main structure (e.g., share a common wall with the main structure, rely partially on the main structure for structural support or be attached to the main structure);

    (B)   Comply with the requirements of this title applicable to the main structure, including height, lot coverage and setbacks;

    (C)   Be compatible with the materials and color of the main structure whenever feasible.

    (3)    Detached Structures.

    (A)   The floor area of any one detached accessory structure shall not exceed forty percent of the required rear yard area. The total floor area(s) of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed fifty percent of the required rear yard area;

    (B)   A minimum of one thousand square feet shall be maintained as rear yard open space for single-family detached uses;

    (C)   Detached accessory structures shall not exceed a height of six to ten feet within five feet of a rear or side property line, or a height of fifteen feet within ten feet of a rear or side property line;

    (D)   Detached accessory structures shall be compatible with the materials and color of the main structure whenever feasible.

    (4)    Setback Requirements. Setbacks shall be in compliance with Table 2-5 (Required setbacks—Accessory residential uses and structures) of this section.

 

 

TABLE 2-5

REQUIRED SETBACKS - ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL USES AND STRUCTURES

 

Single-Family Homes

Accessory Structure

Type of Setback1, 2

Required Setback

Garage3, gazebo, greenhouse, patio cover4, storage shed, workshop or similar accessory structure (more than 120 sq. ft.)

Sides and rear

5 ft.

Street side

As required for the main structure.

Swimming pool, spa, fish pond5, permanently installed outdoor play equipment

Sides and rear

5 ft.

Street side

10 ft.

Air conditioning equipment, pool and spa equipment

Sides

3 ft. or 18 in. if located behind main structure

 

Street side

5 ft.

Rear

18 in.

 

Multi-Family

Garage, gazebo, greenhouse, patio cover, storage shed, workshop

Sides, street side

As required for main structure

Rear

As required for main structure

Swimming pool, spa, fish pond5, outdoor play equipment

Sides

5 ft.

Street side

10 ft.

Rear

5 ft.

 

Notes:

(1) Where a parcel is situated so that the front, side, or rear property lines are not readily determinable, required setbacks shall be established by the planning director.

(2) On reverse corner lots, accessory structures located in the required rear yard within 25 ft. of the street side property line shall be set back five ft. from the rear property line.

(3) Garages on corner or reverse corner lots shall not be built closer than 20 ft. to any street side property line.

(4) For attached patio covers and patio enclosures, the minimum required setbacks are:

(a) 20 ft. from front property line,

(b) 5 ft. from side property line,

(c) 20% of the lot depth or 25 ft., whichever is less from the rear property line.

     Exception: Patio covers with a width less than 50 percent of the total lot width may have a 10-ft. minimum rear setback. For detached patio covers and patio enclosures, the minimum required setbacks are:

(i)  20 ft. from front property line;

(ii) 10 ft. from house;

(iii) 5 ft. from side and rear property lines.

(5) Ponds less than 18 in. in depth shall be allowed within the front setback area.

 

 

    (c)    Multi-Family Uses—Separation between Buildings and Adjoining Properties. This section provides locational standards for multi-family residential dwellings, in compliance with Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, which shall be subject to the following standards and criteria:

    (1)    Separation Between Facing Front Walls. Opposing front walls of multi-family residential dwellings shall be separated by a minimum of twenty-five feet for a one-story structure, measured from the nearest points of exterior walls, with an additional five feet of separation provided for every additional one story in height.

    (2)    Separation Between Facing Rear Walls. Opposing rear walls of multi-family residential dwellings shall be separated by a minimum of twenty feet for a one-story structure, measured from the nearest points of exterior walls, with an additional five feet of separation provided for every additional one story in height.

    (3)    Separation Between End Walls and Facing Front or Rear Walls. Rear or front walls facing an end wall of a separate multi-family residential dwelling shall be separated by a minimum of fifteen feet for a one-story structure, measured from the nearest points of exterior walls, with an additional two and one-half feet of separation provided for every additional one story in height.

    (4)    Separation for Obliquely Aligned Structures. To accommodate facing multi-family residential dwellings which are obliquely aligned, the distances provided in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section may be decreased by a maximum of five feet at one corner of the subject facing wall, if increased by a similar or greater distance at the opposite corner of the facing wall.

    (5)    Separation from Single-Family Dwellings.

    (A)   Multi-family residential dwellings two stories in height or greater shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet from existing single-family residential uses.

    (B)   Multi-family residential parking facilities, single-story structures and landscaping are allowed within one hundred feet of existing single-family residential uses.

    (d)    Setback Requirements for Specific Structures.

    (1)    Detached decks, with or without hand rails, freestanding solar devices, steps, terraces and other site design elements that are placed directly upon the finish grade, and which equal or exceed a height of eighteen inches above the surrounding finish grade at any point, shall conform to the setback requirements identified in Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title for detached accessory structures.

    (2)    Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.

    (A)   Outdoor swimming pools (above-ground or in-ground), spas, hot tubs and all related equipment shall be located a minimum of five feet measured from any property line or primary structure to the water line. Related equipment may be located within eighteen inches of side and rear property lines when located a minimum of five feet from the main dwelling and ten feet from a neighbor’s dwelling.

    (B)   Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, other similar water features and all related equipment shall be fenced in compliance with the Uniform Building Code.

    (e)    Single-Story Room Additions/Enclosed Patio Structures. Single-story room additions, including screened and/or enclosed patio structures, may be located within a required rear yard in compliance with the following:

    (1)    Minimum distance of ten feet from the rear property line shall be maintained;

    (2)    Width of the room addition shall not exceed fifty percent of the average lot width;

    (3)    Required rear yard area shall be a minimum of one thousand square feet, including swimming pools, spas, patios, deck and other similar features;

    (4)    Total footprint square footage of the primary structure and the room addition shall not exceed forty-five percent of the total lot area;

    (5)    Architectural style and materials of the room addition, including roof, shall be compatible with the primary structure.

    (f)    Detached Accessory Structures. Detached accessory structures may be located within a required rear yard provided:

    (1)    Minimum distance of ten feet is maintained from the primary structure;

    (2)    Minimum distance of five feet is maintained to a side or rear property line;

    (3)    Not located within twenty feet of the rear property line on a through lot;

    (4)    Not located in the required exterior side yard of a back-to-back corner lot;

    (5)    Not to exceed a height of fifteen feet;

    (6)    Where a corner lot has a rear to side relationship with a key lot, a minimum distance equal to the key lot side yard setback shall be maintained from the rear property line and street of the corner lot.

    (g)    Unenclosed Patio Structures. Screened unenclosed patio structures may be located within a required rear yard provided the following:

    (1)    Minimum distance of ten feet from the rear property line is maintained;

    (2)    Width of the unenclosed patio structure does not exceed fifty percent of the average lot width. (Ord. 1528 § 4, 2017; Ord. 1527 § 7, 2017; Ord. 1432 § 4, 2009; Ord. 1362 § 4, 2004; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.08.055 Standards for accessory dwelling units.
    Building permits will be issued for accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22 and the maximum standards allowed therein. (Ord. 1556 § 2, 2020; Ord. 1527 § 8, 2017)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.08.060 Reasonable accommodation.
    (a)    Purpose. It is the policy of the city to provide reasonable accommodation in the application of its zoning or building laws, policies or procedures for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Administration Act of 1988 (FHA) and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA).

 

    The purpose of this section is to provide a clear and defined process for disabled persons to make reasonable accommodation requests from existing development standards in the city’s municipal code.

    For the purpose of this chapter, the term “disabled” or “disability” shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in the Federal Fair Housing Act (FHA) and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA).

    (b)    Application.

    (1)    Any disabled person, or his or her representative, may request a reasonable accommodation in the application of a zoning or building law, policy or procedure, which may act as a barrier to fair housing opportunities, by filing a complete application with the planning department. There shall be no fee imposed in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under the provisions of this chapter.

    (2)    If the project for which the request is being made also requires some other approval, permit or entitlement, the applicant shall file the request together with the application for such approval, permit or entitlement.

    (c)    Required Information. The applicant shall provide the following information with the application:

    (1)    Applicant’s name, address, and telephone number;

    (2)    Address of the property for which the request is being made;

    (3)    The current actual use of the property;

    (4)    A description of the accommodation requested including reference to the development code provision, policy or procedure from which accommodation is being requested;

    (5)    The basis for the claim that the applicant is considered disabled under the FHA and the FEHA; and

    (6)    A detailed explanation of why the accommodation is reasonable and why the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling in the city. Where appropriate, the applicant shall include a summary of any potential means and alternatives considered in evaluating the need for the accommodation;

    (7)    Other supportive information deemed necessary by the city to facilitate proper consideration of the request.

    (d)    Notice of Request for Accommodation. Written notice of a request for reasonable accommodation shall be given as follows:

    (1)    In the event that there is no approval sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation, the notice shall be mailed to the owners of record of all properties which are immediately adjacent to the property (“abutting owners”) which is the subject of the request. For the purposes of this chapter only, abutting owners shall include owners of property that would abut the subject property if the existence of a street or alleyway were disregarded.

    (2)    In the event that the request is being made in conjunction with some other approval, permit or entitlement, the notice shall be transmitted along with the notice of the other proceeding.

    (e)    Grounds for Accommodation. The following findings shall be analyzed, made and adopted before any action is taken to approve or deny a request for reasonable accommodation and must be incorporated into the written notification relating to such decision:

    (1)    Whether the accommodation is reasonable considering the nature of the applicant’s disability, the surrounding land uses, and the rule, standard, policy, or practice from which relief is sought;

    (2)    Whether the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant equal opportunity to enjoy and use a specific dwelling in the city;

    (3)    Whether the accommodation will have only incidental economic or momentary benefits to the applicant, and whether the primary purpose of the accommodation is to assist with real estate speculation or excess profit making;

    (4)    Whether the accommodation will create a substantial adverse impact on surrounding land uses, or a public nuisance, that cannot be reasonably mitigated;

    (5)    Whether the accommodation is reasonably feasible considering the physical attributes of the property and structures;

    (6)    Whether there are alternative accommodations which may provide an equal level of benefit to the applicant, while minimizing adverse impacts on surrounding land uses and lessening the financial and/or administrative burden of the city;

    (7)    Whether the requested accommodation would constitute a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, polices or procedures of the city.

    (f)    Decision. The city staff shall review each application for reasonable accommodation and determine whether the application is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, city staff will promptly give written notice to the applicant of the additional information necessary to complete the application.

    The planning director shall have the authority to consider and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. The director shall (1) approve the accommodation request, (2) approve the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions, or (3) deny the request. A written determination shall be sent to the applicant by mail with factual findings, conclusions, and reasons for the decision. All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. If no appeal application is submitted within twenty days following the date the determination was rendered, the director’s determination shall be final.

    (g)    Appeals. Any applicant dissatisfied with the determination of the director may appeal to the planning commission as specified in the Fountain Valley Municipal Code Section 21.60.040.

    Any applicant dissatisfied with the determination of the planning commission may appeal to the city council as specified in Fountain Valley Municipal Code Section 21.60.040.

    (h)    Expiration of Grants of Reasonable Accommodation. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this code shall expire within twelve months from the effective date of approval or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval unless:

    (1)    A building permit has been issued and construction has commenced; or

    (2)    A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or

    (3)    The use is established.

    Any modification granted for an individual with a disability shall be considered a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and, at the determination of the decision-maker, shall not run with the land. Conditions of approval may, where deemed appropriate, provide for any or all of the following:

    (1)    Inspection of the affected premises periodically, as specified in the conditions, to verify compliance with this chapter and with any applicable conditions of approval.

    (2)    Prior to any transfer of interest n the premises, notice to the transferee of the existence of the modification, and the requirement that the transferee apply for a new modification as necessary. Once such transfer takes effect, the originally approved modification shall have no further validity.

    (3)    Removal of the improvement, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable and unfair financial burden, if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.

    (4)    Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.

    (5)    Other necessary conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

    (i)     Violation of Terms. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this code maybe revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such reasonable accommodation are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith. (Ord. 1422 § 5, 2008)

Chapter 21.10 COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1561 and 1562. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.10.010 Purpose.
    This chapter determines which land uses are allowed in each of the commercial and manufacturing zoning districts established by Section 21.04.020 (Zoning districts established) of this title, what land use permit is required to establish each use, and the basic development standards that apply to allowed land uses in each district. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.10.020 Purposes of commercial zoning districts.
    The purposes of the individual commercial zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:

    1.     CP (Professional Office) District. The CP zoning district applies to areas suitable for low-scale professional offices and related support services. The CP zoning district is consistent with the office commercial land use designation of the general plan.

    2.     C1 (Local Commercial) District. The C1 zoning district applies to areas suitable  for small-scale retail and personal service uses for essential needs located near residential neighborhoods. The C1 zoning district is consistent with the local commercial and general commercial land use designation of the general plan.

    3.     C2 (General Commercial) District. The C2 zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for broad range of retail and service commercial land uses designed to serve countywide and regional populations. The C2 zoning district is consistent with the general commercial land use designation of the general plan.

    4.     CM (Commercial Manufacturing) District. The CM zoning district applies to areas appropriate for light manufacturing and heavy commercial land uses that will not generate polluting or otherwise offensive impacts to surrounding areas. The CM zoning district is consistent with the commercial manufacturing land use designation of the general plan.

    5.     M1 (Manufacturing) District. The M1 zoning district applies to areas appropriate for intensive manufacturing land uses. The M1 zoning district is consistent with the commercial manufacturing land use designation of the general plan. (Ord. 1386 § 4, 2006; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.10.030 Commercial and manufacturing district land uses and permit requirements.
    Table 2-6 identifies the uses of land allowed by this title in the commercial and manufacturing zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 21.06.030 (Allowable land uses and permit requirements) of this title.

 

Note: where the last column in the tables (“Specific Use Regulations”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this title may also apply.

 

TABLE 2-6

 

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements  for
Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts

P

Permitted Use

 

Specific Use Regs.

CUP

Conditional Use Permit required

—

Use not allowed

 

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

LAND USE (1)

CP

C1

C2

CM

M1

AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agricultural production

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Agricultural produce market, wholesale

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Greenhouses, commercial, wholesale only

—

—

—

P

P

 

MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agricultural products processing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Apparel and fabric products manufacturing

—

—

—

P

P

 

Assembly of prepared materials

—

—

—

P

P

 

Bakery products distribution

—

—

—

P

P

 

Chemical product manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Concrete, gypsum, and plaster products

—

—

—

—

CUP

 

Electronics and appliance manufacturing

—

—

—

P

P

 

Food and beverage product manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Furniture/fixtures manufacturing, cabinet shops

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Fuel storage

—

—

—

—

CUP

 

Glass product manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Handcraft industries, small-scale manufacturing

—

—

P

P

P

 

Laundries and dry cleaning plants

—

—

—

P

P

 

Leather, fur products

—

—

—

P

P

 

Machinery manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Metal products fabrication, machine/welding shops

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Paper product manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Petroleum bulk storage

—

—

—

—

CUP

 

Pharmaceuticals manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Photographic processing

—

—

—

P

P

 

Plastics, synthetics, rubber products manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Printing and publishing

—

—

P

P

P

 

Quarry materials storage and distribution

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Recycling – Large collection facility

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Recycling – Small collection facility

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Research and development (R&D)

—

—

—

P

P

 

Stone and stone cut products

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Structural clay and pottery product manufacturing

—

—

—

—

CUP

 

Textile manufacturing

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution facilities

—

—

—

P

P

 

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements  for
Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts

P

Permitted Use

 

Specific Use Regs.

CUP

Conditional Use Permit required

—

Use not allowed

 

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

LAND USE (1)

CP

C1

C2

CM

M1

MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES (con’t)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Woodworking shops, including cabinetry

—

—

—

P

P

 

RECREATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

 

 

 

 

Accessory entertainment uses

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Assembly facilities and nonprofit institutions

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Billiard and pool halls

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

Clubs, lodges, membership meeting halls

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Dance halls

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

Health and fitness centers

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Libraries and museums

CUP

CUP

P

—

—

 

Night clubs and bars

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

Outdoor commercial recreation facilities

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

Schools - private

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

 

 

Schools - Specialized training and education

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Studios (dance, martial arts, music, photography, etc.)

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Theaters and auditoriums

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

Caretaker’s quarters

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Emergency shelters2

—

CUP

P2

—

—

 

Rooming and boarding houses

CUP

—

—

—

—

 

Residential care homes

CUP

—

—

—

—

 

Single room occupancy (SRO)

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

RETAIL TRADE

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory retail sales

P

P

P

CUP

CUP

 

Alcoholic beverage sales, off-premises

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Alcoholic beverage sales, on-premises

—

CUP/P4

CUP/P4

CUP/P4

CUP

21.10.060

Antiques, art galleries, collectibles

P

P

P

CUP

CUP

 

Auto parts sales

—

P

P

P

P

 

Auto sales and rental, new

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Auto sales and rental, used

—

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Bakeries, retail

—

P

P

—

—

 

Butcher shops

—

P

P

—

—

 

Building material stores

—

—

CUP

P

—

 

Convenience stores

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements  for
Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts

P

Permitted Use

 

Specific Use Regs.

CUP

Conditional Use Permit required

—

Use not allowed

 

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

LAND USE (1)

CP

C1

C2

CM

M1

RETAIL TRADE (con’t)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department stores

—

P

P

P

—

 

Drive-in and drive-through sales

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Drug stores, pharmacies

CUP

P

P

—

—

 

Equipment sales and rental

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Furniture, furnishings & appliance stores

—

P

P

P

CUP

 

Garden supply and equipment sales and services

 

P

P

P

CUP

 

General retail, primary use

CUP

P

P

CUP

—

 

Grocery stores

—

P

P

—

—

 

Heavy equipment sales and rental

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Hydroponic stores

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Lumber yards

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Multi-use commercial centers

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

 

Pet shops

—

P

P

P

—

 

Plant nurseries and garden supply stores

—

P

P

P

CUP

 

Recreational vehicle sales and rental

—

—

CUP

—

CUP

 

Restaurants – Large format

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

21.10.060

Restaurants – Small format

—

P

P

P

CUP

21.10.060

Restaurants – Accessory cafeterias

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Secondhand stores, pawn shops

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Specialized sporting goods store

—

P

P

CUP

CUP

 

Tattoo establishments

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ambulance services

CUP

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Automated teller machines (ATMs)

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Auto repair and maintenance, minor

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

P

 

Auto repair and maintenance, major

—

—

CUP

CUP

P

 

Banks and financial services

P

P

P

CUP

—

 

Business support services

—

P

P

P

P

 

Car wash, full service

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Car wash, self service

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

 

Catering services

—

—

—

CUP

P

 

Child day care centers

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

 

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements  for
Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts

P

Permitted Use

 

Specific Use Regs.

CUP

Conditional Use Permit required

—

Use not allowed

 

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

LAND USE (1)

CP

C1

C2

CM

M1

SERVICES (con’t)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contractor’s storage yard

—

—

—

—

CUP

 

Gunsmiths

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Hotels and motels

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

 

Medical services – Clinics, offices, and laboratories

P

P

P

—

—

 

Medical services – Extended care

P

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Medical services – Hospitals

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Mortuaries

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Offices – Administrative, business, professional

P

P

P

P

P

 

Personal services, accessory use

P

P

P

—

—

 

Personal services, primary use

P

P

P

—

—

 

Pest control services

—

—

—

P

P

 

Repair services for consumer products

—

P

P

CUP

P

 

Service stations

—

CUP

CUP

—

—

 

Storage, outdoor

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Storage, personal self-service (mini-storage)

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Veterinarians, animal hospitals, kennels, boarding

—

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

 

TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

Broadcast studios

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Heliports

—

—

—

—

CUP

 

Parking lots and garages

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Transit stations and terminals

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Vehicle and freight terminals

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

 

Wireless telecommunications facilities (3)

Administrative wireless facilities permit (3)

21.28

 

     Notes:

      (1)     See Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title for land use definitions. See Section 21.02.020 regarding uses not listed.

      (2)     Emergency shelters are limited to no more than 30 occupants per site as a permitted use. Emergency shelters with more than 30 occupants per site are permitted subject to the approval of a CUP.

      (3)     Wireless telecommunications facilities may also be permitted by a conditional use when the planning/building director determines that the project’s complexity or the public interest warrants the referral.

      (4)     On-premises beer and wine sales may be permitted per Section 21.10.060.

 

(Ord. 1555 § 6, 2020; Ord. 1523 § 6, 2017; Ord. 1460 § 4, 2011; Ord. 1456 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1428 § 4, 2009; Ord. 1385 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.10.040 Commercial and manufacturing district general development standards.
    Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-7, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Chapters 21.16 through 21.30 of this title.

TABLE 2-7

COMMERCIAL/MANUFACTURING DISTRICT

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

 

 

 

Development Feature

C1

CP

C2

CM

M1

Minimum lot size

Minimum area and width for new parcels.

Minimum area and width for parcels proposed in new subdivisions.

COMMERCIAL/MANUFACTURING DISTRICT Lot area

10,000 s.f.

7,200 s.f.

10,000 s.f.

1 acre

10,000 s.f.

Lot width

N.A.

N.A.

N.A.

None

If lot area is between:

 

 

 

 

 

10,000—12,499 = 80 ft.

 

 

 

 

 

12,500—14,999 = 80 ft.

 

 

 

 

 

15,000 and over = 100 ft.

Setbacks required

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 21.18.090 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to required setbacks.

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 21.18.090 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to required setbacks.

Front

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

30 ft. on arterial streets; 20 ft. on local streets.

20 ft.

Sides (each)

20 ft. adjacent to a residential zone; none required from interior lot lines otherwise; 10 ft. on the street side of a corner lot.

N.A.

N.A.

Rear

20 ft. adjacent to a residential zone; 10 ft. for through lots; none required otherwise.

20 ft. adjacent to a residential zone, none otherwise.

Floor area ratio (FAR) (2)

0.50

0.50

0.50

0.60

0.60

Lot coverage

N.A.

N.A.

N.A.

N.A.

80%

Height limit (1)

50 ft./4 stories

60 ft./4 stories

Landscaping

As required by Chapter 21.20 (Landscaping)

Parking

As required by Chapter 21.22 (Parking and Loading)

Signs

As required by Chapter 21.24 (Signs)

Notes:

     (1)      Maximum allowed height of structures. See also Section 21.18.050 (Height measurement and height exceptions).

 

     (2)      For the purpose of calculating floor area, floor area shall not include carports, garages, parking garages, elevator shafts, mechanical     rooms, and exterior patios associated with the use within the same development.

 

(Ord. 1463 § 4, 2011; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

 

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.10.050 Standards for specific land uses.
    (a)    Outdoor Dining, Display and Sales. This section provides development and operational standards for the establishment of outdoor uses, including temporary outdoor display and sales (subsection (a) of this section), permanent outdoor display and sales (subsection (b) of this section) and outdoor dining and seating areas (subsection (c) of this section), which shall be subject to the following criteria and standards:

    (1)    Temporary Outdoor Displays and Sales. Temporary outdoor displays and sales are allowed subject to the approval of a temporary use permit, in compliance with Chapter 21.48 of this title and the following standards:

    (A)   Provision for a fixed period of time as specified by the permit, or where not specified, not to exceed three days for a temporary event, and not to exceed a total of eighteen days per calendar year;

    (B)   Regulation of nuisance factors (e.g., prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjoining parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, waste and vibration);

    (C)   Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary event, as identified in subsection (a)(1) of this section;

    (D)   Provision for adequate temporary parking facilities, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including vehicular ingress and egress, and public transportation, if applicable, in compliance with Chapter 21.22 (Parking and Loading) of this title;

    (E)   Submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, satisfactory to the planning director, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used would be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event, the property would be cleaned of debris, litter or any other evidence of the temporary event upon completion or removal of the event, restored to the former condition (or better if deemed appropriate by the planning director), and shall continue to be used in compliance with this title;

    (F)    Provision for sanitary facilities, as deemed appropriate by the planning director;

    (G)   Provision for security and safety measures, if applicable and as deemed appropriate by the planning director;

    (H)   Appropriate setbacks shall be maintained to ensure adequate separation from adjoining land uses and a safe environment for vehicles and pedestrians;

    (I)    Signs shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 21.24 (Signs) of this title;

    (J)    Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including location, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;

    (K)   Provision for solid, hazardous and toxic waste collection, recycling and/or disposal;

    (L)   Other conditions that would ensure the operation of the proposed temporary event in an orderly and efficient manner.

    (2)    Outdoor Dining and Seating Areas. Outdoor dining and seating areas are allowed only on private property subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and the following standards:

    (A)   Areas in which alcoholic beverages would be served shall comply with the standards established by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control;

    (B)   Outdoor dining and seating areas shall comply with the following parking requirements:

    (i)     Parking requirements shall be calculated in compliance with Chapter 21.22 (Parking and Loading) of this title;

    (ii)    Outdoor dining areas that are not part of a specific restaurant, but are used in common with several restaurants or tenants within a commercial center, shall not be required to provide additional parking for those common outdoor areas.

    (C)   Outdoor dining areas, whether part of a restaurant or seating in common, shall provide adequate clean-up facilities, and associated procedures, in the following manner. Outdoor dining areas shall:

    (i)     Be cleaned on a continual basis for removal of litter and food items which would constitute a nuisance to the public health, safety and general welfare of the patrons and the community;

    (ii)    Contain waste receptacles for use by the public and/or restaurant employees.

    (D)   To ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and a high standard of quality, the following standards shall apply:

    (i)     Associated structural elements, awnings, covers, furniture, umbrellas or other physical elements that are visible from public rights-of-way, shall be compatible with the character of the main structure(s);

    (ii)    The relation of the outdoor facilities to churches, hospitals, public schools and residential uses shall be considered by the commission. Proper mitigation measures shall be applied to eliminate potential impacts related to glare, light, loitering and noise;

    (iii)   Outdoor facilities that provide dancing, entertainment or amplified music shall require the preparation of a noise analysis with appropriate mitigation measure, including limited hours of operation;

    (iv)   Outdoor facilities shall not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow and not necessitate the removal of existing vehicular or pedestrian movement areas. Facilities shall comply with ADA requirements;

    (v)    Outdoor facilities shall be separated from residential uses by a minimum distance of two hundred feet, except in a mixed-use project.

    (E)   The use of awnings, plants, umbrellas and similar elements is encouraged to enhance the pedestrian experience.

    (F)    Waste receptacles shall be provided in outside seating areas, where and when deemed appropriate by the planning director.

    (b)    Emergency Shelters. This subsection provides standards for permanent emergency shelter facilities to provide temporary housing for the homeless.

    (1)    A single emergency shelter for thirty occupants, or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not to exceed thirty occupants, shall be allowed as a permitted use in the C-2 zone, consistent with Section 65583(4)(A) of the California Government Code. Emergency shelters up to thirty occupants are permitted in the C-2 zone by right.

    (A)   Shelters exceeding thirty occupants are permitted subject to the approval of a CUP.

    (2)    Stays at the facility shall be on a first-come first-served basis with clients only on-site and admitted to the facility between five p.m. to eight a.m. Clients must vacate the facility by eight a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night.

    (3)    Maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed one hundred twenty days in a three hundred sixty-five-day period.

    (4)    Facility location shall be within a half mile from an OCTA bus stop, as measured from the property line.

    (5)    A minimum of five hundred feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter, as measured from the property line.

    (6)    A minimum of one staff member per fifteen beds shall be awake and on duty when the facility is open.

    (7)    Bike rack parking shall be provided by the facility.

    (8)    Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor area of the site in compliance with Section 21.18.060.

    (9)    A waiting area shall be provided which contains a minimum of ten square feet per bed provided at the facility. The waiting area shall be in a location not adjacent to the public right-of-way, shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot tall visually screening mature landscaping or a minimum six-foot tall decorative masonry wall, and shall provide consideration for shade/rain provisions.

    (10)  Any outdoor storage, including, but not limited to, items brought on-site by clients for overnight stays, shall be screened from public view. Any outdoor storage areas provided shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot tall visually screening mature landscaping or a minimum six-foot tall decorative masonry wall.

 

    (11)  All facility improvements shall comply with the Fountain Valley Municipal Code and the most current adopted Building and Safety Code, specific to the establishment of dormitories.

    (12)  A trash enclosure shall be provided on-site per the requirements of Section 21.18.100.

    (13)  An operational plan shall be provided for the review and approval of the planning and building director. Plans may be required to address additional specific needs as identified by the director. The approved operational plan shall remain active throughout the life of the facility. At a minimum, said plan shall contain provisions addressing the topical areas outlined below:

    (A)   Sleeping areas addressing the separation of male/female sleeping areas as well as any family areas within the facility;

    (B)   Loitering control with specific measures regarding off-site controls to minimize the congregation of clients in the vicinity of the facility during hours that clients are not allowed on-site;

    (C)   Management of outdoor areas, including a system for daily admittance and discharge procedures, and monitoring of waiting areas with goals to minimize disruption to nearby land uses;

    (D)   Staff training with objectives to provide adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter and income;

    (E)   Alcohol and illegal drugs addressing how the operator will control and regulate drug and alcohol use by clients on the premises;

    (F)    Communication and outreach with objectives to maintain good communication and response to operational issues which may arise from the neighborhood, city staff, or the general public;

    (G)   Screening of clients for admittance eligibility with objectives to provide first service to city of Fountain Valley residents;

    (H)   Counseling programs to be provided with referrals to outside assistance agencies, and provide an annual report on this activity to the city;

    (I)    Litter control with an objective to provide for the timely removal of litter attributable to clients within the vicinity of the facility;

    (J)    The operator shall provide the city with the most current contact information for the operator of the facility during the normal daytime office business hours, and the nighttime contact information for the person on duty when the emergency shelter is operating.

    (14)  The facility may provide the following services in designated areas separate from sleeping areas:

    (A)   A recreation area either inside or outside the shelter;

    (B)   A counseling center for job placement, education, health care, legal, or mental health services;

    (C)   Laundry facilities to serve the number of clients at the shelter;

    (D)   Kitchen for the preparation of meals;

    (E)   Dining hall;

    (F)    Client storage area (i.e., for the overnight storage of bicycles and personal items);

    (G)   Or similar services geared to homeless clients.

    (15)  An emergency shelter shall provide off-street parking at a ratio of one space per four beds, and/or one-half space per bedroom designed as a family unit with children, plus one per staff member.

    (16)  Floor area ratio, maximum building height, minimum lot size, maximum lot coverage, setbacks, signs, and landscaping shall comply with Section 21.10.040 Table 2-7.

    (c)    Single-Room Occupancy Housing. This subsection provides development and operational standards for the establishment of single-room occupancy housing (SRO).

    (1)    Conditional Use Permit. Single-room occupancy housing shall be allowed by conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 21.36 (Conditional Use Permits) subject to the provisions of the applicable zoning district, and the regulations of this subsection.

    (A)   Management Plan. Each SRO project shall submit a management plan to the department as part of the conditional use permit application. This plan shall contain information regarding the development’s projected staffing needs, facility management and operations, emergency procedures, security, rental procedures, and proposed rental rates.

    (B)   Revocations and Modifications of Conditional Use Permit. The city may revoke or modify the permit in compliance with Chapter 21.62 (Revocations and Modifications).

    (2)    Management Requirements.

    (A)   Resident Manager. Each SRO project containing sixteen or more units shall have a resident manager available on a twenty-four hour basis.

    (B)   Annual Report. Each SRO development owner shall file an annual report with the department. This report shall include the range of monthly rents, the monthly income of the residents, occupancy rates, and the number of vehicles owned by the residents.

    (3)    Tenant Occupancy and Income Restrictions.

    (A)   Length of Tenancy. Rental units shall be established for weekly and monthly tenancies only. Deposit requirements shall be specified for each type of tenancy. Less than monthly stay pays transient occupancy tax in accordance to Chapter 3.08.

    (B)   Tenant Income Restrictions. SRO developments shall be restricted to low and very low-income individuals as defined by the general plan housing element. This restriction shall not apply to an SRO project’s twenty-four hour resident manager.

    (4)    Standards. The commission shall use the following standards and criteria when determining the appropriateness of granting the conditional use permit:

    (A)   Compliance with Codes. Single-room occupancy housing (SRO) projects shall comply with the most recent city building and housing codes.

    (B)   Room Size Requirements. Individual dwelling units within an SRO development shall have:

    (i)     Single Occupancy Rooms. Single occupancy room size of no less than one hundred fifty square feet and no greater than two hundred twenty square feet;

    (ii)    Double Occupancy Rooms. Double occupancy room size of no less than two hundred seventy-five square feet and no greater than four hundred fifty square feet;

    (C)   Allowable Percentage of Double Occupancy Rooms. Double occupancy rooms shall not make up more than ten percent of any SRO project.

    (D)   Access Requirements.

    (i)     Each development shall comply with federal, state, and local disabled person access requirements.

    (ii)    One disabled person accessible unit shall be required for each twenty rooms. The unit shall comply with all applicable disabled person access requirements.

    (E)   Kitchens. Each SRO unit shall contain a kitchen. Kitchens shall be required to contain a sink with garbage disposal, a countertop (sixteen inches by twenty-four inches minimum), refrigerator, and stove or microwave oven. If stoves are not provided in each unit, then stoves shall be provided in a common kitchen area accessible to the entire SRO project.

    (F)    Bathrooms. Each SRO unit shall contain a bathroom. Bathrooms shall be required to contain a sink, toilet, and shower or bathtub.

    (G)   Closets. Each SRO unit shall contain a closet/storage space no less than forty-eight cubic feet in size.

    (H)   Common Open Space Requirements.

    (i)     For SRO developments containing thirty or fewer units, a minimum of four hundred square feet of common open space shall be provided.

    (ii)    For SRO developments containing thirty-one or more units, four hundred square feet of common open space shall be provided, with an additional fifteen square feet required per each additional unit over thirty.

    (I)    Monitored Entrances. Each SRO project shall locate a single, controlled entrance to the project adjacent to and in full view of the manager’s desk.

    (J)    Mailboxes. A mailbox shall be provided for each SRO unit.

    (K)   Bicycle Parking. Each SRO project shall provide a secured bicycle parking area. This area shall be able to accommodate one bicycle for every three units.

    (L)   Storage Spaces. Each SRO project shall provide each unit with a lockable storage space not less than ten cubic feet in size within the development.

    (M)  Laundry Facilities. Each SRO project shall provide laundry facilities in a separate room or rooms located in close proximity to the units served. A minimum of one washer and one dryer shall be provided for each ten units or fraction thereof.

    (N)   Utility Closets. Each SRO project shall provide a supply storeroom and/or utility closet with at least one laundry tub with hot and cold water on every floor.

    (O)   Trash Area. Each SRO project shall provide a centralized trash area compliant with Section 21.18.100.

    (P)    Development Standards. Minimum lot size, setbacks, floor area ratio, maximum building height, landscaping, parking, and sign regulations shall comply with Section 21.10.040 Table 2-7. (Ord. 1460 §§ 7, 8, 2011; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.10.060 Standards for small format restaurants including those providing on-premises beer and wine sales.
    (a)    Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to:

    (1)    Streamline the permitting process for small format restaurants including those providing on-premises beer and wine sales to benefit tenants, property managers, and the public.

    (2)    Administratively permit small format restaurants including those proving on-premises beer and wine sales that have little or no negative impacts to the property or commercial center in which they are located or to nearby noise sensitive uses, including all residential uses.

    (3)    Clearly establish standards for small format restaurants including those providing on-site premises beer and wine sales.

    (4)    Clearly establish the parameters in which a permit for a Small Format Restaurant or restaurants providing on-premises beer and wine sales may be revoked.

    (b)    Applicability. Except as noted in Section 21.10.060(c), all small format restaurants, as defined in Chapter 21.90, shall be subject to the following provisions:

    (1)    Approval of a small format restaurant permit by the planning director or designee. The small format restaurant permit shall:

    (A)   Establish hours of operation;

    (B)   Establish operating standards that eliminate or minimize nuisance factors (e.g., noise, odors, smoke, waste disposal, loitering, property maintenance, outdoor storage, signage and banners);

    (C)   Establish operating standards applicable to restaurants that propose to serve on-premise beer and wine;

    (D)   Be reviewed by applicable city departments prior to issuance;

    (E)   Be acknowledged and signed by the applicant and property owner/manager prior to issuance;

    (F)    Be valid for the period of the business license and shall be renewed annually at the time of renewal of the business license;

    (G)   Be able to be transferred upon closure of the business or change of ownership upon issuance of a new small format restaurant permit in conjunction with issuance of the business license; and

    (H)   Not be valid until an on-site inspection has verified compliance with necessary physical improvements for a new small format restaurant. An on-site inspection may or may not be necessary upon renewal subject to the review and approval of the planning and building director.

    (2)    Issuance of Business License.

    (c)    The following small format restaurants shall require issuance of a conditional use permit per Chapter 21.36:

    (1)    Restaurants with accessory entertainment;

    (2)    Restaurants in the M1-Manufacturing Zone;

    (3)    Restaurants with drive-thru facilities;

    (4)    Restaurants with exterior amplified sound (e.g. music, ordering);

    (5)    Restaurants proposing public operating hours between twelve a.m. and five a.m.

    (6)    Restaurant openings, such as windows or doors, within fifty feet of a residential property line and, in the opinion of the planning director, have the potential to result in negative impacts associated with noise, odors, public access, outdoor use, or involve an operator with a prior enforcement history.

    (7)    Restaurants that have the potential for heavy parking demand subject to review by the planning director.

    (8)    Except as noted in Section 21.10.060(e), restaurants serving alcohol.

    (9)    Restaurants that, in the opinion of the planning director, have the potential for an impact resulting from issues such as noise, odors, public access, outdoor use, or involve an operator with a prior enforcement history.

    (d)    Small Format Restaurant Standards. As applicable, the following standards shall apply to small format restaurants. At the discretion of the city, additional standards may be applied to address specific impacts arising from the nature and location of the proposed business subject to a conditional use permit.

    (1)    Planning department standards for small format restaurants.

    (A)   Public operating hours shall be limited to five a.m. to twelve a.m.

    (B)   Hours of delivery shall be restricted to the hours of seven a.m. to ten p.m. Monday through Saturday, and no time on Sunday or legal holiday.

    (C)   The number of persons inside the business shall not exceed the maximum occupancy load as determined by the fire department. If required by the fire department, signs indicating the occupant load shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the main entrance.

    (D)   Signs for the business shall comply with the sign regulations of the Fountain Valley Sign Code and applicable shopping center sign program.

    (E)   The windows of the business shall be free of any obstruction, tinting, or painting, except for window signage as permitted by the Fountain Valley Sign Code.

    (F)    There shall be no trash dumping from the restaurant between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., seven days a week.

    (G)   To prevent scavenging, illegal dumping, and to contribute to the general cleanliness of the shopping center, the business shall provide a refuse containment area with a screened and securable gate if not already provided by the property owner. Also, if not already provided by the property owner, exterior signage shall be provided outside of the trash enclosure prohibiting the scavenging of any material from the trash dumpster. Any refuse containment area and signage shall be included in the applicant’s plan check submittal to the building department and shall be installed prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy for the restaurant.

    (H)   To maintain the cleanliness of the shopping center, the restaurant owner shall be responsible for maintaining the area adjacent to their premises, over which they have control, free of litter and graffiti.

    (I)    The rear and/or side access door(s) (other than the main entrance) must remain closed twenty-four hours a day and shall only be used in cases of emergencies and deliveries.

    (J)    The restaurant owner shall comply with Labor Code Section 6404.5 prohibiting smoking in restaurants and public places, such as eating establishments and shall install “No Smoking” signage per the provisions of this statute.

    (K)   The establishment will not provide any video or arcade games.

    (2)    Building department standards for small format restaurants.

    (A)   Restaurant owner shall comply with California Building Code including requirements for California Disabled Access, Title 24, and grease interceptors.

    (3)    Police department standards for small format restaurants.

    (A)   There shall be no live entertainment within the facility.

    (B)   Install, and maintain in working order, security cameras to provide visual coverage of the areas available to the public on the inside of the restaurant, as well as the parking area adjacent to the restaurant.

    (C)   The restaurant owner acknowledges that Education Code Section 48200 et seq. provides that persons between the ages of six and eighteen are subject to compulsory education and are required to be in school unless exempted. Permittee agrees not to allow the business to become a “hang out” for truants and agrees not to allow youths to congregate or otherwise loiter in or around the business. Permittee shall take reasonable steps to control the conduct of others on this property so that it does not become a nuisance or otherwise disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or peace, health and safety of the community.

    (D)   An alarm system shall be installed and be of a type that sounds a signal when it is activated.

    (4)    Fire department standards for small format restaurants.

    (A)   Restaurant owner shall comply with California Fire Code requirements for Group “A” occupancies, automatic fire sprinklers, premises identification with address numbers, portable fire extinguishers, Knox box, commercial cooking systems, combustible materials, CO2 storage, public assembly permits, exits or exit access doorways, and panic and fire exit hardware.

    (5)    Public works department standards for small format restaurants.

    (A)   As required by the city engineer, install a reduced pressure principle device on the domestic water supply line to the buildings and install approved backflow devices for irrigation systems.

    (B)   Pay a traffic impact fee per Section 21.26.070.

    (e)    On-premises Beer and Wine Standards. The following standards, in addition to the standards for a small format restaurant in Section 21.10.060(d) above, shall apply to restaurants that are applying for an on-premises sale of beer and wine license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC), which authorizes the sale of beer and wine for consumption on or off the premises where sold. Distilled spirits may not be on the premises (except brandy, rum, or liqueurs for use solely for cooking purposes). Must operate and maintain the licensed premises as a bona fide eating place. Must maintain suitable kitchen facilities, and must make actual and substantial sales of meals for consumption on the premises. Minors are allowed on the premises.

    (1)    Standards for small format restaurants with on-premises beer and wine sales;

    (A)   Restaurant owner shall post signage in the restaurant stating, “No person under 21 will be served alcoholic beverages” and “Valid ID is required to purchase alcoholic beverages.”

    (B)   Restaurant owner shall ensure all pertinent employees have obtained Licensee Education on Alcohol and Drugs (LEAD) Certificates and copies of such certificates shall be kept on-site and made available for inspection by a public official upon request.

    (C)   Food shall be required to be served at all hours that the establishment is open for business.

    (D)   The quarterly gross sales of alcoholic beverages shall not exceed the gross sales of food during the same period.

    (E)   The sale of alcoholic beverages may not be advertised by signs directed toward persons outside of the building.

    (F)    The operator will ensure that there will be no drinking and/or loitering in the parking lot or within one hundred feet of the establishment.

    (G)   No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on any property adjacent to the licensed premises under the control of the licensee.

    (H)   All requirements of an on-premises beer and wine ABC license and of the City shall be observed at all times. The surrender, lapse, termination, suspension, or payment of a fine in lieu of suspension/termination, of the Alcoholic Beverage License issued for the site by the ABC shall be grounds for revocation of city approvals.

    (2)    Revocations. If approval for beer and wine sales is revoked or modified per Sections 21.10.060(f) and 4.04.100, operator may continue to operate under the provisions of a small format restaurant subject to approval of a revised small format restaurant approval. Also, per Section 4.04.100, if a beer and wine sales permit is revoked, no other application for a permit to carry on a similar business by such a person shall be considered for a period of one year.

    (f)    Revocation or Modification. A small format restaurant permit may be revoked or modified per Section 4.04.100 if any one of the following findings of fact can be made:

    (1)    Circumstances under which the small format restaurant permit was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare require the revocation or modification;

    (2)    The small format restaurant permit was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application;

    (3)    One or more of the requirements of the small format restaurant permit have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated;

    (4)    The improvement/use authorized in compliance with the small format restaurant permit approval is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation or statute of the city, state or federal governments; or

    (5)    The improvement/use authorized in compliance with the small format restaurant permit has become detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, or the manner of operation constitutes or is creating a nuisance.

    (g)    Unlawful to operate without approval. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant, or other person in control of property within the city for which the standards set forth in this section apply, to operate a business or land use in a zone requiring a conditional use permit or small format restaurant permit without such a permit, or to fail to comply with each and every condition of that conditional use permit or small format restaurant permit. (Ord. 1555 § 7, 2020)

Chapter 21.12 SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS
21.12.010 Purpose.
    This chapter determines which land uses are allowed in each of the special purpose zoning districts established by Section 21.04.020 (Zoning districts established) of this title, what land use permit is required to establish each use, and the basic development standards that apply to allowed land uses in each district. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.12.020 Special purpose zoning districts (PI, P/OS, SP).
    The purposes of the individual special purpose zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:

    (1)    PI (Public Institutional) District. The PI zoning district is applied to areas suitable for public, civic, government, education, cultural or quasi-public services. The PI zoning district is consistent with the public facilities land use designation of the general plan.

    (2)    P/OS (Parks and Open Space) District. The P/OS zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for active and passive recreational uses, including parks and natural preservation areas. The P/OS zoning district is consistent with the parks and open space land use designation of the general plan.

    (3)    Specific Plan (SP) Zoning District. The SP zoning district is intended to address specific areas within the community that warrant a comprehensive set of land use policies and standards designed for the unique features of an area. The SP zoning district is consistent with the specific plan designation of the general plan.

    Sites within the SP district shall be developed according to standards adopted within the applicable specific plan to address specific site constraints and opportunities, including buffering, traffic, noise and other land use compatibility impacts. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.12.030 Special purpose district land uses and permit requirements.
    Table 2-8 identifies the uses of land allowed by this title in each special purpose zoning district, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 21.06.030 (Allowable land uses and permit requirements) of this title.

 

Note: where the last column in the table (“Specific Use Regulations”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this title may also apply.

 

 

Table 2-8

SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT LAND USE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

 

 

P

Permitted Use

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements
for Special Purpose Land Use

CUP

Conditional Use Permit required

—

Use not allowed

LAND USE (1)

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

Specific Use Regulations

 

PI

P/OS

 

AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE USES

 

 

 

Hiking and bicycle trails

—

P

 

Nature preserves

—

P

 

RECREATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

 

 

 

Convention and exhibition centers

CUP

—

 

Golf course, private

—

P

 

Libraries and museums

CUP

—

 

Municipal facilities

P

P

 

Schools, colleges and universities

CUP

—

 

Schools, private

CUP

—

 

Outdoor recreational facilities

—

P

 

Assembly uses

CUP

—

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

 

 

Caretaker housing

CUP

—

 

SERVICES

 

 

 

Day care centers

CUP

—

21.30.020

Medical services - hospitals and related medical services

 

 

 

Wireless telecommunications facilities

CUP (2)

CUP (2)

21.28

 

     Notes:

     (1)      See Article VI for land use definitions. See Section 21.02.020 regarding uses not listed.

     (2)      Wireless telecommunications facilities may also be permitted by an administrative permit subject to the provisions in Chapter 21.28.

 

(Ord. 1523 § 7, 2017; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.12.040 Special purpose district general development standards.
    Subdivisions, new land uses and structures and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-9, in addition to any other applicable requirements of this chapter, and the development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Chapters 21.16 through 21.30 of this title.

 

 

TABLE 2-9

SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

PI

P/OS

Minimum lot size

Determined by the Commission through development review process, consistent with the General Plan.

Setbacks required

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 21.18.090 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to required setbacks.

Front

Determined by the Commission through development review process, consistent with the General Plan.

Sides (each)

Rear

Height limit

Landscaping

As required by Chapter 21.20 (Landscaping)

Parking

As required by Chapter 21.22 (Parking and Loading)

Signs

As required by Chapter 21.24 (Signs)

 

(Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.14 OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
21.14.010 Purpose.
    This chapter regulates new and existing structures and land uses in the overlay zoning districts established by Section 21.04.020 (Zoning districts established) of this title, being appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary zoning district on the zoning map. The provisions of this chapter provide guidance for development in addition to the standards and regulations of the primary zoning district, where important site, environmental, neighborhood or compatibility issues require particular attention in project planning. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.14.020 Applicability of overlay district provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of this title. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of this title, the most restrictive shall control. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.14.030 Affordable housing (–AH) overlay zoning district.
    (a)    Purpose. The –AH overlay district is intended to identify areas in the city that are appropriate locations for affordable housing.

    (b)    Applicability. Applicants for affordable housing projects shall apply for a change of zone to implement the –AH overlay district.

    (c)    Development Standards. Development of affordable housing projects shall comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of Section 21.08.050 (Affordable housing density bonus incentives) of this title and other applicable development standards of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.14.040 Floodplain (–FP) overlay zoning district—Flood damage prevention.
    (a)    Statutory Authorization.

    (1)    The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Consistent with this authority, the city of Fountain Valley does hereby adopt this chapter to implement the city’s floodplain management regulations.

    (b)    Findings of Fact.

    (1)    The floodplain district (FP) consists of flood hazard areas of Fountain Valley that are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

    (2)    These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

 

    (c)    Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

    (1)    To protect human life and health;

    (2)    To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

    (3)    To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

    (4)    To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

    (5)    To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

    (6)    To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

    (7)    To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

    (8)    To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

    None of the above-stated purposes shall be construed as imposing duties upon the city other than those specially mentioned in this chapter.

    (d)    Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

    (1)    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

    (2)    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

    (3)    Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

    (4)    Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;

    (5)    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas; and

    (6)    Reviewing proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972.

    (e)    Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

    “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

    “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or VO zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.

    “Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special Flood Hazard Area.”

    “A zone.” See “Special flood hazard area.”

    “Base flood” means the flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

    “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

    “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.

    “Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets).

    “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

    (1)    The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

    (2)    The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

    “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map” mean the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

    “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

    “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

    “Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).

    “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

    “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion control ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

    “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

    “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

    “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

    (1)    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

    (2)    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

    (3)    Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

    (4)    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

    “Levee” means a man made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

    “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

    “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.

    “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty consecutive days.

    “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

    “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

    “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    “New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    “One hundred year flood” or “100-year flood” means a flood which has one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the “base flood,” which will be the term used throughout this chapter.

    “Person” means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

    “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

    (1)    Built on a single chassis;

    (2)    Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

    (3)    Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

    (4)    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

    “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

    “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height, also referred to as “floodway.”

    “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means the area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.

    “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

    “Structure” means a walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally aboveground.

    “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

    “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure occurring within the five years immediately preceding the current application, regardless of any change in ownership during this period, which act or acts aggregated have a total cost that equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either:

    (1)    Before the improvement or repair is started; or

    (2)    If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

    For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

    (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

    (B)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.

    As used in the definition of “substantial improvement,” “market value” shall be determined by the building official by reference to the latest Orange County assessment roll, by a real estate appraiser secured at applicant’s cost or by reference to any other reliable information as the planning and building director deems necessary.

    “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

    “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

    “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

    (f)    Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.

    (g)    Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Orange County and incorporated areas Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated March 21, 2019, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated March 21, 2019, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS, and attendant mapping, is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study and FIRM are on file at City Hall, 10200 Slater Avenue, Fountain Valley, California 92708.

    (h)    Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.

    (i)     Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

    (j)     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

    (1)    Considered as minimum requirements;

    (2)    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

    (3)    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

    (k)    Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

    (l)     Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

    (m)   Permits Required. All applicable development permits shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection (g). Any application for permits shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Fountain Valley and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

    (1)    The proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

    (2)    In zone AO, elevation of existing grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;

    (3)    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be flood proofed;

    (4)    Certification by a registered civil engineer that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria per FEMA standards; and

    (5)    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

    (n)    Floodplain Administrator. The planning and building director is appointed as the floodplain administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits within the special flood hazard areas; duties that are handled by the planning and building department.

    (o)    Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to floodplain administration.

    (1)    Permit Review.

    (A)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

    (B)   Review all permits to determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding;

    (C)   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point;

    (D)   Assure that all other required state and federal permits have been obtained.

    (2)    Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection (g) of this section, the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer this chapter.

    (3)    Information to Be Obtained and Maintained. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed for flood insurance policies:

    (A)   The certified elevation requirement in subsection (p)(3)(A);

    (B)   The certification required in subsection (p)(3)(B);

    (C)   The flood proofing certification required in subsection (p)(3)(C);

    (D)   The certified elevation required in subsection (p)(3)(D).

    (4)    Alteration of Watercourses.

    (A)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

    (i)     Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:

    a.     Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).

    b.     All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

    Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

    (ii)    Changes in corporate boundaries: notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

    (B)   Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.

    (5)    Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.

    (p)    Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

    (1)    Anchoring.

    (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure according to the applicable standards as set forth in the California Building Code as adopted by the city;

    (B)   All manufactured homes to be placed shall meet the anchoring standards of subsection (s) of this section.

    (2)    Construction Materials and Methods.

    (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

    (B)   All new construction and substantial improvments shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

    (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

    (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements within zone AH or AO, shall be constructed so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

    (3)    Elevation and Flood Proofing.

    (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated one foot above the base flood elevation or elevated in accordance with the current California Building Code. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (p)(3)(C) of this section. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

    (B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in zone AO shall be elevated so that the lowest floor is at least as high as the depth number (specified on the FIRM) in feet above the highest adjacent grade plus on foot, or three feet if no depth number is specified. Within zone AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are to be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (p)(3)(C) of this section. Upon completion of the structure, a registered civil engineer shall certify that the elevation of the structure meets this standard and provide such certification to the floodplain administrator.

    When a regulatory floodway has been designated, encroachments shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the floodway which would increase flood elevations during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

    (C)   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (p)(3)(A) or (B) of this section or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

    (i)     Be flood proofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the base flood level so the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

    (ii)    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

    (iii)   Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

    (iv)   Be certified by a licensed civil engineer or licensed surveyor so that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

    (D)   Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria:

    (i)     For non-engineered openings:

    a.     Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

    b.     The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

    c.     Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and

    d.     Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or

    (ii)    Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.

    (q)    Standards for Utilities.

    (1)    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.

    (2)    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

    (r)    Standards for Subdivisions.

    (1)    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

    (2)    All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

    (3)    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

    (4)    All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.

    (5)    All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

    (s)    Standards for Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions.

    (1)    Anchoring. All manufactured homes to be placed and additions to manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by one of the following methods:

    (A)   By providing an anchoring system designed to withstand horizontal forces of fifteen pounds per square foot and uplift forces of nine pounds per square foot;

    (B)   By providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors; specifically:

    (i)     Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations with manufactured homes less than fifty feet long requiring only one additional tie per side,

    (ii)    Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home, with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than fifty feet long requiring only four additional ties per side, and

    (iii)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred pounds.

    (2)    Manufactured Home Parks and Manufactured Home Subdivisions. The following standards are required for: (A) manufactured homes not placed in manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (B) new manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (C) expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, and (D) repair, reconstruction or improvements to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions that equal or exceed fifty percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced:

 

    (A)   Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler shall be provided.

    (B)   All manufactured homes to be placed shall be placed on pads or lots elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood level or elevated in accordance to current CBC, whichever is higher, if elevated on pilings:

    (i)     The lots shall be large enough to permit steps;

    (ii)    The pilings shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and

    (iii)   Reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level.

    (t)     Standards for Recreational Vehicles.

    (1)    All recreational vehicles placed in the special flood hazard area will either:

    (A)   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or

    (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

    (C)   Meet the permit requirements of subsection (p) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (s) of this section.

    (u)    Floodways. Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

    (1)    Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1—A-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Fountain Valley.

    (2)    Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city of Fountain Valley shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

    (3)    If subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter or the California Building Code.

    (v)    Variance Procedure. The planning commission shall hear and decide all requests for variances. A variance may only be issued upon:

    (1)    A showing of good and sufficient cause;

    (2)    A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

    (3)    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

    All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a fee as set by city council resolution to cover processing and staff costs in preparing their report to the planning commission. Only the absolute minimal variance shall be granted and variances shall only be granted to the extent necessary. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

    (w)   Appeals. The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals from any decision of the floodplain administrator pursuant to this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal to the city council. Appeals shall be accompanied by a processing fee set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1541 § 4, 2019; Ord. 1529 §§ 4—19, 2017; Ord. 1426 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1359 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.14.050 Seismic hazard (–SH) overlay zoning district.
    (a)    Purpose. The –SH overlay district is intended to address potential seismic hazards within the city. Although there are no active earthquake faults within the city, the city may be subject to earthquake related ground shaking from faults in the vicinity. Specific geologic hazards related to ground shaking include a potential for liquefaction in areas along the Santa Ana River and south of the I-405 Freeway.

    (b)    Applicability—Standards. To reduce liquefaction potential in areas identified in the –SH overlay area, development may be subject to special design requirements and preparation of a site specific soils report. These requirements shall be identified on a case-by-case basis as determined by the city building official. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.14.060 Planned development (–PD) overlay zoning district.
    (a)    Purpose. The –PD overlay district may be designated by the city in areas where the city has determined that flexibility in the application of development standards may produce development projects of higher quality than might be achieved through the strict application of the development standards required by the primary zoning district.

    (b)    Applicability. The –PD overlay district may be combined with any residential, commercial or manufacturing zoning district.

    (c)    Allowed Land Uses. Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district may be allowed within the –PD overlay district, except when the ordinance rezoning a site to the –PD overlay includes specific limitations on allowable land uses.

    (d)    Development Standards. Subdivisions, new land uses and structures and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be established in general compliance with the requirements of the primary zoning district and other applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Chapters 21.16 through 21.30 of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.14.070 Housing opportunity overlay.
    (a)    Purpose. The housing opportunity overlay district (-HO) is intended to provide for the availability of housing sites to meet the projected future new housing construction needs identified in the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA). The housing opportunity overlay establishes alternative land use and development standards for sites identified in the city of Fountain Valley’s adopted general plan housing element.

    (b)    Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of this title. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of this title, the most restrictive shall control.

    (c)    Development Standards. Development standards for the housing opportunity district shall apply to the following:

    (1)    Housing Opportunity Overlay District Area #1 (-HO1). Development standards for the sites identified as (-HO1) on the city of Fountain Valley Zoning Map shall comply with the provisions of Sections 21.08.020(2) (Garden Homes) and all applicable standards of Title 21 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code.

    (A)   Permit Required. Residential uses identified in Table 2-2 of Section 21.08.030 of this title shall be permitted as a matter of right, subject to the development standards applicable to residential uses identified in Section 21.08.020(2).

    (B)   Allowed Uses. Uses within housing opportunity overlay district area #1 (-HO1) shall be reserved for residential uses only. Applicants shall be permitted to request a waiver of the provisions stated in subsection (a) for nonresidential uses identified in the base zone. Any waiver request shall demonstrate the availability of appropriately zoned alternative sites to accommodate the remaining RHNA target need prior to granting the waiver request.

    (2)    Housing Opportunity Overlay District Area #2 (-HO2). Development standards for the sites identified as (-HO2) on the city of Fountain Valley Zoning Map shall comply with the provisions of Section 21.08.020(5) (High Density Multiple Dwelling Unit) and all applicable standards of Title 21 of the Fountain Valley Municipal Code.

    (A)   Minimum Density Requirements. Development shall be permitted at a minimum density of thirty dwelling units per gross acre.

    (B)   Permit Required. Residential uses identified in Table 2-2 of Section 21.08.030 of this title shall be permitted as a matter of right, subject to the development standards applicable to residential uses identified in Chapter 21.08.

    (C)   Allowed Uses. Uses within housing opportunity district area #2 (-HO2) shall be reserved for residential uses only. Applicants shall be permitted to request a waiver of the provisions stated in subsection (c)(2)(B) for nonresidential uses identified in the base zone. Any waiver request shall demonstrate the availability of appropriately zoned alternative sites to accommodate the remaining RHNA target need prior to granting the waiver request. (Ord. 1490 § 4, 2013)

Chapter 21.16 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
21.16.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform performance standards which are designed to minimize and mitigate the potential impacts of development within the city and promote compatibility with surrounding areas and land uses. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.16.020 Applicability.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to all new and existing land uses, including permanent and temporary uses, in all zoning districts except as provided in Section 21.01.040 of this title. Existing uses on the effective date of this chapter shall not be altered or modified to conflict with, or further conflict with, these standards. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.16.030 Air pollution—Smoke/particulate matter and dust/dirt.
    (a)    Compliance. Sources of air pollution shall comply with rules identified by the Environmental Protection Agency (Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40), the California Air Resources Board and the Southern California Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).

    (b)    Excessive Air Pollution Prohibited. Uses, activities and processes shall not operate in a manner that emit excessive dust, fumes, smoke or that exceed the requirements identified in subsection a of this section.

    (c)    SCAQMD Permit. Operators of activities, processes or uses that require approval to operate from the Southern California Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), shall file a copy of the permit with the department within thirty days of permit approval. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.16.040 Noise.
    (a)    Noise Impact Evaluation for Residential Uses.

    (1)    All new residential projects to be constructed near existing sources of non-transportation noise (including commercial facilities, public parks with sports activities) shall demonstrate through an acoustical study by a registered engineer that the indoor noise levels will be consistent with the provisions of the city’s noise ordinance (Section 21.16.040 of this code).

    (2)    A noise impact evaluation may be required for other projects if determined necessary by the environmental review committee. Should noise abatement be necessary, the city shall require the implementation of mitigation measures based on a detailed acoustical study prepared by a registered engineer.

    (b)    Compliance with Noise Standards.

    (1)    Prior to development approval, new commercial, industrial or any redevelopment project or proposed development near existing residential land use shall demonstrate compliance with the city’s noise ordinance (Section 21.16.040 of this code).

    (2)    New developments shall be allowed only if appropriate mitigation measures are included so that the applicable noise standards are met. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.16.050 Hazardous materials storage.
    (a)    Compliance with State Law. The following standards are intended to ensure that the use, handling, storage and transportation of hazardous substances comply with all applicable state laws (Government Code Section 65850.2 and Health and Safety Code Section 25505, et seq.) and that appropriate information is reported to the city in a timely manner.

    (b)    Definition. For the purposes of this section, hazardous substances shall include all substances on the comprehensive master list of hazardous substances compiled and maintained by the California Department of Health Services.

    (c)    Conditional Use Permit Required. A conditional use permit shall be required for any use that involves the handling, manufacture, processing or storage of hazardous substances in sufficient quantities that would require permits under the Uniform Fire Code.

    (d)    Reporting Requirements. All businesses required by state law to prepare hazardous materials release response plans shall submit copies of such plans, including any revisions, to the director at the same time the plans are submitted to the fire department.

    (e)    Storage Structures. Structures for the storage of hazardous materials shall be designed to meet fire department approved standards. Such structures shall be removed upon change in occupancy of the facility. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.16.060 Violations of general performance standards.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the general performance standards set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to comply with the standards imposed in this chapter. (Ord. 1358 § 3, 2004)

Chapter 21.18 GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS
21.18.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all development produces an environment of stable and desirable character that is harmonious with existing and future development, and protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.020 Applicability.
    (a)    Applies to More than One Zoning District. The standards of this chapter apply to more than one zoning district (e.g., residential, commercial, manufacturing, etc.), and therefore, are combined in this chapter. These standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title. Where there may be a conflict, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these general standards.

    (b)    Compliance. All structures, additions to structures and uses shall comply with the standards of this chapter as determined applicable by the director, except as specified in Chapter 21.56 (Nonconforming Uses—Structures and Parcels). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.030 Access.
    (a)    Access to Streets.

    (1)    Every structure, including garages, shall be located upon a legally recorded parcel with a permanent means of access to a public street including recorded access easements and reciprocal access agreements.

    (2)    All structures shall be properly located to ensure safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required parking.

    (3)    Parcels located on a private street that were legally established before the effective date of this title, are exempt from the required compliance with the latest adopted city standards for private streets.

    (4)    Single-family residential uses shall be limited to one access drive per street frontage subject to the approval of the city engineer.

    (b)    Access to Accessory Structures.

    (1)    Accessory structures and other on-site architectural features shall be properly located to ensure that they do not obstruct access to main structures or accessory living quarters.

    Also refer to subsection a of Section 21.08.050 (Accessory uses and structures) of this title.

    (2)    Fences and walls shall provide an access gate, or other suitable opening, at least forty-eight inches in width to provide suitable pedestrian access to main or accessory structures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.040 Corner cutback.
    (a)    Corner Cutback Area. Corner parcels shall be developed in a manner that ensures visibility across the corners of the intersecting streets, alleys and private driveways. The corner cutback area shall be described as a triangular shaped area on a corner parcel formed by measuring fifteen feet from the intersection of the front and street side property lines, or an intersecting alley or driveway, and connecting the lines diagonally across the property making a ninety-degree triangle as shown in Figure 3-1 of this section.

    (b)    Height of Obstructions. The maximum height cutback of any object (e.g., fence, landscaping, signs, walls, etc.) located in the corner area shall be three feet, measured from the adjoining top of curb. The three-foot height limit shall not apply to traffic safety devices, trees trimmed to eight feet above the adjacent top of curb, utility poles and other government or utility installed devices.

 

 

 



 

Figure 3-1

Corner Cutback Area

 

(Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

 

 

21.18.050 Height measurement and height limit exceptions.
    All structures shall meet the following standards relating to height, except for fences and walls, which shall comply with Section 21.18.070 (Fences, walls, screens, hedges and shrubs) of this chapter.

    (1)    Maximum Height. The height of structures shall not exceed the standard established by the applicable zoning district in Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title.

    (2)    Height Measurement. Maximum height shall be measured as the vertical distance from finish grade to an imaginary plane located parallel to the finish grade at a height allowed by the zoning district.

    (3)    Exceptions to Height Limits. Exceptions to the height limits identified in this title shall apply in the following manner:

    (A)   Roof-Mounted Structures.

    (i)     Roof-mounted structures for the housing of chimneys, elevators, flagpoles, stairways, tanks, towers, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the structure, shall be allowed, up to a maximum of fifteen feet above the allowed structure height.

    (ii)    The total square footage of all roof-mounted structures that exceed the allowed height shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent of the total roof area of the structure.

    (B)   Fire or parapet walls may extend up to four feet above the allowable height limit of the structure. No mechanical equipment shall exceed the height of the parapet. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.060 Exterior lighting.
    (a)    Exterior Fixtures. Lighting fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with the character of the surrounding structure(s) and shall be energy efficient. Fixtures shall be appropriate in height, intensity and scale to the use they are serving.

    (b)    Intensity. The level of parking lot light projected onto any ground or wall surface shall not be less than two foot candles nor more than five foot-candles at the base of the light fixture. The electrical plan or lighting plan shall demonstrate the dispersal of light on the ground surface and compliance with the requirements of this subsection. Building-mounted decorative lights shall not exceed five footcandles measured five feet from the light source.

    (c)    Security Lighting. Security lighting shall be provided in all nonresidential zoning districts at building entrances/exits. Security lighting shall provide a minimum of two footcandles and a maximum of three footcandles at the ground level of the entrance.

    (d)    Shielding of Light Source. Where the light source is visible from outside the project boundary, shielding shall be required to reduce glare so that neither the light source nor its image from a reflective surface shall be directly visible from any point five feet or more beyond the property line. This requirement shall not apply to single-family residential uses, traffic safety lighting or public street lighting.

    (e)    Mechanical or Chemical Processes. Light, heat or glare from mechanical or chemical processes, or from reflective materials used or stored on a site, shall be shielded or modified to prevent emission of light or glare beyond the property line. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.070 Fences, walls, screens, hedges and shrubs.
    Fences, walls, lattice work screens, hedges and dense growth of shrubs or trees shall conform to the provisions of this section.

    (1)    Front Yard. Fences, walls, lattice work, hedges and dense growth of shrubs/trees greater than three feet in height are not allowed within a required front yard.

    (2)    Side and Rear Yards. For side and rear yards, such items are not allowed in excess of six feet in height, except for a fence or wall necessary for the public safety, health and welfare as required by a governmental agency or as allowed under subsection 4 of this section.

    (3)    Rear and Side Yard Relationship. In cases where lots have a rear to side relationship refer to plot plans on file in the planning and building departments.

    (4)    Wall along Arterial Highways. Walls along arterial highways that were constructed as part of a subdivision shall be maintained in original condition. Such walls may be extended to a height of eight feet with like materials subject to approval by the director.

    (5)    Barbed Wire/Razor Wire Prohibited. The use of barbed wire, razor wire or similar security wire (including broken glass) shall be prohibited in all residential and commercial zoning districts.

    (f)    Chain Link Fence. The use of chain link fence within the front yard setback area shall be prohibited in all residential zoning districts. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.080 Screening and buffering.
    (a)    Compliance. This section establishes standards for the screening and separation of adjoining multi-family and nonresidential land uses, equipment and outdoor storage areas, and surface parking areas.

    (b)    Screening between Different Land Uses. An opaque screen consisting of plant material and a solid masonry wall, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be installed along parcel boundaries whenever a commercial or industrial development adjoins a residential zoning district. The maximum height of walls shall comply with the provisions of Section 21.18.070 (Fences, walls, screens, hedges and shrubs) of this chapter. Walls shall be architecturally treated on both sides, subject to the approval of the director.

    (c)    Mechanical Equipment, Loading Docks and Refuse Areas.

    (1)    Roof or ground-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, ventilation ducts, exhaust, etc.), loading docks, refuse storage areas and utility services shall be screened from view from adjoining public streets and area(s) zoned for residential or open space uses.

    (2)    The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors, materials and architectural style.

    (3)    Landscaping shall be installed adjacent to the walls, at the discretion of the director, in compliance with Chapter 21.20 (Landscaping) of this title.

    (d)    Building Materials and Garden Supply Areas. Outdoor building materials and garden supply areas shall be screened with fencing, landscaping, meshing, walls or similar material to minimize visibility of the storage area. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.090 Setback measurement and exceptions.
    This section establishes standards to ensure the provision of open areas for access to and around structures, access to natural light and ventilation, landscaping, recreation, separation of incompatible land uses, space for privacy, traffic safety and visibility.

    (1)    Setback Requirements.

    (A)   All structures shall conform to the setback requirements identified for each zoning district by Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, and with any special setbacks established for specific uses by this title.

    (B)   Each yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as provided in this Section.

    (2)    Exemptions from Setback Requirements. The minimum setback requirements of this title shall apply to all uses except for the following:

    (A)   Fences or walls constructed within the height limitations of this title;

    (B)   Decks, with or without handrails, freestanding solar devices, steps, terraces and other site design elements that are placed directly upon the finish grade and are less than eighteen inches above the surrounding finish grade;

    (C)   Porches may encroach up to four feet into a required front yard setback in the R1 and GH zoning districts;

    (D)   Architectural features may extend into the front, side and rear yard setbacks in the following manner:

    (i)     A chimney or fireplace up to six feet in width, may extend three feet into a required setback, but no closer than three feet to a side or rear property line;

    (ii)    Cantilevered architectural features on the main structure, including balconies, bay windows, canopies, cornices, eaves and solar devices that do not increase the floor area enclosed by the structure, may extend into required yards as follows:

    a.     Front Yard Setback. Up to three feet into the required front yard,

    b.     Side Yard Setback. Up to two feet into a required side yard, but no closer than three feet to a side property line, and

    c.     Rear Yard Setback. Up to five feet into the required rear yard;

    (iii)   Covered, unenclosed porches, located at the same level as the entrance floor of the structure, and fire escapes, landings and outside stairways that are not enclosed, may extend into required yards as follows:

    a.     Front Yard Setback. Up to four feet into a required front yard,

    b.     Side Yard Setback. Up to four feet into a required side yard, but no closer than three feet to a side property line, and

    c.     Rear Yard Setback. Up to fifteen feet into a required rear yard, but no closer than ten feet to the rear property line.

    (3)    Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows:

    (A)   The front yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line to the nearest wall of the structure, except as follows:

    (i)     The measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the structure to the nearest point of the property line adjoining the street to which the property is addressed and the street from which access to the property is taken. Whenever a future street right-of-way line is officially established, the required setback shall be measured from the established line(s).

    (ii)    The measurement shall be taken from the nearest wall of the structure to the point where the access strip meets the bulk of the parcel, establishing a building line parallel to the lot line nearest the public street or right-of-way.

    (B)   The side yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line to the nearest wall of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, that extends between the front and rear yards.

    (C)   The side yard on the street side of a corner parcel shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the street side property line to the nearest wall of the structure.

    (D)   The rear yard shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the rear property line to the nearest wall of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line, that extends between the side yards, except:

    (i)     The rear yard on the street side of a double frontage lot shall be measured from the nearest point of the rear property line adjoining the street. If an access easement or street right-of-way line extends into or through a rear yard, the measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the easement or right-of-way line.

    (ii)    Where the side lot lines converge to a point, a line five feet long within the parcel parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, shall be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of determining the depth of the required rear yard.

    (E)   Where a structure wall is not parallel to a side or rear lot line, the required dimension of the side or rear yard along the line, may be averaged. The resulting side yard shall not be less that three feet in width, and the rear yard shall not be less than ten feet in depth, at any point.

    (F)    In situations different from the above, the director shall have the authority to determine how setbacks shall be measured. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.100 Solid waste/recyclable materials storage.
    This section provides standards for the provision of solid waste (refuse) and recyclable material storage areas in compliance with state law.

    (1)    Multi-Family Uses. The following are minimum requirements for common refuse and recyclable material storage areas for multi-family developments with five or more units. Storage areas may be located indoors or outdoors as long as they are readily accessible to all residents. Areas are measured in square feet.

 

Table 3-1

Multi-Family Development Minimum Common Storage Areas Required (Sq. Ft.)

 

Dwellings

Refuse

Recycling

Total Area

5 or more

12

12

24

10-15

24

24

48

16-25

48

48

96

26-50

96

96

192

51-75

144

144

288

76-100

192

192

384

101-125

240

240

480

126-150

288

288

576

151-175

316

316

672

176-200

384

384

768

201+

Every additional 25 dwellings shall require an additional 100 sq. ft. for solid waste and 100 sq. ft. for recyclables.

 

    (2)    Nonresidential Uses. Nonresidential uses shall provide refuse and recyclable material storage areas in compliance with the following requirements. Requirements apply to each individual structure. Areas are measured in square feet.

 

Table 3-2

Nonresidential Structures Minimum Storage Areas Required (Sq. Ft.)

 

Building Floor Area

Refuse

Recycling

Total Area*

Up to 5,000

12

12

24

5,001-10,000

24

24

48

10,001-25,000

48

48

96

25,001-50,000

96

96

192

50,001-75,000

144

144

288

75,001-100,000

192

192

384

100,001+

Every additional 25,000 sq. ft. shall require an additional 48 sq. ft. for solid waste and 48 sq. ft. for recyclables.

 

 

    (3)    Location Requirements. Refuse and recyclable materials storage areas shall be located in the following manner:

    (A)   Shall be adjacent/combined with one another;

    (B)   Shall be accessible to residents, employees and haulers at all times. Storage areas within multi-family residential developments shall be located within one hundred fifty feet of an access doorway to the dwellings that they are intended to serve;

    (C)   Shall not be closer than twenty feet from doors or operable windows of adjoining structures;

    (D)   Exterior storage area(s) shall not be located in a required front yard, street side yard, parking space, landscaped or open space area, and any other area required to be maintained unencumbered in compliance with fire and other applicable building and public safety codes;

    (E)   Driveways or aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the designated collector;

    (F)    In cases where a parcel is served by an alley, all storage areas shall be directly accessible to the alley.

    (4)    Design and Construction. The design and construction of the storage areas shall be in compliance with current city standards and the following:

    (A)   If the storage area is located outside or on the exterior of a structure it shall be architecturally compatible with the materials and colors of other structures on the property.

    (B)   Exterior storage areas shall be enclosed by six-foot high masonry walls with steel gates. A concrete apron equal to the width of the gate and outward from the enclosure a minimum of six feet shall be provided. The director may require the provision of a roof structure over the enclosure to obstruct visibility of the enclosure from above.

    (C)   The exterior perimeter of the storage areas shall be planted, if feasible, with drought resistant landscaping, including a combination of shrubs and/or climbing evergreen vines.

    (D)   The storage areas shall be well lit with a minimum one footcandle.

    (E)   Signs shall be conspicuously posted on each storage area giving instructions on the use of the recycling bins and containers. Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in area and shall be posted on the exterior of the storage area, adjacent to the access point. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.110 Undergrounding of utilities
    Cable television, electric and telephone facilities, fire alarm conduits, street lighting wiring and other wiring conduits and similar facilities shall be placed underground by the developer for all new development and additions and remodels over twenty-five percent of the value of the existing improvements. The director may grant a modification or waiver of this requirement, after considering the general purposes and nature of the proposed development. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.18.120 Storm water and urban runoff management.
    In compliance with the Federal Clean Water Act, the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), Orange County’s Drainage Area Management Plan (DAMP), and the city of Fountain Valley’s local implementation plan (LIP), this section establishes standards to ensure that future development and significant redevelopment reduce or eliminate urban and storm water run-off to protect water quality, biological habitats and beneficial uses of downstream receiving waters.

    (a)    Definitions.

    “Best management practices (BMPS)” means the best practical and economically achievable measures to control the addition of pollutants to the waters of the United States through the application of pollution control practices, technologies, processes, siting criteria, management activity, operating methods or other alternatives.

    “Drainage area management plan (DAMP)” means Orange County’s 2003 DAMP and incorporates the fourth term permit requirements and is the principal policy and guidance document for the countywide NPDES storm water program.

    “General construction permit” means the NPDES general permit for storm water discharges associated with construction activity. (State Water Resources Control Board Order No. 2010-0014 DWQ, NPDES General Permit No. CAS000002 or its subsequent replacement.)

    “General industrial permit” means the NPDES general permit for storm water discharges associated with industrial activity. (State Water Resources Control Board Order No. 97-03-DWQ, NPDES General Permit No. CAS000001 or its subsequent replacement).

    “General permit” means Order No. R8-2009-0030 (NPDES No. CAS618030) of the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board covering areawide urban storm water runoff in Orange County. The city of Fountain Valley is a co-permittee to the permit.

    “Local implementation plan (LIP)” means the city of Fountain Valley’s specific document that details how the storm water programs within the DAMP are implemented within its jurisdiction.

    “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)” is a provision of the Clean Water Act, Section 402 that identifies municipal storm water as a point source subject to regulation under the NPDES permits. The NPDES storm water program was designed by the Orange County permittees for compliance with the NPDES. The city of Fountain Valley, as a permittee, is responsible for the implementation of the program within its jurisdiction.

    “New development” is defined as projects that create ten thousand square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site) including commercial, industrial, residential housing subdivisions (i.e., detached housing family home subdivisions, multi-family attached subdivisions (town homes), condominiums, apartments, etc.), mixed-use, and public projects. This category includes development projects on public or private land, which fall under the planning and building authority of the permittees.

    “Parking lot’ is defined as a land area or facility for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.

    “Significant redevelopment” is defined as projects that include the addition or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface on a developed site. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of the facility, or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Where redevelopment results in the addition or replacement of less than fifty percent of the impervious surfaces of a previously existing developed site, and the existing development was not subject to WQMP requirements, the numeric sizing criteria discussed below applies only to the addition or replacement, and not to the entire developed site. Where redevelopment results in the addition or replacement of more than fifty percent of the impervious surfaces of a previously existing developed site, the numeric sizing criteria applies to the entire development.

    “The Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board (SARWQCB)” means the agency that implements and enforces the Clean Water Act Section 402(p) NPDES permit requirements, and issues and administers these permits on behalf of EPA within Orange County.

    (b)    Applicability. All new development and redevelopment, except as provided below, shall comply with the requirements of this section, the provisions of Chapters 14.40 and 18.06 of this code, the city’s local implementation plan (LIP) and NPDES Order No. R8-2009-0030 (NPDES No. CAS 618030) to reduce the discharge of pollutants in urban and storm water runoff.

    (c)    Review Required. Prior to the issuance of a discretionary permit, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit for new development or significant redevelopment, the city planning, public works or building departments shall review the proposed plans and impose conditions as necessary to comply with the local implementation plan (LIP), Chapters 14.38, 14.40, 18.06 and this section of this code, and NPDES Order No. R8-2009-0030 (NPDES No. CAS 618030) to reduce or eliminate pollutants in storm water or urban runoff.

    (d)    Water Quality Management Plan.

    (1)    A water quality management plan may be required to be provided by the applicant in order to identify the post construction storm water quality management plan and to act as guidance for property owners, operators, tenants and/or employees in implementing the best management practices (BMPs) upon which a project’s approval was based.

    (2)    As detailed in Section A-7.5 of the LIP, a water quality management plan shall be required for all public and private projects that meet any of the following criteria:

    (A)   Qualify as a priority project, which is defined as a project that meets any of the following:

    (i)     All significant redevelopment projects;

    (ii)    New development projects;

    (iii)   Residential development of ten units or more;

    (iv)   Commercial and industrial development greater than one hundred thousand square feet including parking areas;

    (v)    Automotive repair shop (SIC) codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532 through 7534, and 7536 through 7539);

    (vi)   Restaurant where the land area of development is five thousand square feet or more;

    (vii)  Hillside development on five thousand square feet or more, which is located on areas with known erosive soil conditions or where natural slope is twenty-five percent or more;

    (viii) Developments of two thousand five hundred square feet of impervious surface or more, adjacent to (within two hundred feet) or discharging directly into environmentally sensitive areas, such as areas designated in the Ocean Plan as areas of special biological significance or water bodies listed on the CWA Section 303(d) list of impaired waters;

    (ix)   Parking lot area of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface exposed to storm water;

    (x)    Streets, roads, highways and freeways of five thousand square feet or more of paved surface shall incorporate USEPA guidance, “Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets” in a manner consistent with the maximum extent practicable standard. This category includes any paved surface used for the transportation of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and other vehicles and excludes any routine road maintenance activities where the footprint is not changed;

    (xi)   Retail gasoline outlets of five thousand or more square feet with a projected average daily traffic of one hundred or more vehicles per day;

    (xii)  Emergency and public safety projects in any of the above-listed categories may be excluded if the delay caused due the requirement for a WQMP compromises public safety, public health and/or environmental protection.

    (B)   Does not qualify as a priority project but requires a discretionary action that will include an approved plan of development such as a tract map, site plan or precise plan (classified as a non-priority project).

    (C)   Does not qualify as a priority project but requires issuance of a nonresidential plumbing permit, where a nonresidential plumbing permit is defined as a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than storm water, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage (classified as a non-priority project).

    (3)    A water quality management plan shall address the following information:

    (A)   All priority projects are required to identify the following, as defined and detailed in the LIP:

    (i)     Site design and “low impact development” (LID) implementation BMPs (e.g., minimize impervious areas, pervious pavement, conserving natural areas, retention/detention basins). LID site designs shall reduce runoff to a level consistent with the maximum extent practicable standard. The design goal shall maintain or replicate the pre-development hydrological regime through use of design techniques that create a post-development hydrological regime using site preservation techniques and the use of integrated and distributed micro-scale storm water infiltration, retention, detention, evapotranspiration, filtration and treatment systems.

    LID principles shall be prioritized from highest to lowest priority, as follows:

    a.     Preservation of natural features, minimization of runoff,

    b.     Infiltration,

    c.     Harvesting and reuse, and

    d.     Bio-treatment;

    (ii)    Routine structural and non-structural BMPs (e.g., education and training activity restrictions, street sweeping, signage/warnings);

    (iii)   Implement treatment control BMPs;

    (iv)   Identify a mechanism for assuring long-term operation and maintenance of structural BMPs. For all structural treatment controls, WQMPs shall identify the responsible party for maintenance of the treatment system, vector minimization and control measures, and a funding source or sources for its operation and maintenance;

    (iv)   Identify hydrological conditions of concern.

    Each priority development project shall ascertain the impact of the development on the site’s hydrological regime and include the findings in the water quality management plan from a two-year frequency storm event for:

    a.     Increases in runoff volume,

    b.     Decreases in infiltration,

    c.     Changes in time of concentration,

    d.     Potential increases in post development downstream erosion, and

    e.     Potential for adverse impacts on physical structure, aquatic, and riparian habitat.

    (B)   All non-priority projects are required to identify the following, as defined and detailed in the LIP:

    (i)     Site design BMPs (e.g., minimize impervious areas, pervious pavement, conserving natural areas, retention/detention basins);

    (ii)    Routine structural and nonstructural BMPs (e.g., education and training, activity restrictions, street sweeping, signage/warnings); and

    (iii)   Identify a mechanism for assuring long-term operation and maintenance of structural BMPs.

    (4)    All qualifying projects are required to submit a water quality management plan to the city in the following manner:

    (A)   Projects requiring a discretionary permit may be allowed to initially provide a conceptual water quality management plan as a requirement of a complete application. However, a final water quality management plan shall be approved by the public works department prior to the submittal of construction plans for plan check.

    (B)   Projects that do not require a discretionary permit, but require approval of a ministerial construction permit (e.g., grading, building, demolition permit) shall submit a water quality management plan that has been approved by the public works department prior to the submittal of construction plans for plan check.

    (C)   Plans submitted for plan check are required to incorporate all the structural BMPs identified in an approved water quality management plan.

    (5)    Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final approval of permits, all qualifying projects shall:

    (A)   Demonstrate that all requirements of the approved water quality management plan have been installed properly;

    (B)   As described in the LIP, submit and receive approval of an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan;

    (C)   Demonstrate that a mechanism/agreement, which is acceptable to the city, has been executed for the long-term funding and performance of BMP operation, maintenance, repair and/or replacement;

    (D)   Demonstrate that the applicant and/or property owner is prepared to implement all non-structural BMPs described in the approved water quality management plan.

    (6)    A water quality management plan continues with the life of the project. As defined in the LIP, a transfer of responsibility form, which serves to notify the city that a change of ownership has occurred and the new owner of their responsibility to continue implementing the approved water quality management plan, shall be submitted to the city with any change in ownership.

    (e)    Construction Activities.

    (1)    Applicability. As detailed in Section 8 of the LIP, all construction projects altering the footprint of the structure are required to implement BMPs to prevent discharges into the storm drain system or watercourses. At a minimum, all private and public works construction projects are required to employ a combination of erosion and sediment controls and waste and materials management BMPs, which are summarized in Table 8-1 of the LIP and Table 8-6 of the DAMP (e.g., straw mulch, earthen berms, sandbag barrier). These minimum requirements are conveyed to construction contractors as part of the permit conditions and plan notes.

    (2)    Required Permit. Prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit, the applicant shall submit an erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) to demonstrate compliance with local and state water quality regulations for grading and construction activities and ensure that the BMPs to be implemented on-site are consistent with the appropriate phase of construction (Preliminary Stage, Mass Grading Stage, Streets and Utilities Stage, etc.). The ESCP shall identify how all construction materials, wastes, grading or demolition debris, and stockpiles of soil, aggregates, soil amendments, etc., will be properly covered, stored and secured to prevent transport into local drainages or coastal waters by wind, rain, tracking, tidal erosion or dispersion. The ESCP shall also describe how the applicant will ensure that all BMPs will be maintained during construction of any future public rights-of-way. A copy of the current ESCP shall be kept at the project site and be available for city review on request.

    (f)    Requirements for General Permit Sites.

    (1)    As detailed in the LIP, projects that are subject to the general permit (meaning they will result in soil disturbance of five thousand square feet or more of land or less than one acre, if it is part of a larger common plan of development or sale which is one acre or more) and qualify as either a priority or non-priority project, as described in subsection (d), shall be required to prepare and implement a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) meeting the requirements of the general permit. A model SWPPP template is included as Exhibit A-8. IV of the LIP.

    (2)    Private and public construction projects covered by the general permit shall adhere to the following:

    (A)   Required Actions for Private Construction Projects that are Covered by the General Permit.

    (i)     The project owner, developer or contractor is responsible for preparing the notice of intent (NOI), which must be signed by the owner or person delegated authority and submitted to the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). Before issuing a grading or building permit, the city will require proof of general permit coverage (see Section A-7.5.3 of the LIP).

    (ii)    Prior to the issuance of a grading or building permit (if applicable), the SWPPP must be prepared by the project owner, developer or contractor and signed by the responsible party and must be implemented year-round throughout the duration of the project’s construction. City staff is not responsible for reviewing, approving or enforcing the SWPPP; these are responsibilities of the regional board.

    (iii)   The city will inspect and enforce local permit(s) (construction, grading, etc.), ordinances (grading, water quality management plans, etc.), the Model Construction Program, and the Construction Runoff Guidance Manual, and will notify the regional board of noncompliance when the noncompliance meets the criteria of posing a threat to human or environmental health as discussed in DAMP Section 8.4.6.

    (iv)   Once project construction is completed and the site fully complies with the final stabilization requirements of the general permit, the owner/developer will submit a notice of termination (NOT) to the SWRCB.

 

    (B)   Required Actions for Public Agency Construction Projects that are Covered by the General Permit.

    (i)     The city of Fountain Valley will notify the SARWQCB via formal notification of construction activity.

    (ii)    The city of Fountain Valley or its contractor will prepare the SWPPP before construction activities begin.

    (iii)   During construction, the city of Fountain Valley will inspect and enforce the contract documents and will notify the appropriate SARWQCB when noncompliance meets the criteria of posing a threat to human or environmental health as discussed in Section 8.4.6 of the DAMP.

    (iv)   Once the project is completed, the city of Fountain Valley will inform the SARWQCB of the project’s completion.

    (C)   Required Actions for Private Construction Projects Not Covered by the General Permit. Private construction projects not covered by the general permit, but covered under a grading permit, are required to develop erosion and sediment control plans (ESCPs). These ESCPs must show proposed locations of the erosion and sediment control BMPs that will be implemented during the construction project to comply with the minimum requirements listed in Table A-8.1 of the LIP.

    (D)   Required Actions for Public Works Construction Projects Not Covered by the General Permit. Public agency construction projects not covered by the general permit are required by DAMP Section 8.4 to comply with appropriate pollution prevention control practices in accordance with the current edition of the “Green Book” standard specifications for public works construction and the provisions of Section A-8 of the DAMP, and shall develop and implement ESCPs. Low priority construction sites shall meet the minimum requirements listed in Table 8-6 of Section 8.4.4 of the DAMP. (Ord. 1480 § 4, 2012)

Chapter 21.20 LANDSCAPING
21.20.010 Purpose.
    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish landscape standards to mitigate the effects of urbanization on the environment and to provide for an aesthetically pleasing urban setting. The city recognizes the importance of landscaping to the health, well-being, and quality of life of the community and desires to enhance the overall appearance of development projects in the city. It is the intent of this chapter to establish a measure of uniformity in landscaping for new projects as well as provide a mechanism to require upgrading of existing landscaping in existing developments when improvements are proposed. It is also the intent of this chapter to encourage optimum use of drought-tolerant plant materials in conjunction with water-conserving automatic irrigation systems and to allow synthetic turf meeting the standards set forth herein to further assist water conservation. In adopting this chapter, the city is complying with the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act, Government Code Section 65590 et seq. (Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

 

21.20.020 Applicability.
    All nonresidential, multi-family residential projects, single-family residential subdivisions and single-family properties shall provide landscaping in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

 

21.20.030 Definitions.
    “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

    “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

    “Estimated applied water use” means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the Guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.

    “Evapotranspiration (ET) adjustment factor” or “ETAF” is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. The evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project shall not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. ETAF for existing non­ rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

    “Guidelines” refers to the Guidelines for Implementation of the water efficient landscape provisions included in Section 21.20.050(c), as adopted by the city council, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to the water efficient landscape provisions.

    “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a nonirrigated hydrozone.

    “Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. Refer to the Guidelines for irrigation efficiency requirements. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of these water efficient landscape provisions of Section 21.20.050(c) are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

    “Landscaped area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

    “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

    “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required to be provided to the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Guidelines.

    “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of “landscaped area,” meeting the requirements under Section 21.20.050(c)(1) of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

    “Landscaping” means the planting and continuous maintenance of some combination of natural vegetation (e.g., trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers or lawns). In addition to plant life, landscaping may also include synthetic turf, as defined herein, and a limited amount of, benches, ponds, statuary, and other materials as provided for in Section 21.20.050(b)(2)(A).

    “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

    “Maximum applied water allowance” or “MAWA” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.2 of the Guidelines. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].

    “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

    “New construction” means a new building with a landscape area or other new landscape area such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

    “Non-pervious” means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

    “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

    “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape.

    “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration (ETo), that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. The plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

    “Recreational area” means areas of active play or recreation (e.g., sports fields, schoolyards, picnic grounds) or other areas with intense foot traffic.

    “Recycled water” or “reclaimed water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

    “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix C of the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances.

    “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Section 21.20.050(c), where the modified landscape area is greater than two thousand five hundred square feet.

    “Smart automatic irrigation controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system and which schedules irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

    “Special landscape area” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and recreational areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

    “Synthetic turf” means man-made, synthetic material manufactured from nylon, polypropylene, polyethylene, or a blend of nylon, polypropylene and polyethylene fibers which simulates the appearance of live turf, organic turf, grass, sod, or lawn, and meets the requirements of Section 21.20.070.

    “Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool­season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

    “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.

    “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. (Ord. 1507 § 5, 2015; Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

 

21.20.040 Landscape area requirements.
    (a)    Nonresidential and Multi-Family Uses. Each land use, except single­family, shall provide and maintain fifteen percent of the site in landscaping. The landscaping requirement may include setback areas and other unused areas of the site that are not intended for future use.

    (b)    Single-Family Subdivisions. All areas between the front of the residence and the front property line shall be landscaped within six months of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or three months from recorded sale (date of recording) whichever is earlier. All single-family designated property shall maintain a minimum of fifty percent of the front yard setback, as defined in Chapter 21.08, as landscaping. Landscaping shall consist of live plant materials, synthetic turf meeting the criteria provided in Section 21.20.070, or other materials in a limited amount as provided for in Section 21.20.050(b)(2)(A). If installed by the developer, landscape plans shall be in compliance with Section 21.20.050(a) (Landscape standards). If installed by the individual homeowner, landscape plans do not require city approval.

    (c)    Unused Areas. All areas of a project site not intended for a specific use, including pad sites in shopping centers held for future development, shall be landscaped unless it is determined by the director that landscaping is not necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.

    (d)    Parking Areas.

    (1)    Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping.

    (A)   Adjacent to Streets. Parking areas adjoining a public street shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting strip between the street right-of-way and parking area a minimum fifteen feet in width. The planting strip shall be planted with live shrubbery, a minimum of three feet in height. The perimeter planting strip shall not be included within the interior parking lot landscaping calculations.

    (B)   Adjacent to Commercial Use. Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjoining a nonresidential use shall provide a landscape planting strip between the parking area and the nonresidential use a minimum of four-feet in width, unless common/reciprocal parking area is shared. For each one hundred lineal feet of landscaped planting strip, a minimum of six trees shall be provided. A minimum of twenty-five percent of trees in landscape planting strip shall be of a fifteen-gallon variety at planting.

    (C)   Adjacent to Residential Use. Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjoining residential uses shall provide a solid masonry wall, a minimum of eight feet in height, and landscaped buffer yard a minimum of ten feet in width between the parking area and the common property line bordering the residential use. For each one hundred lineal feet of landscaped buffer yard, a minimum of six trees shall be provided. A minimum of twenty-five percent of trees in landscape buffer yard shall be of a fifteen-gallon variety at planting.

    (2)    Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.

    (A)   Amount of Landscaping. For off-street parking areas with ten or more spaces, a minimum of one tree shall be planted for each ten parking stalls, and accompanied by an appropriate amount of shrubs and ground cover. Setback areas required to be landscaped by other subsections of this chapter shall not be considered part of the required parking lot landscaping. Parking lot trees shall be a minimum of a five-gallon size variety at planting.

    (B)   Planters Required. Trees shall be in planters located throughout the parking area. In order to be considered within the parking area, trees shall be located in planters that are bounded on at least three sides by parking area paving. Planters shall have a minimum interior dimension of four feet. All ends of parking lanes shall have landscaped islands.

    (C)   Larger Projects. Parking lots with more than one hundred spaces shall provide a concentration of landscape elements at primary entrances, including specimen trees, flowering plants, enhanced paving, and project identification. Specimen trees shall be a minimum of a thirty-six-inch box variety at planting. (Ord. 1507 § 6, 2015; Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

 

21.20.050 Landscape standards.
    (a)    General Requirements.

    (1)    Landscape Plan. A comprehensive landscape and irrigation plan prepared and signed by a California-licensed landscape professional shall be submitted for review and approval when required through a discretionary permit or the water efficiency landscape provisions of subsection (c). Landscape materials, trees, shrubs, groundcover, turf, synthetic turf and other vegetation, and planting symbols shall be clearly drawn and plants labeled by botanical name, common name, container size, spacing and quantities of each group of plants indicated.

    (2)    Minimum Width. Landscaped areas that may be counted toward required landscaping shall have a minimum interior width of four feet, exclusive of curb or wall.

    (3)    Concrete Curb Required. Landscaping shall be protected with a minimum six-inch high concrete curb.

    (4)    Maintenance Required. Landscaping shall be continuously maintained free of weeds, debris, litter and temporary signage.

    (5)    Irrigation Required. All landscaped areas (except naturalized hydrozones) shall be provided with a smart automatic irrigation controller as provided in subsection (c) unless synthetic turf is used.

    (6)    Limitation on Turf Area and/or live groundcover. The percentage of turf, live groundcover and synthetic turf for nonresidential projects shall not exceed forty-five percent of the required landscaping for single-family residential property or seventy-five percent of the required landscaping for multi-family residential property.

    (b)    Planting Material.

    (1)    Trees.

    (A)   Trees shall not be planted under any eave, overhang, or balcony.

    (B)   Trees shall be staked in compliance with city standards.

    (C)   The minimum interior width of planters containing trees shall be four feet exclusive of curbs.

    (D)   Trees in landscape planters less than ten feet in width or located closer than five feet from a permanent structure shall be provided with root barriers.

    (2)    Groundcover and Shrubs.

    (A)   Required landscaping shall consist of live nondeciduous groundcover, shrubs, turf, live plants that are predominantly drought-tolerant, synthetic turf, or other pervious materials (i.e. crushed rock, redwood chips, mulch, pebbles, stone, decorative pavers) in an amount not to exceed twenty percent of the required landscaping.

    (B)   Groundcover and/or shrubs counted towards the landscaping requirement for residential front yard setbacks shall be planted at a spacing that will provide for full coverage of the live landscape requirement, except for the limited pervious material allowed for in subsection (b)(2)(A) of this section, within eighteen-months of planting.

    (C)   A minimum of two five-gallon size shrubs shall be provided for every six feet of distance along street setbacks.

    (D)   Artificial groundcover or shrubs shall not be allowed except for synthetic turf meeting the standards of Section 21.20.070.

    (c)    Water Efficient Landscape Provisions.

    (1)    Beginning February 1, 2016, all planting, irrigation, and landscape­related improvements required by these water efficient landscape provisions shall apply to the following landscape projects:

    (A)   New landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

    (B)   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscaped area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

    (C)   New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of water efficiency performance requirements or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Guidelines;

    (D)   New or rehabilitated projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater capture on site, and any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape area and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with the treated or untreated graywater or though stored rainwater capture on site is subject only to Appendix A Section (5) of the Guidelines.

    (2)    Subsection (c)(5)(B) of this section shall apply to:

    (A)   All landscaped areas, whether installed prior to or after January 1, 2010; and

    (B)   All landscaped areas installed after February 1, 2016, to which these water efficient landscape provisions apply as required by subsection (c)(1).

    (3)    This chapter does not apply to:

    (A)   Registered local, state, or federal historical sites;

    (B)   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

    (C)   Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

    (D)   Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.

    (4)    Implementation procedures shall be as follows:

    (A)   Prior to installation, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the city for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any landscape documentation package submitted to the city shall comply with the provisions of the Guidelines.

    (B)   The landscape documentation package shall include a certification by a California-licensed landscape professional stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Guidelines.

    (i)     Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the city for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations.

    (ii)    Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the city.

    (iii)   Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certification of completion in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit final process, as provided in the Guidelines.

    (5)    Landscape Water Use Standards.

    (A)   For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to the water efficiency landscape provisions as defined in subsecton (c)(1), the estimated applied water use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the maximum allowed water allowance calculated using an evapotranspiration adjustment factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non­residential areas, except for special landscaped areas where the maximum allowed water allowance is calculated using an evapotranspiration adjustment factor of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the city; as provided in the Guidelines.

    (B)   Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements of the local water purveyor, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by local water purveyor and the city.

    (6)    Delegation. The city may delegate to, or into a contract with, a local agency to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the city. (Ord. 1507 § 7, 2015; Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

 

21.20.060 Maintenance.
    Landscaping shall be properly maintained at all times.

    (a)    Irrigation equipment shall be continuously maintained in good working condition and to avoid overspray.

    (b)    Litter shall be removed from all landscaped areas in a timely fashion.

    (c)    Turf areas shall be mowed on a regular basis and be kept green. Accumulation of leaves, twigs, bark, and other similar materials shall be removed on a regular basis. Planting areas shall be kept in a weed-free fashion at all times. Synthetic turf shall be maintained so as to replicate live turf and shall be replaced when worn.

    (d)    Landscaping maintenance shall include pruning, cultivating, weeding, fertilizing, replacement of plants, and watering on a regular basis.

    (e)    Landscape maintenance shall include the removal of dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds and debris constituting unsightly appearance, dangerous to public safety and welfare or detrimental to neighboring properties or property values. Compliance shall be by removal, replacement, or maintenance.

 

    (f)    All landscaping (trees, shrubs, ground cover, turf, etc.) which, due to accident, damage, disease, lack of maintenance, or other cause, fail to show a healthy appearance and growth, shall be replaced. Replacement plants shall conform to all standards that govern the original planting installation, approved landscaping plan, or as approved by the director of planning. (Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

 

21.20.070 Synthetic turf standards.
    The use of synthetic turf, as defined in Section 21.20.030, shall be permitted as follows:

    (a)    Materials. Synthetic turf shall be of a type known as cut pile and shall be manufactured from nylon, polypropylene, or polyethylene or a blend thereof, stitched onto a mesh or hole-punched backing. An eight-year minimum no-fade product warranty shall be required as well.

    (b)    Installation. Synthetic turf shall be installed by a licensed contractor, pursuant to manufacturer specifications and shall be anchored at all edges and seams. A proper drainage system must be installed to prevent excessive run-off or pooling. Synthetic turf shall be separated from flower beds by a bender board or similar material, to prevent the intrusion of living plants into the artificial turf. (Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

 

21.20.080 Violations of landscaping standards.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the standards set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to install or maintain landscaping or the landscape plan as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1440 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 21.22 PARKING AND LOADING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1562. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.22.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations to ensure that sufficient off-street parking facilities are provided for all uses and that parking facilities are properly designed and located to meet the needs created by specific uses and to protect the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.020 Applicability.
    Every use and structure, including a change or expansion of a use or structure shall have appropriately maintained parking and loading areas in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A use shall not be commenced and structures shall not be occupied until improvements required by this chapter are satisfactorily completed. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.030 General parking regulations.
    (a)    Parking and Loading Spaces to Be Permanent. Parking and loading spaces shall be permanently available, marked and maintained for parking or loading purposes for the use they are intended to serve. The director may approve the temporary reduction of parking or loading spaces in conjunction with a seasonal or intermittent use with the approval of a temporary use permit (Chapter 21.48 of this title).

    (b)    Parking and Loading to Be Unrestricted. Owners, lessees, tenants or persons having control of the operation of a premises for which parking or loading spaces are required by this chapter shall not prevent, prohibit or restrict authorized persons from using these spaces without prior approval of the director.

    (c)    Restriction of Parking Area Use for NonResidential and Multi-Family Uses. Required off-street parking, circulation and access areas shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking and maneuvering of vehicles and shall not be used for the sale, lease, display, repair or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile homes, merchandise or equipment, or for any other use not authorized by the provisions of this code.

    (d)    Single-Family Uses. Refer to subsection (b)(1), Single-family uses, of Section 21.22.080, for driveway requirements for single-family uses. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.22.040 Number of parking spaces required.
    Each use shall provide at least the minimum number of parking spaces required by this chapter.

    (a)    Parking Requirements by Land Use. Each land use shall be provided the number of parking spaces required in Table 3-3, except where a greater number of spaces is required through land use entitlement approval, where an exception has been granted through approval of a variance in compliance with Chapter 21.50, or where an adjustment to the parking requirements has been approved by the planning commission through a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 21.22.050.

    (b)    Multi-Tenant Sites. A site with multiple tenants shall provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required for each separate use; except where the site was developed comprehensively as a shopping center, the parking ratio shall be that required for the shopping center as a whole as provided in Table 3-3, unless an adjustment to the parking requirements has been approved by the planning commission through variance in compliance with Chapter 21.50, or where an adjustment to the parking requirements has been approved by the planning commissions through a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 21.22.050.

    (c)    Uses Not Listed. Land uses not specifically listed in Table 3-3 (Parking Requirements by Land Use) of this section shall provide parking as required by the director. The director shall use the requirements of Table 3-3 as a guide in determining the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided, and shall make the following findings:

    (1)    That field investigations disclose that the subject use and its operations are compatible to one or more uses under which the parking area is designated;

    (2)    That the proposed parking area requirements will adequately serve the intended use and be located in a manner to protect the public health, peace, safety and general welfare.

    (d)    Bench or Bleacher Seating. Where fixed seating is provided in the form of benches or bleachers, a seat shall be construed to be not less than eighteen inches of continuous bench space for the purpose of calculating the number of required parking spaces.

 

 

 

TABLE 3-3

PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE

 

Land Use Type:
Manufacturing Processing and Warehousing

Vehicle Spaces Required

General manufacturing, processing uses, and research and development, laboratories

2 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 25,000 sq. ft.; and 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. thereafter. The gross floor area may include incidental office space comprising up to 20% of the total gross floor area. The parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for offices.

Recycling facilities

Determined by conditional use permit.

Warehouses, storage, and distribution facilities (not including mini-storage for personal use)

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. The gross floor area may include incidental office space comprising up to 10% of the total gross floor area. The parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for offices.

Land Use Type:
Recreation, Education, Public Assembly

Vehicle Spaces Required

Child day-care

 

 

Centers

1 space for each employee

 

Large family day-care homes

1 space for each employee, in addition to the required residential spaces.

Indoor recreation/fitness centers

 

 

Arcades

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

 

Bowling alleys

1 space for each employee plus 4 spaces for each alley, plus required spaces for ancillary uses.

 

Health/fitness clubs

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

 

Pool and billiard rooms

2 spaces for each table, plus required space for ancillary uses.

 

Skating rinks

1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area for public use, plus required spaces for ancillary uses.

Land Use Type:
Recreation, Education, Public Assembly (cont’d)

Vehicle Spaces Required

Libraries, museums, art galleries

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each official vehicle.

Outdoor commercial recreation

Determined by conditional use permit.

Religious institutions, cinemas, performance theaters, meeting halls, and membership organizations

1 space for each 3 fixed seats, or 1 space for every 50 sq. ft. of gross assembly or viewing area, plus ancillary uses (e.g., restaurant).

Schools (private)

 

 

Elementary/junior high

1.5 spaces for each classroom, plus 1 space for every 75 sq. ft. of assembly area in an auditorium, plus 1 bus loading space for each 100 students or portion thereof.

 

High school

5 spaces for each classroom, plus 1 space for each 75 sq. ft. in assembly rooms and auditoriums, plus 1 bus loading space for each 100 students or portion thereof.

 

Trade and business schools

1 space for each student.

Studios for dance and art

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Tennis/racquetball/handball or other courts

2 spaces for each court, plus 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area for ancillary uses.

Land Use Type:
Residential Uses

Vehicle Spaces Required

Group quarters (including boarding houses, rooming houses, dormitories and organizational houses)

1 space for each sleeping room or 1 space for each 2 beds, whichever is greater.

Mobile home parks

2 covered spaces in conjunction with each mobile home plus 1 space for each 5 mobile homes, the latter to be provided in the mobile park separate from the mobile home spaces.

Multi-family dwellings, duplex units, condominiums and other attached dwellings

Studio, bachelor or 1 bedroom unit: 1.5 spaces for each unit with 1 space per unit in a garage/carport.

 

2 or more bedroom units: 2 spaces for each unit plus 0.5 additional spaces for each bedroom over 2, 1 enclosed space per 2 bedroom unit and 2 enclosed spaces for 3 or more bedroom units.

 

Guest parking: 25% of total required spaces. (1)

Mixed-use developments

Determined by conditional use permit.

Accessory dwelling units

1 space per unit or per bedroom, whichever is less. See Section 21.08.055 for more information.

Senior housing projects

1 space for each unit with half the spaces enclosed, plus 1 guest parking space for each 10 units.

Senior congregate care facilities

0.5 space for each residential unit, plus 1 space for each 4 units for guests.

Single-family

 

 

1 to 4 bedrooms

2 enclosed spaces. 450 sq. ft. maximum. (2)

 

5 bedrooms and more, or more than 4,000 sq. ft. gross

3 enclosed spaces. 650 sq. ft. maximum. (2)

 

 

 

Land Use Type:
Retail Trade

Vehicle Spaces Required

Automobile, mobile home, vehicle, machinery and parts sales

1 space for each 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Banks and financial services

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Building materials, furniture stores, hardware stores and plant nurseries

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor sales area.

Convenience stores

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Restaurants such as fast food, cafés, cafeterias, nightclubs, taverns, lounges or similar establishments for the consumption of food and beverages on the premises

 

 

Less than 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of outdoor dining area, plus 1 space for each 35 sq. ft. of dance floor area.

 

1,000 sq. ft. or greater, but less than 4,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of outdoor dining area, plus 1 space for each 35 sq. ft. of dance floor area.

 

4,000 sq. ft. or greater of gross floor area

40 spaces, plus 1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of 4,000 sq. ft., plus 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of outdoor dining area, plus 1 space for each 35 sq. ft. of dance floor area.

Retail sales and services

 

 

Less than 5,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

 

5,000 sq. ft. or greater but less than 20,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

25 spaces, plus 1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of 5,000 sq. ft.

 

20,000 sq. ft. or greater of gross floor area

25 spaces, plus 1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of 5,000 sq. ft., plus 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of 20,000 sq. ft.

 

Shopping centers (neighborhood, community, and regional)

5.5 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area with up to 20% allowed for restaurants, theaters, fitness centers and medical uses.

 

Specialized sporting good store

3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Land Use Type:
Service Uses

Vehicle Spaces Required

Consumer products: repair and maintenance

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Copy and reproduction centers

1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Depots: bus, freight or rail

Determined by conditional use permit.

Emergency shelter

An emergency shelter shall provide off-street parking at a ratio of 1 space per 4 beds and/or 0.5 spaces per bedroom designed as a family unit with children, plus 1 per staff member.

Equipment rental

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor use area.

Hotels

1 space for each guest room up to 40 guest rooms, plus 1 additional space for each 2 rooms over the first 40 rooms.

Kennels, animal boarding and veterinary clinics

1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 800 sq. ft. of boarding area.

Laundries and dry cleaning plants

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Motels

1 space for each sleeping or living unit, and 1 cargo trailer space for each 5 guest rooms.

 

Land Use Type:
Service Uses (cont’d)

Vehicle Spaces Required

Medical services

 

 

Clinics, medical/dental offices

1 space for each 143 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

 

Board and care homes, group home care facilities, and in-patient drug treatment facilities

1 space for each 5 beds.

 

Convalescent hospital

1 space for each patient bed the facility is licensed to accommodate, plus 1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of office area.

 

Hospitals

1 space for each 3 patient beds the facility is licensed to accommodate plus required spaces for ancillary uses as determined by the director.

 

Medical/dental labs

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Mortuaries and funeral homes

1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of assembly area or 1 space for each 3 fixed seats, whichever amount is greater.

Offices, administrative, corporate

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Offices, not providing on-premises customer service

1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Personal services

 

Barber/beauty shops (and other personal services: tattoo studios, massage therapy)

1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Pet grooming

1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

Service stations (including multi-use stations)

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area; plus 3 spaces for each service bay. For ancillary uses (convenience stores, restaurants, car washes) 50% of the parking provided at pump islands may be credited toward meeting parking requirements.

Single room occupancy

Single occupancy rooms shall be parked at 0.5 spaces per room. Double occupancy rooms shall be parked at 1 space per room, plus 1 per staff member.

Storage, personal storage facilities

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, but not less than 6 spaces, plus 2 spaces for manager office/ residence.

Vehicle repair and maintenance

 

 

Repair garage

1 space for each 350 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

 

Self-service vehicle washing

2 spaces for each washing stall, for queuing and drying.

 

Full-service vehicle washing

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 10 spaces for each wash lane for drying area.

Notes:

      (1)      Guest parking spaces shall be clearly marked for guest parking only and shall be dispersed throughout the development site. Signs shall be provided at appropriate locations to direct visitors to guest parking locations.

     (2)      See Section 21.08.040, Table 2-3 for exceptions.

 

(Ord. 1548 § 6, 2019; Ord. 1527 § 4, 2017; Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1460 § 6, 2011; Ord. 1428 § 6, 2009; Ord. 1350 § 3, 2003; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.050 Adjustments to parking requirements.
    (a)    Shared Parking Reduction. Required off-street parking requirements may be reduced with approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission where two or more nonresidential uses on the same site or immediately adjacent sites have distinct and differing peak parking demands (e.g., a theater and a bank).

    (1)    Requests for a conditional use permit for shared parking shall meet all of the following requirements:

    (A)   A parking study prepared by a California licensed traffic engineer or civil engineer experienced in the preparation of such study shall be submitted by the applicant demonstrating that no substantial conflict will exist in the peak hours of parking demand for the uses for which joint use is proposed. The parking study shall provide findings, recommendations, and a summary table of all existing and proposed uses with square footages and hours of operation, in the shared parking arrangement. The methodology to be used in preparing the study shall be that promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE);

    (B)   The number of parking spaces shall not be reduced below the number of spaces required during the peak hour demands for the combined total of the structures or uses involved;

    (C)   The most remote parking space shall be located within three hundred feet of the use it is intended to serve or as approved by the planning commission; and

    (D)   When applicable, a written and recorded agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the city attorney and director and executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued availability of the number of parking spaces designated for shared use and availability of reciprocal access easements.

    (2)    A shared parking reduction may be approved provided the planning commission makes the following findings, in addition to the findings requirements of Chapter 21.36:

    (A)   That the applicable parking requirements are excessive or inappropriate due to either the nature of the specific uses involved or because of special circumstances applicable to the site;

    (B)   That the proposed parking facilities, as conditioned, comply with the intent and purpose of the parking regulations; and

    (C)   That the provisions of the proposed shared parking program are reasonable, accountable and enforceable.

    (b)    ADA Compliance. The director may administratively reduce parking requirements due to a loss of parking spaces because of ADA requirements associated with tenant improvements.

    (c)    Reduction in the Number of Parking Stalls. With the exception of achieving ADA compliance, the number of required off-street parking stalls may only be reduced with the approval of a variance, in compliance with Chapter 21.50. A variance for a reduction in the number of parking stalls may be approved by the planning commission based on the findings required for a variance, and the findings and recommendations of a parking study prepared by a qualified parking or traffic consultant. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.060 Disabled and handicapped parking requirements.
    Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the disabled in the following manner:

    (a)    Fulfilling of Requirements. Disabled accessible parking spaces required by this chapter shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirements of this chapter.

    (b)    Number of Spaces—Design Standards. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with the Uniform Building Code and the Federal Accessibility Guidelines.

    (c)    Reservation of Spaces Required. Disabled access spaces shall be reserved for use by the disabled throughout the life of the use.

    (d)    Residential Multi-Family Uses. For each dwelling unit required to be designed to accommodate the physically handicapped or required to be made adaptable for the physically handicapped, the required covered parking shall be designed as required by Part 2, Title 24, California Administrative Code.

    (e)    Upgrading of Markings Required. If amendments to state law change standards for the marking, striping and signing of disabled parking spaces, disabled accessible spaces shall be upgraded in compliance with the new state standards. Upgrading shall be completed by affected property owners within sixty days of being notified of new state-approved standards. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.070 Development standards for parking.
    (a)    Access. Access to parking areas shall be provided in the following manner:

    (1)    Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that vehicles enter an abutting street in a forward direction. Parking lots shall be designed so as to prevent access at any point other than at designated access drives. The director may approve exceptions for single-family homes and duplexes.

    (2)    A minimum unobstructed clearance height of fourteen feet shall be maintained above areas accessible to vehicles.

    (b)    Access to Adjacent Sites. Applicants for nonresidential developments are encouraged to provide shared vehicle and pedestrian access between adjacent nonresidential properties for convenience, safety and efficient circulation. A joint access agreement guaranteeing the continued availability of the shared access between the properties and running with the land shall be recorded by the owners of the abutting properties, as approved by the director.

    (c)    Location. Parking areas shall be located in the following manner:

    (1)    Required parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served, except that parking may be located on a parcel adjacent to the parcel served subject to a recorded covenant running with the land and recorded by the owner of the parking lot guaranteeing that the required parking will be maintained exclusively for the use or activity served.

    (2)    For residential uses, parking shall be located within two hundred feet of the unit it is intended to serve. For nonresidential uses, parking shall be located within three hundred fifty feet of the use it is intended to serve, or as approved by the planning commission in a shared parking arrangement.

    (3)    Parking areas shall not be developed in a required front or side yard fronting on a public street.

    (d)    Parking Space and Lot Dimensions.

    (1)    Residential Uses. Minimum clearance inside dimensions for carports and garages shall be twenty feet in length by ten feet in width for each car. The minimum inside dimension shall be twenty feet in length by twenty feet in width for two-car garages and twenty feet in length by thirty feet in width for three-car garages.

    (2)    Nonresidential Uses. Minimum parking dimensions shall be as follows:

    (A)   Standard parking space dimensions shall be nine feet by nineteen feet.

    (B)   A maximum of two feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving, allowing a two-foot bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions. The additional landscaped area is considered part of the parking space and shall not be counted towards satisfying parking lot landscaping requirements.

    (3)    Off-Street Parking Diagrams. Minimum parking dimensions for off-street parking are as follows:

 

 

Figure 3-2

Drive Aisle and Parking Space Dimensions for Nonresidential Uses



 

    (e)    Directional Arrows and Signs.

    (1)    In parking facilities, parking spaces, aisles, approach lanes and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles.

    (2)    The director may require the installation of traffic signs in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility.

    (3)    The exit from a parking area which provides parking for forty or more vehicles shall be clearly marked with a vehicle “STOP” sign in conformance with the State Highway Manual for uniform traffic control devices.

    (f)    Drainage.

    (1)    Surface water from parking lots shall not drain over sidewalks or adjacent parcels.

    (2)    Parking lots shall be designed in compliance with the stormwater quality and quantity standards of the city’s best management practices, and shall be approved by the city engineer.

    (g)    Drive-Through Windows. For each use that provides drive-through window service to occupants of vehicles, there shall be a queuing lane of not less than one hundred fifty feet in length and twelve feet in width. The queuing lane shall not block any parking space of any portion of a traffic lane.

    (h)    Grades of Entrances, Spaces and Driveways.

    (1)    Entrance Driveways. Driveways shall not exceed a maximum grade of plus fifteen percent or minus six percent measured along the driveway centerline. Where there is a change in the slope of the driveway, it shall be demonstrated that vehicles will be able to pass over the change in slope without interference with the vehicle’s undercarriage.

    (2)    Interior Driveways. Ramps or driveways within the interior of a parking area (beyond twenty feet from ultimate right-of-way line) shall have a maximum grade of twenty percent. If a ramp or driveway exceeds ten percent, the design shall include transitions (at each end of the ramp) not less than eight feet in length, having a slope equal to one-half the ramp or driveway slope.

    (3)    Parking Spaces. Parking spaces and abutting access aisles shall have a maximum grade of seven percent, measured in any direction.

    (i)     Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of the on-site structure(s). All illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed downward, away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way in compliance with Section 21.18.060 (Exterior lighting) of this title.

    (j)     Residential Guest Parking. Guest parking for multi-family residential uses shall be designated and restricted for the exclusive use of the guests with appropriate signs/pavement markings.

    (k)    Striping and Identification.

    (1)    Vehicular. Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the surface of the parking facility. Circulation aisles, approach lanes and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure safe traffic movement. Carpool spaces shall be clearly identified for vehicle carpool usage respectively.

    (2)    Disabled. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be striped and marked according to the applicable state standards.

    (l)     Surfacing. Parking spaces, including motorcycle parking areas, and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained in compliance with city standards and subject to approval by the city engineer.

    (m)   Wheel Stops/Curbing. Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided for parking spaces located adjacent to fences, walls, property lines, landscaped areas and structures. Individual wheel stops may be provided in lieu of continuous curbing when the parking is adjacent to a landscaped area, and the drainage is directed to the landscaped area subject to the approval of the director. Wheel stops or curbing shall be placed to allow for two feet of vehicle overhang area within the dimension of the parking space.

    (n)    Barriers to Channel Traffic. Appropriate barriers (e.g., landscape planters, bumper guards or wheel stops) to traffic movement shall be provided to channelize traffic into travel lanes and prevent unrestricted movement through parking stalls.

    (o)    Pedestrian Walkways. Commercial developments shall provide grade-separated walkways that connect parking lots to on-site buildings and public sidewalks. Pedestrian walkways shall be properly illuminated for nighttime safety and visibility and shall be adequately landscaped for shade, comfort and aesthetics.

    (p)    Rear Parking Areas. Rear parking shall be provided with access into the rear of the building(s) served. Rear building access shall be designed as secondary points of egress and ingress. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.080 Driveways.
    (a)    Number and Location of Driveways. The number and location of driveways shall be subject to the requirements of the city engineer.

    (b)    Driveway Width and Length.

    (1)    Single-Family Uses.

    (A)   Each single-family dwelling shall provide a paved driveway continuous from the street or other public right-of-way via a curb cut and driveway apron providing access to the interior of a garage or carport. Driveways shall be kept free and clear of stored materials (e.g., trash, debris, construction material), including inoperable vehicles, at all times.

 

    (B)   Driveways that provide access to garages or carports having a setback less than twenty-four feet from the street property line shall have a minimum width of twenty-two feet. Driveways that provide access to garages or carports having a setback greater than twenty-four feet from the street property line may have a minimum width of twelve feet at the street property line.

    (C)   When a garage is perpendicular (ninety degrees) to the driveway, a minimum twenty-five-foot deep unobstructed back-out area shall be provided.

    (D)   For single-family uses in residential zoning districts, paved driveways may be used only for the parking/storage of operable automobiles, trucks under two-ton capacity, recreational vehicles, trailers and watercraft. Automobiles, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, watercraft or similar items shall not be used for habitation.

    (E)   The maximum width of an expanded driveway shall not exceed fifty percent of the lot width for lots with widths greater than fifty feet, and sixty percent of the lot width for lots with widths of fifty feet or less.

    (2)    Multi-Family Uses.

    (A)   The minimum width of driveways shall be as follows:

 

1—15 dwelling units

20 feet

16 or more dwelling units

25 feet

 

    (B)   Driveways that provide direct access to garages or carports shall have minimum widths as follows:

 

Garages, carports or parking on one side

25 feet

Garages or carports on both sides

30 feet

 

    (C)   Garages and carports shall provide a minimum overhead clearance of eight feet.

    (3)    Nonresidential Uses. Drive aisles for nonresidential uses shall be provided in compliance with Figure 3-2 (Drive Aisle and Parking Space Dimensions for Nonresidential Uses). The maximum driveway width shall be thirty feet, exclusive of the area provided for a median divider.

    (c)    Clearance from Obstruction. The nearest edge of a driveway apron or curb return shall be at least five feet from the nearest property line, centerline of a fire hydrant, utility pole, traffic signal, light standards or other similar facilities. Driveways shall have an overhead clearance of ten feet in height except within a parking structure which may be reduced to seven feet, six inches.

    (d)    Internal Circulation. Internal circulation patterns and the location and traffic direction of all access drives shall be designed and maintained in compliance with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety.

    (e)    Visibility. Visibility of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists shall be assured when entering individual parking spaces, circulating within a parking facility and entering or leaving a parking facility.

    (f)    Coordination with Medians. Driveway locations shall be located to coordinate with future median openings in compliance with the design standards established in the Division of Highways Design Manual. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1427 § 2, 2009; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.090 Loading space requirements.
    (a)    Number of Loading Spaces Required. Nonresidential uses shall provide the number of loading spaces required to meet the needs of the proposed use as determined by the director.

    (b)    Standards for Loading Areas. Loading areas shall be provided in the following manner:

    (1)    Dimensions. Loading spaces shall be not less than fifteen feet in width, twenty-five feet in length, with fourteen feet of vertical clearance.

    (2)    Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of adjacent structure(s).

    (3)    Loading Doors and Gates. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall be painted to blend with the exterior structure wall(s) and be located on the rear of the structure only. Bays and doors may be located on the side of a structure, away from a street frontage, where the director determines that the bays, doors and related trucks will be adequately screened from view from adjacent streets.

    (4)    Loading Ramps. Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions and overhead clearances.

    (5)    Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows:

    (A)   Adjacent to the main structure and limited to the rear two-thirds of the parcel, except where approved by the director;

    (B)   Situated to ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets as much as possible;

    (C)   Situated to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way or other traffic areas on-site;

    (D)   Situated to ensure that vehicular maneuvers occur on-site;

    (E)   Situated to avoid adverse impacts upon neighboring properties.

    (6)    Screening. Loading areas abutting residentially zoned parcels shall be screened in compliance with Section 21.18.080 (Screening and buffering) of this title.

    (7)    Striping. Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for “loading only.” The striping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/ tenant in a clear and visible manner at all times. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.22.100 Violations of parking and loading regulations.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the standards set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to provide or maintain parking and loading areas as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.24 SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.24.010 Title.
    This chapter may be known as the “Sign Ordinance” of the city of Fountain Valley California. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.020 Authority.
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s general and police powers, California Constitution Article XI, Section 7; California Government Code Sections 65000 et seq., 65850(b), 38774, and 38775; Business and Professions Code Sections 5200 et seq., 5230, and 5490 et seq.; Penal Code Section 556 et seq., and other applicable state laws. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.030 Scope.
    This chapter regulates signs, as defined herein, which are within the legal corporate limits of the city, but not on city property, as defined herein, or in the public right-of-way, or on property owned and/or controlled by other city controlled entities. Signs on city property and the public right-of-way are controlled by Chapter 21.25. This chapter does not regulate signs used in conjunction with parades and public assemblies; such matters are covered in Chapter 8.50. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.040 Findings and purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to create and enforce a comprehensive system for the reasonable regulation of signs, as defined herein, within the city. The city has maintained strong sign regulations throughout its history and has been vigilant in enforcing the same with the result that the city does not have the visual blight that afflicts some other cities. By adopting this chapter the city intends to balance many competing interests, which include, but are not limited to:

    (1)    To provide adequate opportunity for exercise of the free speech right by display of a sign;

    (2)    To preserve and enhance the aesthetic values of the city by limiting visual clutter which can be caused by excessive or inappropriate signage;

    (3)    To regulate on the basis of particular need and proportion of signage;

    (4)    To serve the traffic and pedestrian safety needs of the community;

    (5)    To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating existing and proposed signs in the city to assure that they are:

    (A)   Legible in the context of their location,

    (B)   Architecturally compatible with their surroundings,

    (C)   Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain,

    (D)   In compliance with applicable state and federal law and this chapter. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.050 Basic principles.
    The principles stated in this section apply to all signs and procedures within the regulatory scope of this chapter and to all provisions of this chapter.

    (a)    Applicability. All signs within the scope of this chapter shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. The requirements and development standards in this chapter shall apply to all zoning districts and all private property in the city. Only signs authorized by this chapter shall be allowed. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, specific regulations shall apply as provided in each specific plan.

    (b)    Prospective Only. This chapter is intended to have prospective effect only; however, this does not waive the city’s right to demand compliance with this chapter, or to demand abatement of existing signs which were illegal when installed and have never been legalized, or which have expanded nonconformities without proper permitting.

    (c)    Enforcement. The director or designee is authorized and directed to enforce and administer this chapter.

    (d)    Regulatory Interpretations. All regulatory and administrative interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the message neutrality and message substitution policies.

    (e)    Message Neutrality. It is the city’s policy and intent to regulate signs in a manner consistent with the United States and California constitutions, which is content neutral as to protected noncommercial speech and which does not favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech.

    (f)    Message Substitution. Subject to the property owner’s consent, a protected noncommercial message of any type may be substituted, in whole or in part, for the message displayed on any sign which is already legal or legal nonconforming without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting, provided that the message substitution makes no changes to the physical structure of the sign. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over protected noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular protected noncommercial message over any other protected noncommercial message.

    Message substitution is a continuing right and may be exercised any number of times, in whole or in part. This policy applies only to messages which are within the protection of the First Amendment to the United States constitution and corresponding provisions of the California constitution. This message substitution provision does not: (1) create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or land use, beyond that otherwise allowed; (2) affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted, when any permit requirement applies; (3) allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; or (4) authorize the substitution of an offsite commercial message in place of an onsite commercial message or in place of a noncommercial message.

    (g)    On-Site/Off-Site Distinction. Within this chapter, the distinction between on-site signs and off-site signs applies only to commercial messages. There is no location criterion for noncommercial speech on signs.

    (h)    Permanent Signs—Accessory or Appurtenant Uses Only. Unless otherwise provided herein, permanent signs are to be accessories to, or appurtenant to, or auxiliary to, a main, principal or primary land use on the same parcel; the signs themselves are not to be a primary, principal, or a secondary principal use on any parcel. This provision applies prospectively only. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.060 Definitions.
    “Abandoned sign” means a sign which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product or service available on the premises where the sign is located.

    “Animated sign” means a sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or the appearance of motion. This definition includes blinking, flashing, moving and revolving signs; strobe, laser, fiber optic, search lights and string lighting of any type, including blinking lights. It also includes electronic display faces which are capable of presenting a series of still images in “slide show” fashion.

    “Area of sign” or “sign area” means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles that enclose the extreme limits or writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, with any frame, background area of sign, structural trim or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such signs from the background against which it is placed. If a sign is designed with more than one exterior surface, the area shall be computed as including only the maximum single display surface that is visible from any ground position at one time. The supports or uprights on which a sign is supported shall not be included in determining the sign area unless the supports or uprights are designed in a manner as to form an integral background of the display. For signs with no distinct border or boundary, the sign area shall be calculated by computing the area of a simple rectilinear figure consisting of not more than eight perpendicular lines that contain all of the writing, representations, emblems, logos, or other display elements of the sign.

 



Figure 1. Sign Area

 

    “Aerial sign” means a sign or device that is either floating or flying in the air but is tethered to a structure or to the ground by strings or cables, for the purpose of attracting attention to or advertising a commercial or noncommercial message.

    “Awning sign” means a sign painted or otherwise affixed permanently to the exterior surface of an awning. For purposes of this chapter, awning means shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and constructed of a rigid frame covered by a flexible skin (e.g., as fabric, synthetic material or thin sheet metal).

    “Banner” means a temporary sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing framework.

    “Billboard” means a permanent structure sign which meets any one or more of the following criteria: (1) it is used for the display of off-site commercial messages; (2) it is used for general advertising for hire, in contrast to self-promotion; (3) it is not an accessory or auxiliary use serving a principal use on the same parcel, but rather is a separate or principal use of the parcel; (4) it is a profit center on its own. Signs within an area controlled by a master sign program or specific plan which displays commercial messages pertaining to establishments within the same sign program area or specific plan area are not billboards.

    “Building frontage” means the linear dimension of a building that faces upon a public street (excluding an alley) or public/private parking lot and is roughly parallel to it.

    “Bunting” means a decoration made out of fabric, synthetic material, sheet metal or any thin pliable material that is attached to at least two ends of a rigid frame attached to a pole or projecting from a building.

    “Cabinet sign” means a sign face within a box frame, usually made of metal; also known as “cab sign” or “box sign.”

    “Canopy sign” means a sign affixed to the top or face of a canopy. For the purposes of this chapter, canopy means a permanent, flat projection from the face of the building, constructed of rigid materials.

    “Channel letters” means individual letters or figures that are affixed to a building or to a freestanding sign structure, typically by sliding the letters into channel guides.

    “Commercial mascot” means a person or animal attired or decorated with commercial insignia, images or symbols, and/or holding signs displaying commercial messages, when a principal purpose is to draw attention to or advertise a commercial enterprise. Includes sign twirlers, sign clowns and human or animal “sandwich board” type signs.

    “Commercial message” means an image or message on a sign which primarily concerns the commercial and/or economic interests of the sign sponsor or intended audience, and/or which proposes a commercial transaction.

    “Construction sign” means a temporary sign on a property where construction activities are taking place. Construction activities consist of adding more than fifty percent to the total square footage of the building/buildings, or exterior redesign of more than fifty percent of the length of the building’s façade.

    “Directional sign” means an on-site sign that provides information to drivers and pedestrians, such as parking, exit, one way traffic, handicapped parking, etc.

    “Directory sign” means a freestanding or wall sign that identifies establishments located within a multi-tenant building, a shopping center, an industrial building or an institutional establishment.

    “Director” means the planning/building director of the city, or designee.

    “Drive-through ordering sign” means a sign displaying the menu of a drive-through restaurant to customers seated in vehicles in drive-through service lanes.

    “Electronic message center” or “EMC” means a sign with a visual image formed by the selective illumination of an array of light bulbs, light emitting diodes (LEDs), or liquid crystal displays (LCDs) that can be changed electronically. These signs may display text and/or graphic images, and may be programmable. The definition applies regardless of whether the sign displays a single image or a series of still images or full motion. Also known as digital signs, CEVMS (changeable electronic variable message signs), and similar names. All functionally equivalent technologies are within this definition.

    “Establishment” means any legal use of land, other than long-term residential, which involves the use of structures subject to the Building Code. By way of example and not limitation, this definition includes businesses, factories, farms, schools, hospitals, hotels and motels, offices and libraries but does not include single-family homes, mobile homes, residential apartments, residential care facilities, or residential condominiums.

    This definition does not include nature preserves, open space, raw land, broadcasting towers, or electrical transmission or transformer stations.

    “Fence sign” means a sign attached to or painted onto any freestanding fence.

    “Flag” means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular, of distinctive design, used as a symbol.

    “General advertising” means the commercial enterprise of advertising or promoting other businesses, establishments or causes using methods of advertising, in contrast to self-promotion or on-site advertising. Also known as “advertising for hire” and “general advertising for hire.” This definition applies even when the sponsored message is noncommercial or promotes a nonprofit cause or institution.

    “Graphic” means the visually communicative portion of a sign; a visual image which functions as symbol of an establishment, a company or any other legal private or public entity or a symbol expressing any other noncommercial or commercial message. Also known as “copy” or “sign copy.”

    “Height” means the vertical distance measured from the surface grade beneath the sign to the highest element of the sign. For purposes of this chapter, all sign heights specified are measured from the grade adjacent to the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign. Grading of a lot to increase sign height above natural grade shall not be allowed.

    “Illegal sign” means a sign that does not meet the requirements of this chapter and does not have legal nonconforming status. Includes all signs which were originally installed in violation of laws, rules and regulations which were in effect at the time of installation, and which have not been subsequently legalized.

    “Illuminated sign” means a sign with an artificial source of light incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.

    “Inflatable sign” means a form of inflatable device or a sign that is displayed, printed or painted on the surface of a balloon or any other form of inflatable background and is used to attract attention to or advertise a noncommercial or commercial message or location.

    “LED” means a light emitting diode, which is an electronic device that lights up when electricity is passed through it.

    “Legal nonconforming sign” means a permanent sign that was legally established and has been maintained in compliance with the provisions of all applicable laws in effect at the time of original installation but that does not currently comply with the provisions of this chapter or title.

    “Master sign program” means a coordinated program of signage for building complexes with four or more tenants.

    “Mobile sign” means a sign mounted, attached, affixed or painted upon any surface of a motor vehicle, trailer or similar conveyance parked or traversing upon a public street or on public or private property for the purpose of general advertising for hire.

    “Monument sign” means a freestanding sign, without exposed pylons or posts, mounted directly on the ground.

    “Mural” means a visual image on an exterior surface of a structure that is displayed primarily for artistic purposes, and not for advertising purposes. Images which consist of or contain text or commercial logos, symbols or images are not within this definition.

    “Neon sign” sign means any sign using neon or any other inert gas under low pressure, which glows in a distinctive color when exposed to a high voltage electrical current.

    “Off-site message” means a commercial message displayed on a sign which pertains to goods or services not available at the same location. The definition includes any wall sign that is not located directly above or upon a tenant’s lease space where the primary establishment is operated. The onsite/off-site distinction applies only to commercial messages.

    “On-site message” means a commercial message which pertains to goods and/or services offered on the same site, or expected to be offered on the same site in the near future. In the case of developments subject to a master sign program or specific plan, all establishments subject to the plan are considered on-site when located within the area to which the plan applies. In the case of construction site signs, “on-site” means any message or copy concerning parties involved in the specific construction project, as well as the intended use of the project when complete. The on-site/off-site distinction applies only to commercial messages.

    “Order confirmation board” means any video screen or electronic display, monitor or terminal that is located on, or affixed to, a drive-through menu board that displays exhibits or shows visual content or material.

    “Painted sign” means a visual image painted or silk-screened onto a building wall or freestanding structure.

    “Pennant” means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or similar material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, attached to a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind and attract attention. Pennants are typically triangular or swallow tail in shape. Flags are not within this definition.

    “Pole sign” means a freestanding sign supported by one or more poles. The definition applies even if the poles are skirted or covered with cladding.

    “Portable sign” means a sign not permanently attached to, mounted upon or affixed to a building, structure or the ground, and which is easily moved. Examples include A-frame signs, sandwich board signs, signs on wheels and signs carried/supported by human beings or animals.

    “Projecting sign” means a sign, the sign surface of which is not parallel to the face of the supporting wall and which is supported wholly by the wall. This definition shall include V- or wing-type signs.

    “Real estate sign” means a temporary sign whose message pertains to an economic transaction involving real property, such as a sale, rental, or lease. All signs described in Civil Code 713 are within this definition. This definition does not include signs offering or pertaining to short term or transient occupancy, such as hotel, motel, bed and breakfast inns advertising vacancy and rates.

    “Rider sign” means a sign attached to a real estate sign that provides limited information about the property (by way of example and not limitation: number of bedrooms, agent’s name, open house, etc.).

    “Roof sign” means a sign erected, constructed and attached to and/or maintained upon or above any roof or portion of a roof of any building, including a mansard roof. For the purposes of this chapter, a mansard roof is any roof or parapet wall with roofing material for siding that slopes from thirty degrees to ninety degrees and does not have a ridge line.

    “Sign” means the public display of a communicative visual image for the purpose of attracting attention and/or expressing some message, which is visible from an exterior location open to the public. Notwithstanding the breadth and generality of the foregoing, the following are not within the definition of sign:

    (1)    Aerial signs or banners towed behind aircraft;

    (2)    Architectural Features. Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), which do not perform a communicative function;

    (3)    Fireworks;

    (4)    Foundation stones and cornerstones;

    (5)    Holiday decorations, cultural observance imagery, and strings of lights which are on display in conjunction with a state or national holiday for not more than forty-five calendar days per year (cumulative, per parcel or use) and which do not include commercial advertising messages;

    (6)    Inflatable Gymnasiums. Inflatable, temporary, moveable, gymnasium devices commonly used for children’s birthday parties, and similar devices; also called “party jumps”;

    (7)    Interior Graphics. Visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof;

    (8)    Landscaping;

    (9)    Manufacturers’ Marks. Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale;

    (10)  Mass Transit Graphics. Graphic images mounted on duly licensed and authorized mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city for the primary purpose of transportation rather than general advertising for hire; taxis;

    (11)  Newsracks and newsstands;

    (12)  Personal Appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, wigs, costumes, masks, etc. (but not including commercial mascots or hand-held signs);

    (13)  Search lights, except when used to attract attention to or advertise a commercial or noncommercial message or location;

    (14)  Shopping carts, golf carts, horse drawn carriages, pedicabs and similar devices; any motorized vehicle which may be legally operated upon a public road is not within this exclusion;

    (15)  Symbols Embedded in Architecture. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal; by way of example and not limitation, such symbols include stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells, religious statuary, etc.;

    (16)  Vehicle and Vessel Insignia. On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel;

    (17)  Vending machines, automated intake devices and product dispensing devices which do not display off-site commercial messages or general advertising messages;

    (18)  Window Displays. The display of merchandise in a store window.

    “Sign Committee.” The sign committee shall be composed of the following:

    (1)    Two commission members appointed by the commission; and

    (2)    The director.

    “Sign copy” means the combination of letters, numerals, or symbols displayed on a sign face to convey a message to the public; the complete set of all elements of a visual image which is intended to be communicative.

    “Snipe sign” means a small poster board on a stake mounted on the public right-of-way, in violation of applicable laws.

    “Subdivision entry feature” means a sign located within a common open space area or landscape easement, adjacent to a street on the perimeter of the subdivision.

    “Temporary sign” means a sign that is designed or intended to be temporarily mounted or displayed and which is not intended for permanent or long term use. Temporary signs are usually made of lightweight materials and are easily mounted by hand or with ordinary hand tools.

    “Under-canopy sign” means a sign suspended under a canopy, marquee or arcaded walk in front of a building.

    “Wall sign” means a sign installed on or attached to a wall and which is parallel to the building façade.

    “Window sign” means a sign painted or installed on a glass window or door or located within three feet from inside the window in a manner that it can be viewed from the exterior of a structure. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.070 General provisions for all signs.
    (a)    Sign Integration. Signs shall be designed as an integral part of the total building design.

    (b)    Emergency Response Information. Signs that are not primarily in the English language shall provide the name of the business or type of business and street address (e.g., dentist, hardware, etc.) displayed in English to help facilitate an emergency response to that location if necessary.   (c)        Illumination. Signs with external illumination shall be provided with shields to concentrate the illumination on the sign to prevent glare on the street or adjacent property. It shall be unlawful to create harmful glare or light that distracts motorists, or causes a nuisance to adjacent property.

    (d)    Quality—Maintenance—Aesthetics. Signs shall be maintained in proper working order and in a state of good repair at all times. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept clean and legible at all times.

    The rear of any sign face or cabinet visible to the public shall be provided with a flat-surfaced cover to obscure structural elements from public view. Angle bars, metal pipes or I-beams shall not be used as visible structural supports unless covered with decorative material.

    (e)    Location. The location and design of a proposed sign shall not create a pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazard.

    (f)    Sign Consistency. All signs within an individual project shall be of the same type (e.g., channel letters, cabinet, etc.), unless otherwise approved by the sign committee. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.080 Standards for specific sign types.
    Only signs authorized by this section shall be allowed unless additional signage is allowed by another provision of this chapter. The following standards are maximums and lesser standards may be applied to a particular project if the circumstances warrant.

    (a)    Wall Signs.

 

     1.        Building frontage (A) = 30 ft.

     2.        30 ft. x 1.5 = 45 square feet = max. sign area



Figure 2. Wall Signs

 

Standards for Wall Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Requirements

 

1 Sign per building elevation

1.5 sq. ft. of sign area/linear ft. of building frontage

Below edge of roof

Wall signs shall be located only on building frontages facing a public street, private drive or parking lot.

2 Signs maximum for corner/ end tenants in a multi-tenant shopping center

Wall signs shall be parallel to the face of the building and shall not project from the face of the building more than required for construction purposes and in no case more than 12 inches.

3 Signs maximum for freestanding buildings

Wall signs shall not obstruct any portion of a window.

 

    (b)    Directional Signs.

 



Figure 3. Directional Signs

 

 

Standards for Directional Signs in Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family Zoning Districts

 

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Requirements

1 per site entrance, or as allowed by a master sign program approved by the sign committee

4 sq. ft.

3 ft.

On-site directional signs are intended to aid vehicle and pedestrian traffic to maneuver safely onto and within the site.

 

    (c)    Freestanding Monument Signs.

 



Figure 4. Freestanding Monument Signs

 

 

Standards for Freestanding Monument Signs in Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family
Zoning Districts and Assembly Facilities

 

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Requirements

1 sign for every 300 feet of street frontage along a public street

50 sq. ft.*

8 ft.*

Sign shall be set back a minimum 5 ft. from property lines or public right-of-way and shall not block traffic safety area.

*Height and square footage may be increased for commercial and industrial properties that have 500 ft. or more of continuous street frontage along an arterial street

80 sq. ft.

12 ft.

Same as above.

See additional requirements below

 

    (1)    In commercial, industrial zones, multi-family zoning districts, and assembly facilities, the following limitations shall apply to monument signs:

 

Lineal Street Frontage

No. of Signs Permitted

0—300

1

300—600

2

600—900

3

Over 900

4

 

    (2)    Lineal street frontage on corner lots fronting arterial streets shall be combined and count towards the number of allowable monument signs.

    (3)    Separation. There shall be a minimum of seventy-five feet between two freestanding monument signs on the same property and adjoining properties to ensure adequate visibility for all signs. The director may waive this requirement in situations where its application would be impractical due to the locations of existing signs on adjacent properties.

    (4)    Freestanding monument signs shall not project over public property, vehicular easements or rights-of-way, or obstruct corner cutback area. A minimum of two hundred square feet of landscaping shall be provided at the base of the supporting structure;

    (5)    The width of the base structure shall be a minimum of one-half the length of the sign area;

    (6)    Illumination: freestanding monument signs may be illuminated with either interior or indirect lighting;

    (7)    Architectural Compatibility. Monument signs shall be compatible with the architectural features of the facility to which it relates.

    (8)    Addresses shall be provided on monument signs using Arabic numbers at least eight inches in height and be placed on the top face or the side parallel to the street of the monument sign.

    (9)    Sign area shall be computed by measuring the entire area contained within the frame or cabinet but excluding the monument base if it contains no sign copy and is clearly distinguishable from the sign copy area through the use of different texture, color, and design. The frame or cabinet structure shall be included in the maximum height calculation of the sign.

    (d)    Freeway Visible Monument Signs.

 



Figure 5. Freeway Visible Monument Signs

 

Standards for Freeway Monument Signs in the Commercial and Industrial Zones Adjacent to the 405 Freeway

 

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Requirements

1 sign

200 sq. ft.

Shall not exceed 20 ft. in height as measured from the elevation of the nearest freeway lane

Only on parcels that have a minimum freeway frontage of 200 ft.

See additional requirements below

 

    (1)    Freeway monument signs may not be used as general advertising for hire.

    (2)    Landscaping. Freeway monument signs shall be located in a landscape berm area, approved by the director, a minimum of six hundred square feet in area.

    (3)    Orientation. Freeway monument signs shall be perpendicular to the freeway right-of-way.

    (4)    Separation. There shall be a minimum of two hundred feet between two freestanding signs on abutting sites to ensure adequate visibility for all signs and to alleviate sign clutter.

    (5)    All freeway monument signs shall be reviewed by the sign committee for compliance with this chapter.

    (e)    Banners.

 



Figure 6. Banners

 

Standards for Temporary Banners in
Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family
Zoning Districts

 

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Size

Requirements

1 per building or tenant space

45 sq. ft.

3 ft. by 15 ft.

An establishment in a commercial, industrial, or multi-family zoning district may display 1 banner for a maximum 4 such time periods per year, each time period running not more than 60 days, with a minimum of 30 days between time periods.

See additional requirements below

 

    (1)    A banner shall be located on the face of the structure to which it is associated. No banner shall be placed on the parapet or roof area of any structure. The banner shall be attached to the building.

    (2)    Banners shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following: number twelve canvas or equivalent shall be used; top and bottom edges shall have a one and one-half inch hem with one-quarter inch rope enclosed in the hem for reinforcement to prevent eyelets from ripping out; top and bottom edges shall have metal reinforced eyelets spaced at two-foot intervals.

    (3)    Prohibited Banner Types. Three-dimensional banners, inflatable advertising devices, lighted banners and animated banners are all prohibited.

    (4)    A temporary sign permit and associated fees shall be required for installation of any banner. The applicant shall submit an application for a banner permit and obtain a permit prior to the installation of the banner.

    (5)    A banner permit shall be issued in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

    (f)    Window Signs. Temporary advertising/promotional signs and graphics painted on a window or securely attached to a window are allowed subject to the following:

 



Figure 7. Window Signs

 

Standards for Window Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

Maximum Sign Area

Location

Requirements

Not to exceed 30% of each window area

Upper 2/3 of window area

Window signs shall be permanently painted or mounted on the inside of windows and doors.

Window signs shall be allowed only on windows located on the ground floor of a building frontage.

Illuminated, neon and LED signs are prohibited

 

    (g)    Awning Signs.

 



Figure 8. Awning Signs

 

Standards for Awning Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

1 per awning per building elevation

10% of front face of awning area

See additional requirements below

 

    (1)    Awning signs for multiple-tenant projects shall only be allowed as part of an approved master sign program to ensure continuity of architecture and sign identification for the entire development. Individual tenants within multiple-tenant projects shall not erect awning signs unless they are part of a comprehensive sign program for the entire project. Awning signs are allowable on single-tenant buildings without a sign program;

    (2)    Awnings shall only be located on building frontages and are limited to ground level only.

    (3)    The area of awning signs shall be included in the aggregate sign area allowed for the use.

    (4)    Awnings shall not be internally illuminated so that light is emitted from the awning. Lighting directed downwards to illuminate the exterior surface of the awning is allowed.

    (5)    Combinations of signs on awnings with wall signs are permitted but shall not exceed the maximum allowable sign area per building elevation.

    (h)    Service Station Canopy Signs.

 



Figure 9. Service Station Canopy Signs

 

Standards for Service Station Canopy Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

1 per awning elevation

10% of canopy face

LED (or similar) accent lighting is also permitted to be used on service station buildings when in keeping with the overall architectural design of a building and/or canopy and insofar as such accent lighting does not convey a message to the public, such accent lighting shall not be considered signage nor count against overall allowable sign area subject to development review.

 

    (1)    Canopy fascia may be illuminated when not facing a residential zone that abuts the property.

    (2)    Canopy fascia illumination shall be subject to development review.

    (3)    Canopy fascia lighting shall maximize opportunities for energy conservation, while avoiding glare and light trespass through design of lighting installations, selection of fixture type, lighting technology and location, and control of light levels.

    (i)     Service Station Monument Signs.

 



Figure 10. Service Station Monument Signs

 

Standards for Service Station Monument Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

Number Allowed

Service stations are permitted 1 monument sign per street frontage

 

    (1)    Service station monument signs shall meet all the requirements as indicated in subsection (c) of this section, freestanding monument signs, except as provided for in this section.

    (2)    Service station monument signs may incorporate a digital/changeable copy LED (or similar) illuminated fuel price sign subject to sign committee review.

    (3)    Digital/changeable copy technology may be used in price signs strictly for the purpose of pricing adjustments and may not be utilized to transmit any other digital messages.

    (4)    The digital/changeable copy shall not scroll, blink, flash or travel horizontally or vertically across the face of the sign.

    (j)     Drive-Through Ordering Signs.

 



Figure 11. Drive-Through Ordering Signs

 

Standards for Drive-Through Ordering Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Height

Requirements

2 per property

45 sq. ft. for main menu board

8 ft.

Shall not be located in the setback area.

20 sq. ft. for the secondary menu board

Order confirmation boards shall not exceed 19 inches in diameter and shall count towards the square footage for all drive-through signage.

 

    (k)    Protected Non-Commercial Speech Temporary Signs.

    (1)    Number. All private properties in the city are allowed to display a maximum of four temporary non-commercial speech signs per parcel in the residential zone and one temporary non-commercial speech sign per one hundred feet of arterial street frontage in nonresidential zones. The foregoing is a limitation on the number of signs and not their spacing.

    (2)    Display. The display area of a temporary non-commercial speech sign may be used for any protected non-commercial speech.

    (3)    Structure and Height. Temporary non-commercial speech signs may not exceed three square feet per sign face. Temporary non-commercial speech signs must be freestanding and cannot exceed six feet in height measured from the adjacent grade. Notwithstanding the foregoing height restriction, a temporary non-commercial speech sign placed in the rear yard of a single-family dwelling, where the dwelling is both adjacent to an arterial street and located in the residential zone, cannot exceed nine feet in height measured from the adjacent grade.

    (4)    Timing. Temporary non-commercial speech signs can be displayed in the residential zone at all times. Temporary non-commercial speech signs can be displayed in nonresidential zones only during the period which begins sixty days before, and ends ten days after, an election held by a local, state, or national government entity.

    (5)    No Obstruction. Non-commercial speech temporary signs authorized by this section may not be placed within the fifteen-foot corner cutback area, as defined in Section 21.18.040, or encroach on or over the public right-of-way.

    (l)     Subdivision Entry Feature.



Figure 12. Subdivision Entry Feature

 

Standards for Residential Subdivision Entry Feature Wall Sign

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Requirements

2 per tract entrance; 1 per wall

24 sq. ft.

Shall be located on subdivision wall.

 

    (m)   Interim Identification Signs for Establishments. A maximum of one temporary sign for the identification of a new establishment is allowed until permanent signs can be erected, for a period not to exceed ninety days. One time extension may be granted by the director upon a showing that the delay in obtaining and mounting a permanent sign has been caused by factors beyond the control of the establishment. Maximum sign area is limited to fifty square feet.

    (n)    Construction Site Signs. Temporary signs are allowed on construction sites in compliance with the following:

    (1)    Construction site signs shall only be allowed on residential properties greater than one acre in size.

    (2)    Limit on number and size: one per street frontage and shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area.

    (3)    Construction site signs may be on display only for the period during which active construction is proceeding on the project or when an active entitlement application is on file with the city.

    (4)    Maximum sign height shall not exceed eight feet.

    (5)    Sign face shall be constructed of wood, plastic or metal.

    (6)    Construction site signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property line.

    (o)    Canopy Signs.



Figure 13. Canopy Signs

 

Standards for Canopy Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Height

Requirements

1 Sign per building elevation

1.5 sq. ft. of sign area/ linear ft. of building frontage

Below edge of roof

See below for additional requirements.

2 Signs maximum for corner/ end tenants in a multi-tenant shopping center

3 Signs maximum for freestanding buildings

 

    (1)    Canopy signs are allowed only where a permanent fixed canopy structure is constructed over an entrance to a building.

    (2)    The lettering shall be fixed to the face of the canopy or directly on top of the canopy.

    (3)    The lettering shall not extend above the edge of the building roof line.

    (4)    Maximum sign size on the canopy shall not exceed one and one-half square feet of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage.

    (5)    No structural element of a canopy shall be located less than eight feet above finished grade.

    (6)    Canopies shall be compatible with the architectural integrity of the building(s) to which they are attached.

    (7)    Combinations of signs on canopies with wall signs are permitted but shall not exceed the maximum allowable sign area per building elevation.

    (p)    Real Estate Signs—Commercial Properties.

 



Figure 14. Real Estate Signs—Commercial Properties

 

Real Estate Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Requirements

1 per lot or parcel

16 sq. ft. per sign face plus 9 sq. ft. of rider signage

8 ft.

Illumination is prohibited.

Corner parcels may display 2 commercial real estate signs, 1 along each street frontage

Shall be constructed of wood, plastic, or metal.

Time Periods

Commercial real estate signs shall be removed within 7 days after the proposed transaction has occurred. Maximum time period shall be 180 days from the date the sign permit is issued, unless otherwise extended by the director upon submittal of proof that the property is still on the market.

 

    (q)    Real Estate Signs—Residential. All residential real estate signs shall be subject to the following requirements:



Figure 15. Real Estate Signs—Residential

 

Real Estate Signs in Residential Zoning Districts

Number Allowed

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Requirements

1 per lot or parcel

15 sq. ft. including all riders

6 ft.

Setback a minimum of 2 ft. from property line.

Shall not be mounted on, or extended into, the public right-of-way.

Time Periods

During the period the property is listed for sale, rent or lease, and in any event, shall be removed within 7 days after the property is sold, rented or leased, or the offer is terminated; the property shall be deemed sold upon the close of escrow.

 

    (r)    Directional Open House Signage—Tract Entrance(s).

    (1)    For the purposes of this section, “tract” shall refer to any quadrant bound by adjacent arterial streets.

    (2)    Off-site directional open house signs are permitted in accordance with California Civil Code Section 713.

    (3)    Open house signs must direct traffic to a property that is offered for sale, rent or lease.

    (4)    A maximum of two open house directional signs shall be permitted at each tract entrance per house for sale; the tract entrance is limited to one entrance per arterial street.

    (5)    Open house signs at tract entrances shall limit messages to “Open House” but can be personalized to include directional arrow, name of agent, real estate company, phone number, etc.

    (6)    Maximum sign area—Twenty-four inches by eighteen inches.

    (7)    Maximum height—Forty-two inches; except for those flush mounted on tract wall.

    (8)    No flags, pennants, or balloons are permitted on the open house directional signs.

    (9)    Signs can only be displayed between six a.m. to eight p.m. on the day of open house.

    (10)  Signs must be set back a minimum of two feet from the property line, except for those flush mounted or on top of or behind the tract wall, but signs cannot extend into the public right-of-way.

    (11)  One additional open house sign may be placed within the tract at each change of direction from the entrance to the most direct route to the open house.

    (12)  Signs can only be placed on private property with consent of the property owner; no sign shall be placed on any public property, including, but not limited to, the public right-of-way, parkway strips, sidewalks, medians, tree wells, power poles, wires and appurtenances, etc.

    (s)    Directional Open House Signage—Arterial Intersections.

    (1)    Off-site directional open house signs are permitted in accordance with California Civil Code Section 713.

    (2)    The purpose of the directional open house sign is to direct homebuyer to an open house, not to market an individual agent or real estate company.

    (3)    Open house signs must direct traffic to a property that is currently offered for sale, rent or lease.

    (4)    A maximum of four off-site open house directional signs shall be permitted per home for sale; a maximum of two signs at any of the four nearest arterial intersections, not to exceed a total of four signs, provided not more than one sign is placed at any single street corner.

    (5)    Maximum sign area—Twenty-four inches by nine inches.

    (6)    Maximum height—Forty-two inches; except for flush mounted signs on tract walls.

    (7)    Signs shall be limited to the following:

    (A)   One red, blue or green directional arrow;

    (B)   Signs may include the name of agent and phone number or email address in a single colored font not to exceed one and one-half inches.

    (8)    No flags, pennants, or balloons are permitted on the open house directional signs.

    (9)    Signs can only be displayed between six a.m. to eight p.m. on day of the open house.

    (10)  Signs must be set back a minimum of two feet from the property line.

    (11)  Signs can only be placed on private property with the consent of owner; no sign shall be placed on any public property, including, but not limited to, the public right-of-way, parkway strip, sidewalks, medians, tree wells, power poles, wires and appurtenances, etc. (Ord. 1543 § 4, 2019; Ord. 1539 § 4, 2018; Ord. 1513 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.24.090 Sign permit procedures.
    (a)    Sign Permit Required. No private party may post, mount, install or display a sign unless a permit therefor has first been issued or the subject sign is expressly exempt from the permit requirement by this chapter. The sign shall conform to the permit.

    (b)    Sign Permit Fee. A sign permit shall not be issued until the applicant has paid the permit fee set by council resolution.

    (c)    Sign Permit Application Elements. The sign permit application form may call for the following information:

 

    (1)    Three sets of a fully dimensioned site plan (drawn to scale) indicating all property lines, public and private street lines (including center lines), structures, easements, and the location and size (in square feet) of all existing and proposed signs;

    (2)    Three sets of a fully dimensioned architectural elevation drawing (shown to scale) indicating thereon all sign matter, graphic design elements, materials, and method of illumination, and if required by the director, a photographic simulation;

    (3)    Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and, if applicable, the name, address, APN (assessor’s parcel number) and telephone number, as well as the license number, if any, of the sign contractor;

    (4)    Address and zoning district of the property where the sign is proposed to be displayed;

    (5)    Existing and proposed sign area of each individual sign and the combined area of all signs (including those already existing or previously permitted) in relation to the maximum allowed sign area;

    (6)    Written evidence of all owners’ consents, such as land owner or lessor;

    (7)    A statement as to whether the sign is intended to be used in whole or in part for off-site commercial messages, advertising for hire or general advertising;

    (8)    A statement or graphical description as to whether the proposed sign, or any part of it, is proposed to utilize any of the following physical methods of message presentation: sound; odor, smoke, fumes or steam; rotating, moving or animated elements; activation by wind or forced air; neon or other fluorescing gases; fluorescent or day-glow type colors; flashing or strobe lighting; light emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays or other video-like methods; digital display technology; use of live animals or living persons as part of the display; mannequins or statuary;

    (9)    Photographs of the existing property, parcel and/or building on which the sign is proposed to be erected or displayed;

    (10)  In the case of any proposed sign which is subject to a discretionary process, such as a variance, conditional use permit, or sign program, all information required by such process(es);

    (11)  The director is authorized to modify the list of information to be provided on a sign permit application; however, additions may be made only after thirty days public notice. The director is also authorized to request, require or accept application materials, in whole or in part, in computer readable format, and to specify the acceptable formats for such submissions.

    (d)    Master Sign Programs. A sign permit application must include a proposed master sign program in the following cases.

    (1)    New nonresidential projects with four or more tenants.

    (2)    Major rehabilitation work that involves the exterior remodeling of an existing nonresidential project with four or more units.

    For the purposes of this chapter, major rehabilitation means adding more than fifty percent to the total square footage of the building/buildings, or exterior redesign of more than fifty percent of the length of the building’s façade within the development.

    (e)    Reviewing Body. The director shall review all sign permit applications except sign permit applications for changeable copy signs and freeway monument signs, which shall be reviewed by the sign committee. The sign committee shall review master sign programs. The director may forward any other sign permit application to the sign committee for review.

    (f)    Findings. Review of a sign permit application shall not include judgment of the artistic merit of the graphic design. A proposed sign permit or master sign program may be approved only upon making the following findings:

    (1)    That the sign is consistent with this title, the general plan and this chapter;

    (2)    That the location, design, size, shape, color, illumination, form, proportion, scale, material, surface treatment, and placement of the sign are compatible with the building it identifies and that the sign is compatible with the visual characteristics of the surrounding area so as not to detract from or cause to denigrate the value or quality of adjacent properties;

    (3)    That both the location of the proposed sign and the design of its visual elements (lettering, words, figures, colors, decorative motifs, spacing and proportions) are legible under normal viewing conditions at the sign location, and providing sufficient English character identification from the public right-of-way to allow effective public safety responses;

    (4)    That the location and design of the proposed sign does not obscure from view or unduly detract from existing or adjacent signs;

    (5)    That the location and design of a proposed sign in close proximity to any residential district does not adversely affect the quality or character of the residential area;

    (6)    That the location and design of a proposed sign does not create a pedestrian or vehicular hazard;

    (7)    That signs covered by a master sign program have uniform sign type (e.g., channel letters or cabinet sign) and uniform location with the building’s design.

    (g)    Maintenance of Status Quo During Review Process. During review of a sign permit application, including all levels of appeal, the status quo shall be maintained pending completion of the internal appeal process; however, this does not apply in the case of an existing sign which by its physical nature presents a significant and immediate threat of damage to persons or property, or to the public safety.

    (h)    Time for Review.

    (1)    Review by the Director. For sign permit applications that are reviewed by the director, once a sign permit application is complete, a decision thereon shall be issued within ten calendar days; the applicant may waive this timely decision requirement. In the case of incomplete applications, the director shall give written notice to the applicant, within ten days of presentation, of all known deficiencies in the application.

    (2)    Review by the Sign Committee. For sign permit applications that are reviewed by the sign committee, once a sign permit application is complete, a decision thereon shall be issued within forty-five calendar days; the applicant may waive this timely decision requirement. In the case of incomplete applications, the director shall give written notice to the applicant, within ten days of presentation, of all known deficiencies in the application.

    (i)     Decision. A decision on a sign permit application shall be in writing. If a sign permit application is denied, the decision shall state the reasons for denial.

    (1)    Denial by Director. If the application is denied by the director, the applicant shall have twenty calendar days to correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application without payment of additional fees. Alternatively, the applicant may appeal the director’s decision in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title.

    (2)    Denial by Sign Committee. If the application is denied by the sign committee, the applicant may appeal the denial to the planning commission within twenty calendar days of the committee’s action in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title.

    (j)     Judicial Review. Following exhaustion of all available internal methods of review and appeal, the city’s final decision on a sign permit application may be judicially reviewed. To obtain judicial review, an applicant must file an action in the appropriate state or federal within sixty calendar days of the city’s final decision on a sign permit application.

    (k)    Permits Issued in Error. Any permit issued in error may be summarily revoked by the city manager by informing, in writing, the applicant of the nature of the error in issuance. Any applicant whose permit is revoked as issued in error may, at any time thereafter, submit a new permit application which cures any deficiencies in the original application. The application fee shall apply separately to each new application, but shall be waived when the original issuing error was caused by the city. When a permit is revoked, the permittee must remove the sign within seven calendar days of the revocation. If the permittee does not do so, then the city may remove the sign and recover from the permittee the reasonable cost of removal, as may be set by resolution of the city council. Such cost recovery may be a condition to any future or additional permits sought by the same applicant. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.100 Exemptions from sign permits.
    The signs described in this section are exempt from the sign permit requirement, but are still subject to all other legal requirements including all other applicable requirements of this code and chapter. Unless otherwise stated, the signs described in this section do not reduce the total area of sign display which is otherwise applicable.

    (a)    Notices. Notices required or allowed by law.

    (b)    Governmental signs.

    (c)    Flags. Each real property shall be allowed one flag pole, not to exceed thirty-five feet in height.

    (d)    Residential Property. Temporary non-commercial signs on residential property.

    (e)    Real estate signs.

    (f)    Window signs. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.110 Prohibited signs.
    The following sign types are prohibited in all zoning districts, unless specifically authorized or allowed by a more specific provision of this chapter:

    (1)    Aerial signs or aerial devices;

    (2)    Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving or other similar signs;

    (3)    Banners, bunting, flags, streamers and pennants;

    (4)    Bench signs, except at approved bus passenger loading areas;

    (5)    Billboards;

    (6)    Changeable copy signs, except at land uses characterized by human assembly and periodically changing programs (such as theaters, concert halls, convention facilities, and places of worship);

    (7)    Electronic reader board signs, electronic message centers and changeable electronic variable message signs;

    (8)    Fence signs;

    (9)    Inflated signs, balloons and figures (balloons and blimps);

    (10)  Mobile signs;

    (11)  Exposed neon, exposed LED or similar illuminated signs;

    (12)  Off-site commercial advertising signs;

    (13)  Signs painted on fences, walls, roofs, storage bins or cargo containers; including murals;

    (14)  Paper, cloth or similar lightweight, flimsy material signs on the exterior of a building, except those signs located inside a building as part of a window sign that meets all other provisions of this chapter;

    (15)  Pennant signs;

    (16)  Portable signs displaying commercial messages, including A-frame signs;

    (17)  Commercial mascots;

    (18)  Pole signs;

    (19)  Roof signs;

    (20)  Projecting signs;

    (21)  Signs erected in a manner that a portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of a fire escape, exit or standpipe or obstruct a required ventilator, door, stairway or window above the first story;

    (22)  Signs not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

    (23)  Signs emitting audible sounds, odors or visible matter;

    (24)  Signs that conflict with or imitate traffic control devices due to color, wording, design, location or illumination, or that interfere with the safe and efficient flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic;

    (25)  Snipe signs;

    (26)  Strings of lights or signs outlined with individual light bulbs;

    (27)  Vehicles used primarily as advertising devices. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.120 Abandoned signs.
    Signs shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the establishment that it advertises is no longer in operation on the premises for a period of ninety calendar days. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the director shall give the owner thirty days written notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the director may have the sign removed at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.24.130 Violations.
    It is unlawful for any person or for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the standards set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to comply with the sign standards set forth in this chapter or to fail to have any approval required by this chapter. The city may utilize any method authorized by law to remedy a sign in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

Chapter 21.25 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
21.25.010 Capacity.
    In adopting this chapter, the city council acts in its proprietary capacity as to public property within the city. Private parties may post or display signs on public property only in accordance with this chapter or some other authorization duly adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.25.020 Public forum designation.
    The city declares its intent that no public property in the city shall function as a designated public forum for sign display, unless some specific portion of public property is designated herein as a public forum of one particular type; in such case, the declaration as to public forum type shall apply strictly and only to the specified area and the specified time period. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.25.030 Definitions.
    For purposes of interpreting and enforcing this chapter, the following words have the special definitions given. For words not defined in this chapter, definitions from chapter 21.24 may be used as interpretive aids. In consultation with the city attorney, the city manager is authorized and directed to interpret these definitions in light of relevant court decisions.

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley and any of its associate entities.

    “Director” means the city of Fountain Valley planning director, or designee of the director.

    “Noncommercial message” means a constitutionally protected message that is not commercial in nature. Noncommercial messages on signs typically address topics of public concern or controversy such as, by way of example and not limitation, politics, religion, philosophy, science, art or social commentary. The on-site/off-site distinction does not apply to noncommercial messages.

    “Personally attended” means that a live person is physically present within five feet of the sign at all times.

    “Public property” means land or other property in which the city is the owner or has the present right of possession and control, as well as areas which are either designated as public rights-of-way or which have long been used as such.

    “Sign” means the same as the definition of the word “sign” in Chapter 21.24.

    “Sign ordinance” means Chapter 21.24 as that chapter may be amended from time to time.

    “Special public events” mean events such as public street closures, parades and demonstrations.

    “Traditional public forum” means the surfaces of city-owned streets, surfaces of city-owned parks, surfaces of city-owned plazas, surfaces of sidewalks which are connected to the city’s main pedestrian circulation system and the exterior surface of pedestrian areas immediately surrounding City Hall. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.25.040 General regulations.
    (a)    General Prohibition. No private party may post, mount, install or display a sign on public property unless the subject sign is expressly authorized by this chapter or another applicable policy statement or other authorization approved by the city council.

    (b)    Abatement. Any private party sign posted, displayed or installed on public property within the city, contrary to this chapter, may be summarily removed as a trespass and a nuisance by the city pursuant to this chapter. Sign owners who have signs removed by the city may be charged for all costs associated with the removal. Removed signs will be held by the city for a period of thirty days and the property/sign owner notified of same. Failure to respond to the notification may result in the sign(s) destruction or disposal by the city. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.25.050 Signs allowed on public property.
    The following signs are authorized on public property:

    (a)    Government Signs. Traffic control and traffic directional signs erected by the city or another governmental entity; official notices required or authorized by law; signs placed in furtherance of governmental functions; signs on which the city expresses its message(s) to the public.

    (b)    Legal Nonconforming Signs. Permanent signs which were erected in the past on public property in conformance with all then-applicable laws, rules and regulations may remain in that same location so long as they have not been and are not expanded or moved, and are properly repaired and maintained. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.25.060 Traditional public forum areas.
    This section applies only when city regulations concerning special public events, parades and demonstrations do not. In areas qualifying as traditional public forums, private persons may display noncommercial message signs thereon without first obtaining a permit, provided that the signs conform to all of the following:

    (1)    The signs must be personally held by a person or personally attended by one or more persons.

    (2)    The signs may be displayed only during the time period of six a.m. to ten p.m. or thirty minutes after a meeting of the city council or other city entity has concluded, whichever is later.

    (3)    The maximum aggregate size of all signs held by a single person is sixteen square feet.

    (4)    The maximum size of any one sign which is personally attended by two or more persons acting in concert is thirty-two square feet.

    (5)    The sign(s) shall have no more than two display faces and may not be inflatable or air-activated, or produce noise, smoke, or fumes.

    (6)    In order to serve the city’s interests in traffic flow and safety, persons displaying signs under this section may not stand in any vehicular traffic lane when a roadway is open for use by vehicles, and persons displaying signs on public sidewalks must give at least five feet width clearance for pedestrians to pass by. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

 

21.25.070 Violations.
    It is unlawful for any person or for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the standards set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to comply with the sign standards set forth in this chapter or to fail to have any approval required by this chapter. The city may utilize any method authorized by law to remedy any violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1467 § 3, 2011)

Chapter 21.26 TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT
21.26.010 Purpose.
    This chapter is adopted to implement Proposition III (Congestion Management) and Measure M (Traffic Improvements and Growth Management Plan) that requires development of a trip reduction and travel demand element to the congestion management plan which requires adoption and implementation of a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance. Specifically, it is the purpose of this chapter to:

    (1)    Reduce the number of peak-period vehicle trips generated in association with additional development;

    (2)    Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation mode such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus and rail transit, bicycles and walking, as well as those facilities that support such modes;

    (3)    Achieve related reductions in vehicle trips, traffic congestion and public expenditure and achieve air quality improvements through utilization of existing local mechanisms and procedures for project review and permit processing, such as conditional use permits or precise plans;

    (4)    Promote coordinated implementation of strategies on a county-wide basis to reduce transportation demand; and

    (5)    Achieve the most efficient use of local resources through coordinated and consistent regional and/or local TDM programs. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.26.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the definition of the following terms shall apply:

    “Alternative transportation mode” means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking.

    “Developer” means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner.

    “Employee” means any person(s) employed by a firm, business, educational institution, nonprofit agency or corporation, government agency or other entity or person.

    “Employer” means any person(s), firm, business, educational institution, government agency, nonprofit agency or corporation or other entity which employs one hundred or more persons at a single worksite, and may either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project.

    “Facility(ies)” means the total of all buildings, structures and grounds that encompass a worksite, at either single or multiple locations, that comprises or is associated with an applicable development project.

    “New development project” means any nonresidential project being processed where some level of discretionary action by a decision-making body is required.

    “Peak period” means those hours of the business day between six a.m. and ten a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday.

    “Travel demand management (TDM)” means the implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle (SOV) such as carpools, vanpools and transit; reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips, or shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak period. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.26.030 Applicability.
    This chapter shall apply to all new development projects that will employ a total of one hundred or more persons. The total employment projections shall be developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the commission. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.26.040 Facilities standards.
    All applicable development shall be subject to the facilities standards as specified in this section which shall be applied in the site development plan review to provide the improvements identified below:

    (1)    Carpool/Vanpool Parking. A portion of the parking spaces shall be reserved for use of carpool and vanpool vehicles and shall be located as close as practical to the entrance(s) they are intended to serve. The amount of parking spaces reserved for carpools and vanpools shall be determined by the planning commission and shall be based upon use and/or tenant mix with the project.

    (2)    Bicycle Storage. Secure, adequate and convenient storage shall be provided for bicycles.

    (3)    Bus Facilities. Bus bays, bus stops and bus shelters shall be provided adjacent to roads and streets traversing or bounding the development, as determined by the city.

    (4)    Information Center. A transportation information center shall be provided within each building of over twenty-five thousand gross square feet which shall provide current maps, routes and schedules for public transit, ridesharing match list, including lists provided by computer-oriented organizations and incentive programs for employees who carpool, vanpool, walk or utilize mass transit.

    (5)    Shower Facilities. A shower and locker room facility for employees of each sex shall be provided in buildings of one hundred thousand or more gross square feet.

    (6)    Pedestrian Circulation. Sidewalks or other paved pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the department shall be provided. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.26.050 Implementation and enforcement.
    To implement the provisions of this chapter, physical facilities shall be verified through the development review process (e.g., precise plans or conditional use permits). Implementation shall be verified during the planning process and by field inspection prior to release of certificate of occupancy to ensure that facilities are improved as required. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.26.060 Monitoring fees.
    Fees may be established to cover the direct costs associated with implementation and monitoring the provisions of this chapter. Fees shall be set by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.26.070 Traffic mitigation payment.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Measure M (Local Transportation Ordinance No. 2, the Revised Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance), the city shall collect traffic mitigation payments in an amount established by resolution to ensure that all new development pays its fair share of costs associated with that development. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.28 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.28.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations regarding the location and design of wireless communications facilities. This chapter is intended to ensure that the installation of wireless communication facilities will not be detrimental to the city’s public health, safety or welfare and to establish standards, timelines, and criteria, in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations, including, without limitation, to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 42 U.S.C. Sections 151 et seq., for the orderly development and siting of wireless communication facilities in the city; Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, applicable state laws, and administrative and court decisions and determinations relating to the same. It is the intent of the chapter to treat wireless communications facilities, including antennas, in the same way that other mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioners) are treated, and to require screening and architectural compatibility. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.020 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall apply in this chapter:

    “Antenna” means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.

    “Associated equipment” means all on-site equipment, including, without limitation, back-up generators and power supply units, cabinets, coaxial and fiber optic cables, connections, shelters, radio transceivers, regular power supply units, and wiring, to which a wireless antenna is attached to facilitate mobile broadband service and personal wireless service delivered on mobile broadband devices.

    “Base station” means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment located on a tower. Base station includes, without limitation:

    (a)    Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

    (b)    Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems (“DAS”) and small-cell networks).

    (c)    Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this section, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (a) and (b) above and has been previously reviewed and approved by the city.

    “Collocation” means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure to transmit and/or receive radio frequency signals for communications purposes which antennas are owned or operated by more than one public or private entity and includes the mounting or installation of additional wireless transmission equipment at an existing wireless facility.

    “Data collection unit” or “DCU” means a wireless telecommunication facility comprised of a collection unit, a solar panel and whip antennas used for receiving and/or transmitting wireless signals from distributed gas and water data collector meters, which is a stand-alone facility not connected via fiber optic or other physical wiring to any other facility. No wireless telecommunications facility operated by an electric corporation, a telephone corporation, a personal wireless service provider, a commercial mobile service provider or a mobile telephone service provider shall be considered a DCU.

    Size: Solar panels not larger than seven square feet, whip antennas not longer than forty inches, and collections units not larger than one and one-half cubic feet. DCUs shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment and minimize the visual appearance by matching the color of the poles or buildings where the DCU is located.

    “Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network of one or more antennas and related fiber optic nodes typically mounted to or located at streetlight poles, utility poles, sporting venues, arenas or convention centers which provide access and signal transfer for wireless service providers. A distributed antenna system also includes the equipment location, sometimes called a “hub” or “hotel” where the DAS network is interconnected with one or more wireless service provider’s facilities to provide the signal transfer services.

    “Eligible facilities request” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(3), as may be amended, which defines that term as “any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: (i) collocation of new transmission equipment; (ii) removal of transmission equipment; or (iii) replacement of transmission equipment.”

    “Eligible support structure” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which defines that term as “any tower or base station as defined in this section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the State or local government under this section.”

    “Existing” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which provides that a constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of the FCC’s Section 6409(a) regulations if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

    “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or successor agency.

    “Micro wireless facility” means a small cell that is no larger than twenty-four inches long, fifteen inches in width, twelve inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches.

    “Public right-of-way” means the area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under, upon and within the dedicated public streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, and waterways within the city, as they now exist or hereafter will exist, including unimproved areas that have been dedicated for public street purposes. Public right-of-way does not include public utility easements dedicated to the city outside dedicated public streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, waterways within the city, parks, city facilities, and city owned infrastructure.

    “RF” means radio frequency on the radio spectrum.

    “Small cell” means a wireless telecommunications facility, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65850.6, or a wireless facility that uses licensed or unlicensed spectrum and that meets the following qualifications:

    (a)    The small cell antennas on the structure, excluding the associated equipment, total no more than six cubic feet in volume, whether an array or separate.

    (b)    Any individual piece of associated equipment on pole structures does not exceed nine cubic feet.

    (c)    The cumulative total of associated equipment on pole structures does not exceed twenty-one cubic feet.

    (d)    The cumulative total of any ground-mounted equipment along with the associated equipment on any pole or nonpole structure does not exceed 35 cubic feet. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume:

    (1)    Electric meters and any required pedestal.

    (2)    Concealment elements.

    (3)    Any telecommunications demarcation box.

    (4)    Grounding equipment.

    (5)    Power transfer switch.

    (6)    Cutoff switch.

    (7)    Vertical cable runs for connection of power and other services.

    (8)    Equipment concealed within an existing building or structure.

    (e)    “Small cell” includes a micro wireless facility. “Small cell” does not include the following:

    (1)    Wireline backhaul facility, which is defined to mean a facility used for the transport of communications data by wire from wireless facilities to a network.

    (2)    Coaxial or fiber optic cables that are not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna or collocation.

    (3)    The underlying vertical infrastructure.

    “Spectrum Act” means Section 6409(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief Act and Job Creation Act of 2012, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) (providing, in part, “… a state or local government may not deny, and shall approve, any eligible facilities request for a modification of any existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station.”)

    “Stealth” means any wireless telecommunications facility that is architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure, such that no portion of any antenna, antenna equipment, or any other apparatus associated with the function of the facility is visible. The concealing structure shall have an aesthetically pleasing architectural design which fits into the context of its surroundings.

    “Substantial change” means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(7), as may be amended, which defines that term differently based on the particular facility type and location. For clarity, the definition in this chapter organizes the FCC’s criteria and thresholds for a substantial change according to the facility type and location.

    (a)    For towers outside the public rights-of-way, a substantial change occurs when:

    (1)    The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or the height of one additional antenna array not to exceed twenty feet (whichever is greater);

    (2)    The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than twenty feet from the edge of the wireless tower or the width of the wireless tower at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater);

    (3)    The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of more than the standard number of equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four; or

    (4)    The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower, including any access or utility easements currently related to the site.

    (b)    For towers in the public rights-of-way and for all base stations, a substantial change occurs when:

    (1)    The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or ten feet (whichever is greater);

    (2)    The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than six feet from the edge of the wireless tower or base station;

    (3)    The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground when there are no existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets;

    (4)    The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new ground-mounted equipment cabinets that are ten percent larger in height or volume than any existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or

    (5)    The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

    (c)    In addition, for all towers and base stations wherever located, a substantial change occurs when:

    (1)    The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the existing concealment elements of the support structure as determined by the planning/building director.

    (2)    The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval, provided however that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval related to height, width, equipment cabinets or excavation that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section.

    Note: The thresholds for a substantial change outlined above are disjunctive. The failure to meet any one or more of the applicable thresholds means that a substantial change would occur. The thresholds for height increases are cumulative limits. For sites with horizontally separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the originally permitted support structure without regard to any increases in size due to wireless equipment not included in the original design. For sites with vertically separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the permitted site dimensions as they existed on February 22, 2012—the date that Congress passed Section 6409(a).

    “Tower” means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or -authorized antenna, including any structure constructed for wireless communications service. This term does not include a base station.

    “Transmission equipment” means equipment that facilitates transmission of any FCC-licensed or -authorized wireless communication service.

    “Vertical infrastructure” means all poles or similar facilities owned or “controlled” by the city that are in the public rights-of-way or public utility easements and meant for, or used in whole or in part for, communications service, electric service, lighting, traffic control, or similar functions.

    (a)    For purposes of this subsection, the term “controlled” means having the right to allow subleases or sublicensing.

    “Wireless telecommunication(s) facilities,” “wireless communication(s) facility,” “wireless facility,” or “facility” means any device or system for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic signals, including, but not limited to, radio waves and microwaves for cellular technology, personal communication services, mobile services, paging systems and related technologies. Facilities include towers, freestanding facilities, ground-mounted facilities, roof-top facilities, utility poles, transmitters, microwave dishes, antennas and parabolic antennas, small cells, macro and micro cells, DAS, DCU, all other types of equipment used in transmitting or receiving signals, antenna structures, associated buildings, base stations, emergency power systems or cabinets which house support equipment, and other accessory development.

    Exclusions: The term “wireless telecommunications facility” does not apply to the following:

    (a)    Government owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

    (b)    Emergency medical care provider-owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

 

    (c)    Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.

    (d)    Any wireless telecommunications facilities exempted from this code by federal law or state law. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.030 Procedures.
    To the extent necessary by federal or state law, the appropriate criteria and burden of proof and production shall be applied as an overlay with all other criteria:

    (a)    The city may deny a wireless telecommunications facility if a site is inadequate for the facilities or the placement, construction, or modification of the equipment will adversely affect the property or surrounding neighborhood;

    (b)    If the city denies an application for a wireless telecommunications facility, it must not discriminate against a provider;

    (c)    The provider shall bear the burden of production and proof that the city discriminated;

    (d)    The city must not effectively prohibit or create a significant gap in service;

    (e)    It is the provider’s burden to show that the city created a significant gap or effectively prohibited service, and the provider must demonstrate that the proposed facility is the least intrusive means necessary to provide the service;

    (f)    The city may not deny a wireless telecommunications facility because of radio frequency effects that are in compliance with federal law; and

    (g)    The city may regulate right-of-way facilities, which may be subject to an administrative wireless permit, a master deployment plan permit, an encroachment permit, a building permit and a license agreement. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.040 General provisions for wireless communication facilities on public and private property.
    All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be in compliance with the following standards:

    (a)    General. Antennas allowed by this chapter shall comply with all applicable zoning and building codes.

    (b)    Wireless telecommunications facilities are allowed in compliance with Section 21.10.030 (Commercial and manufacturing district land uses and permit requirements) of this title and also in areas governed by specific plans.

    (c)    Wireless telecommunication facilities are allowed on church properties in the R1 zone subject to FVMC Section 21.28.040(h).

    (d)    Wireless telecommunication facilities are allowed on school properties and parks in the Public Institution and Open Space zone.

    (e)    Public right-of-way antennas and wireless telecommunications facilities shall be allowed in the public right-of-way subject to Section 21.28.100.

    (f)    Ten-Year Review. Allowed antennas and wireless telecommunication facilities shall be reviewed ten years from their approval date in order to review new technologies.

    (g)    Visual Impact. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located, installed and mounted in a manner to minimize, to the greatest extent possible, the visibility of the antennas and equipment.

    (h)    Nonexclusive Condition. Wireless telecommunication facilities on private property shall be conditioned to be nonexclusive in order to encourage collocation with separate providers.

    (i)     Screening. Antennas and accessory wireless equipment, if visible, shall be screened with a solid wall and/or landscaping to the greatest extent possible. The base shall be landscaped to screen equipment cabinets or the equipment cabinets shall be architecturally compatible with adjacent buildings. All landscaping screening shall be required to be maintained and replaced if necessary by the applicant or property owner as long as the associated antenna or wireless equipment is in use.

    (j)     Stealthing. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be stealth unless exempted by federal or state law. Stealthing shall include concealment of any component of the wireless facility. Examples include, but are not limited to, “monopines,” flagpoles or windmills designed to conceal wireless communication equipment and those applications where wireless communication equipment is contained within another structure such as a scoreboard or sign. Wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the requirements of Section 21.28.100. A wireless communications facility that is not fully assimilated to its surroundings shall be prohibited.

    (k)    Change of Ownership. Notice of change of ownership shall be provided to the city. Lawfully constructed wireless telecommunication facilities that are no longer in operation shall be removed promptly from the premises ninety days after the discontinuation of the facility.

    (l)     Indemnification. The applicant shall agree to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability or claims that may be brought against the city arising out of its approval of a conditional use permit, encroachment permit or any other approval of a facility.

    (m)   Signage Prohibited. Signage shall be prohibited on wireless telecommunications facilities unless required by federal, state or local law. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.050 Special standards for freestanding, ground-mounted wireless communications facilities on private property.
    (a)    Proximity to Other Ground-Mounted Structures/Collocation. No new ground-mounted structure for an antenna shall be located within five hundred feet of an existing ground-mounted structures for an antenna except if the new structure is replacing the existing structure for purposes of locating more than one wireless telecommunication facility on the structure (collocation).

    (b)    Collocation Feasibility. If collocation is not feasible due to the height restrictions specified in the code, height restrictions may be increased for the collocation provided the commission determines that the structure at the increased height will have less of an adverse visual impact on the surrounding area than two structures of reduced height located in close proximity to one another and will be consistent with the character of the surrounding development.

    (c)    Freestanding wireless telecommunications facilities shall be set back from arterial streets and major traffic corridors to the greatest extent possible. Freestanding wireless telecommunication facilities or antennas shall be painted to match the background or existing and surrounding structures.

    (d)    Freestanding wireless telecommunication facilities shall be set back at least one hundred feet from any parcel with residential uses. The one-hundred-foot setback may be reduced subject to review and approval by a conditional use permit.

    (e)    Height. The height of any freestanding wireless telecommunications facility shall not exceed the maximum height of the designated zoning district.

    (f)    Alternative Site Analysis. All applicants for new freestanding facilities shall be required to submit an alternative site analysis, unless determined unnecessary by the planning/building director. A statement from the applicant that demonstrates that alternative locations, configurations, and facility types have been examined shall be provided. The alternative site analysis shall address in narrative form the feasibility of any alternatives that may have fewer adverse effects on adjacent properties than the facility configuration and location proposed including, but not limited to:

    (1)    Height;

    (2)    Mass and scale;

    (3)    Materials and color;

    (4)    Illumination; and

    (5)    Information addressing the following items:

    (A)   The extent of any commercial development within the geographic search area of the proposed facility,

    (B)   The proximity of the structure to any residential dwellings,

    (C)   The proximity of the structure to any public buildings or facilities,

    (D)   The existence of tall and like structures within the geographic search area of the proposed structure.

    (g)    Security Fencing. All security fencing shall be of a material, color and design that blends with the character of the surrounding environment. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.060 Special standards for roof-top mounted facilities.
    (a)    Roof-top wireless telecommunications facilities shall be appropriately screened from view with a façade which compliments the architecture of the building to create a balanced integrated edge treatment.

    (b)    The height of any new architectural screening shall not exceed the maximum height limit for that zone.

    (c)    Associated equipment buildings or enclosures shall be architecturally consistent with the building where the roof-top antennas are located, such as having similar exterior style and finish. Equipment for roof-top facilities may also be located within the building on which the antennas are mounted. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.070 Satellite dishes on private property.
    (a)    Satellite Dishes in Residential Zones. Satellite dishes in residential zones shall be maintained in compliance with the following criteria:

    (1)    Location. For ground-mounted dishes, the satellite dish shall be located in the rear yard area of the residence and shall not encroach into any area that is within five feet from a lot line. Roof mounting shall be prohibited.

    (2)    Height. The height of the satellite dish and all appurtenant equipment shall not exceed twelve feet four inches as measured from the adjacent ground.

    (3)    Diameter. The diameter of the dish shall not exceed ten feet.

    (4)    Screening. The satellite dish shall be screened from public view from adjacent streets and surrounding property using fences, hedges or other vegetation.

    (5)    Development Review. The satellite dish shall be subject to development review by the planning/building director to ensure that the installation complies with these standards and will not have an adverse impact upon nearby properties.

    (6)    Building Permits. All appropriate building permits shall be obtained prior to installation.

    (b)    Satellite Dishes in Commercial or Industrial Zones. Satellite dishes in all commercial or industrial zones, or in any other nonresidential zones, shall comply with the following criteria:

    (1)    Height. The height of the satellite dish and all appurtenant equipment shall not exceed twelve feet four inches as measured from the ground. Notwithstanding the foregoing, roof mounting will be allowed if the commission makes the determination after development review that the proposed dish will be visually unobtrusive.

    (2)    Diameter. The diameter of the dish shall not exceed ten feet.

    (3)    Screening. The satellite dish shall be screened from public view from adjacent streets and surrounding property using fences, hedges or other vegetation.

    (4)    Development Review. A roof-mounted satellite dish that is not fully stealth shall be subject to development review by the commission; any other satellite dish will be subject to development review by the planning/building director.

    (5)    Building Permits. All appropriate building permits shall be obtained prior to installation. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.080 Satellite exceptions.
    (a)    Small Dish. The provisions contained in subsections (a) and (b) of Section 21.28.070 of this chapter shall not apply to any satellite dish that is:

    (1)    1.1 meter (39.37 inches or less) and located in a residential zone; or

    (2)    2.2 meters (78.74 inches or less) and located in a commercial/industrial zone.

    (b)    Satellite Dish Hardship. An applicant may be granted a hardship exception from subsections (a) and (b) of Section 21.28.070 if the commission determines that:

    (1)    The strict application of those standards will impose an unreasonable limitation on the applicant’s ability to receive satellite signals; or

    (2)    The costs of compliance are excessive relative to the purchase and installation costs of the satellite equipment.

    (c)    Nonconforming Satellite Dish Structures. A satellite dish and appurtenant equipment that were lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time of their construction, but which are now nonconforming to the provisions of this title shall be deemed a lawful nonconforming structure and shall be allowed until terminated through abandonment, dilapidation, obsolescence or destruction. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.28.090 Review and approval of facilities on private property.
    (a)    Administrative Permit. Wireless communications facilities that are fully assimilated to surroundings, or collocated on an existing antenna-supporting structure, may be approved with an administrative permit. The purpose of the administrative wireless communication facilities permit is to provide planning/building director review of wireless communication facilities to ensure they meet the intent of the development code and the general plan.

    (1)    Administrative Permit Procedure.

    (A)   An application for an administrative wireless communication facilities permit should be filed with the planning department. Application fees for said permit shall be set by a separate resolution.

    (B)   The planning/building director will make a decision regarding a completed application within sixty calendar days of receipt. This decision will be final twenty days following the date of the decision unless an appeal is filed in compliance with Fountain Valley Municipal Code Chapter 21.60. A letter will be provided to the applicant describing the decision and any conditions of approval applicable to the project.

    (C)   The planning/building director may refer a request to the planning commission when the planning/building director determines that the project’s complexity or the public interest warrants the referral.

    (b)    Conditional Use Permit. New freestanding wireless communication facilities that are not collocated on existing structures (i.e., new towers), or proposed substantial changes (not meeting the definition of an eligible facilities request) to facilities that were previously approved through a conditional use permit, require approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 21.36 of this title.

    (1)    Public Hearing. Any permit application under this chapter subject to planning commission approval shall require notice and a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 21.58. The planning commission may approve, or conditionally approve, an application only after it makes the findings required in subsection (e).

    (c)    No discretionary permit is required for changes to existing telecommunications facilities that qualify as an eligible facility request and do not qualify as a substantial change.

    (d)    Timeframe for Review.

    (1)    The city acknowledges federal and state shot clocks which may apply to a proposed wireless communication facility. That is, federal and state law provide time periods in which the city must approve or deny a proposed wireless communication facility. As such, the applicant is required to provide the city written notice of the expiration of any shot clock, which the applicant shall ensure is received by the city (e.g., overnight mail) no later than twenty days prior to expiration.

    (2)    All final decisions made pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing and based on substantial evidence in the written administrative record. The written decision shall include the reasons for any denial. The planning/building director may approve, or conditionally approve, an application only after the planning/building director makes the findings required in subsection (e). Within five business days after the planning/building director makes a final decision on an application under this chapter, the planning/building director shall provide notice.

    (e)    Findings. Approval of a wireless telecommunication facility shall require the following findings be made. These are in addition to any applicable sections or criteria outlined in this code. The planning commission or planning/building director shall determine that:

    (1)    There is adequate space on the property for the antenna and accessory wireless equipment without conflict with existing structures on the property, or reducing required parking, landscaping or other development standards;

    (2)    The design and placement of the antenna and accessory wireless equipment will not adversely impact the use of the property, other structures located on the property or the surrounding area or neighborhood;

    (3)    The antenna and accessory wireless equipment as proposed are consistent with the intent of this chapter and comply with the general standards for wireless telecommunication facilities and any special standards below; and

    (4)    The public right-of-way will not be adversely impacted and, for small cells, the proposed wireless telecommunications facility will comply with the adopted Small Cell Standards and Guideline Policy.

    (f)    Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval may be imposed on any permit and architectural approval granted in compliance with this chapter. Permits shall not become effective until all applicable conditions of approval have been met. All conditions of approval shall be observed throughout the duration of the permit. Conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

    (1)    Indemnification. The applicant shall agree to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officers, agents and employees from all liability or claims that may be brought against the city from its approval of a permit.

    (2)    Terms of Lease. A letter outlining the parties, contact information and term of the lease, license or other agreement with the property owner shall be submitted to the city prior to issuance of a building permit for the facility. If the lease, license or agreement is extended or terminated, notice and evidence thereof shall be provided to the planning/building director. Upon termination or expiration of the lease, the use permit for the facility shall be cancelled and the facility removed within ninety days.

    (3)    Change of Ownership. Notice of change of ownership of the facility shall be provided to the city.

    (4)    Noise Study. A noise study may be required subject to the determination by the planning/building director. A noise study shall be prepared and certified by an engineer for the proposed facility and all associated equipment including all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators demonstrating compliance with the city’s noise regulations. The noise study must also include an analysis of the manufacturers’ specifications for all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative to all adjacent property lines.

    (5)    Changes and Modifications. All changes and modifications to an approved facility shall require prior approval by the city.

    (6)    Vandalism Repair. All graffiti and other forms of vandalism shall be promptly removed and/or repaired within twenty-four hours of notification. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.100 Small cell facilities in the public right-of-way.
    (a)    All small cells that are located within the public right-of-way shall be designed, maintained, planned, located, and erected in accordance with the adopted Small Cell Standards and Guidelines Policy for wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way.

    (b)    Wireless equipment designated as “small cell” shall be permitted within the public right-of-way and locations zoned for wireless telecommunications facilities within the city as long as they comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.) and all applicable health and safety requirements, including Public Utilities Commission General Order 95.

    (c)    Small cell deployment in the public right-of-way shall be consistent with Sections 7901 and 7901.1 of the Public Utilities Code.

    (d)    The provider may be required to submit additional information showing that the small cell complies with the Federal Communications Commission’s regulations concerning radio frequency emissions referenced in Section 332(c)(7)(B)(iv) of Title 47 of the United States Code.

    (e)    Small cell deployment shall comply with all applicable building codes, including building code structural requirements and all feasible design and collocation standards.

    (f)    Deployment of small cell technology shall be expedited in a manner that advances technological and competitive neutrality.

    (g)    Permitting.

    (1)    Permits shall grant providers fair, reasonable, nondiscriminatory, and nonexclusive access to city owned streetlights and other suitable host infrastructure located within the public rights-of-way and in other local public places such as stadiums, parks, campuses, hospitals, transit stations, and public buildings.

    (2)    Small cells shall be approved pursuant to an administrative permit or master deployment plan permit, an encroachment permit, a building permit and a license agreement.

    (A)   Administrative permits shall be reviewed and approved in compliance with Section 21.28.090.

    (B)   Master Deployment Plan Permit.

    (i)     Any applicant that seeks approval for five or more wireless communications facilities (including new facilities and collocations to existing facilities) may elect to apply for a master deployment plan permit subject to planning/building director approval. The proposed facilities in a master deployment plan shall be reviewed together at the same time and subject to the same requirements and procedures applicable to an administrative wireless facilities permit. Application fees for said permit shall be set by a separate resolution.

    (ii)    A master deployment plan permit shall be deemed an approval for all wireless telecommunications facilities within the plan; provided, however, that an individual encroachment permit, building permit, and license agreement shall be required for each wireless telecommunications facility. A single master license agreement may also be permitted when associated with a master deployment plan permit.

    (iii)   After the planning/building director approves a master deployment plan permit, any deviations or alterations from the approved master deployment plan for an individual wireless telecommunications facility shall require an administrative wireless telecommunications facilities permit, as applicable.

    (3)    Installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended, whether embedded or attached, on communication cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with state safety codes are exempt from these requirements.

    (4)    The applicable permit may be rescinded if construction is not substantially commenced within one year, absent a showing of good cause. The applicant may not renew the permit or resubmit an application to develop a small cell at the same location for six months from date of rescission.

    (5)    Permits shall be renewed as long as the site maintains compliance with use conditions adopted at the time the site was originally approved.

    (6)    Small cells no longer used to provide service shall be removed by the last known owner of record of such facility, at the sole cost of said owner.

    (7)    The city may adopt a resolution to reserve capacity for future city uses on vertical infrastructure based on substantial evidence in the record.

    (8)    Existing agreements regarding the leasing or licensing of vertical infrastructure entered into before the operative date of this section remain in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions.

    (9)    Other Permits Required. In addition to any permit that may be required under this chapter, the applicant must obtain all other required permits or other approvals from the city, state, or federal agencies. Any permit granted under this chapter is subject to the conditions and/or requirements of required permits or other approvals from city, state or federal agencies.

    (h)    Permitting Fees and Associated Charges.

    (1)    Administrative permit fees, master deployment plan permit fees, encroachment permit fees, and building permit fees shall be set by a separate resolution.

    (2)    An annual charge, developed consistent with all applicable state and federal law shall be determined based on multiplying the percentage of the total usable space that would be occupied by the attachment by the annual costs of ownership of the vertical infrastructure and its anchor, if any.

    (3)    A one-time reimbursement fee for actual costs incurred by the city for rearrangements performed at the request of the small cell provider.

    (4)    The provider shall pay all electricity costs associated with the small cell installation and operation.

    (i)     Inspection and reporting. The owner of the wireless communication facility, when directed by the city, must perform an inspection of the facility and submit a report to the public works department on the condition of the system to include any identified concerns and corrective action taken. Additionally, as city crews perform maintenance on city infrastructure they may identify maintenance concerns. These will be reported to the owner of the facility. The city shall give the applicant thirty days to correct the identified maintenance concerns after which the city reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, which may include revocation of the permit. The burden is on the permittee to demonstrate that it complies with the requirements herein. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.110 Enforcement.
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21.64 (Enforcement Provisions) of this title. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.120 Violations of wireless communications regulations.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the standards set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.130 Permit term and expiration.
    (a)    Unless Government Code Section 65964, as may be amended, authorizes the city to issue a permit with a shorter term, a permit for any wireless telecommunications facility shall be valid for a period of ten years, unless pursuant to another provision of the code it lapses sooner or is revoked. At the end of ten years from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire.

    (b)    A permittee may apply for a new permit within one hundred eighty days prior to expiration. Said application and proposal shall comply with the city’s current code requirements for wireless telecommunication facilities. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

 

21.28.140 Removal and restoration.
    (a)    Upon the expiration date of the permit, including any extensions, earlier termination or revocation of the permit or abandonment of the facility, the permittee, owner or operator shall remove its wireless telecommunications facility and restore the site to its natural condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the city. Removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. The facility shall be removed from the property, at no cost or expense to the city.

    (b)    Removal of Facilities by City. The applicant shall submit a performance bond in an amount that is rationally related to the cost of the removal of the applicant’s facilities, as determined by the city. In the event the city removes a facility in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or summary removal, any such removal shall be without any liability to the city for any damage to such facility that may result from reasonable efforts of removal. In addition to the procedures for recovering costs of nuisance abatement, the city may collect such costs from the performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of the performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with this code. Unless otherwise provided herein, the city has no obligation to store such facility. Neither the permittee, owner nor operator shall have any claim if the city destroys any such facility not timely removed by the permittee, owner or operator after notice, or removed by the city due to exigent circumstances. (Ord. 1523 § 4, 2017)

Chapter 21.30 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
21.30.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides site planning and development standards for land uses that are allowed by Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title in individual or multiple zoning districts. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.30.020 Day care facilities.
    This section provides locational and operational standards for the provision of day care facilities, in compliance with state law. These standards apply in addition to the other provisions of this title and requirements imposed by the California Department of Social Services.

    The establishment of a day care facility shall be in compliance with Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, and the following criteria and standards:

    (1)    Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply. Additional definitions are contained in Chapter 21.32. through 21.50 of this title:

    “Adult day care facilities” means facilities for six or fewer adults. Adult day care facilities are allowed within a single-family residence located in a residential zoning district, with no city land use permits or clearances required;

    “Small family day care homes” means day care homes for eight or fewer children. Small family day care homes as are allowed within a single-family residence located in a residential zoning district, with no city land use permits or clearances required;

    “Large family day care homes” means day care homes for nine to fourteen children. Large family day care homes are allowed within a single-family residence located in a residential zoning district, in compliance with the standards in subsection 3 (Standards for large family day care homes) of this section; and

    “Child day care centers” means day care centers for fifteen or more children. Child day care centers are allowed in the zoning districts determined by Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, subject to conditional use permit approval, in compliance with Chapter 21.36, and the standards in subsection 4 of (Standards for childcare centers) of this section.

    (2)    Permit Processing. Permit processing for large family day care homes shall be conducted in compliance with state law (Health and Safety Code Section 1597.46).

    (3)    Standards for Large Family Day Care Homes. The following standards shall apply.

    (A)   Permit processing for large family day care homes shall be subject to the following:

    (i)     A large family day care home shall require the approval of an administrative large family day care permit by the director. Property owners within one hundred feet of the proposed site shall be provided notice of the application at least ten days before the date of the director’s decision on the entitlement. A public hearing may be requested in writing by the applicant or other affected person(s).

    The notice shall state that the director’s determination may be appealed to the commission. The commission may only grant the appeal and reverse or modify the director’s determination if the commission finds that the director’s determination was contrary to local or state laws governing large family day care homes.

    (ii)    A large family day care permit shall be issued if the director determines that the proposed large family day care home would comply with the standards in this section.

    (iii)   The commission may approve a conditional use permit, in compliance with Chapter 21.36 of this title, authorizing operation of a large family day care home which does not comply with and/or cannot be operated in compliance with the standards in this section.

    (B)   The large family day care home shall be the principle residence of the day care provider and the use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property as a residence.

    (C)   The facility shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector devices and comply with the standards established by the city fire department.

    (D)   In order to protect surrounding residential dwellings from noise impacts, a facility within a residential zoning district may only operate up to fourteen hours each day between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and may only conduct outdoor activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

    (E)   Each facility shall have the number of parking spaces required for single-family dwellings, in compliance with Chapter 21.22 (Parking and Loading) of this title, one additional space for the drop-off and pick-up of the children utilizing the facility, and one additional parking space for each person working at the facility, other than a person who resides at the home. The driveway may serve to meet the required parking spaces and/or the drop-off area.

    (F)    A residential parcel shall not be bordered on more than one side by a day care facility and a day care facility shall not be operated on a parcel within five hundred feet of the parcel subject to the application.

    (4)    Standards for Child Day Care Centers. The following standards shall apply, in addition to those standards contained in subsection 3 (Standards for large family day care homes) of this section:

    (A)   The minimum parcel size for a child day care center shall be ten thousand square feet;

    (B)   The minimum separation between the main assembly building of the center and a residential zoning district shall be thirty feet; and

    (C)   The facility shall be provided with both indoor and outdoor play areas in compliance with state requirements. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.30.030 Drive-through facilities.
    Retail trade or service uses providing drive-through facilities shall be designed and operated to effectively mitigate problems of traffic, congestion, excessive pavement, litter, noise and unsightliness.

    (1)    Drive-through aisles shall be inwardly focused and located away from adjoining streets.

    (2)    Drive-through aisles shall have a minimum ten-foot interior radius at curves and a minimum twelve-foot width. Each drive-through entrance/exit shall be at least fifty feet from an intersection of public rights-of-way, measured at the closest intersecting curbs, and at least twenty-five feet from the curb cut on an adjacent property. Each entrance to an aisle and the direction of traffic flow shall be clearly designated by signs/pavement markings.

    (3)    Each drive-through aisle shall be separated by curbing and landscaping from the circulation routes necessary for ingress or egress from the property, or access to a parking space.

    (4)    Pedestrian walkways should not intersect the drive-through access aisles, but where they do, they shall have clear visibility and be emphasized by enhanced paving or markings.

    (5)    The provision of drive-through service facilities shall not justify a reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces.

    (6)    Drive-through access aisles shall provide sufficient space before the menu board to accommodate at least four waiting vehicles.

    (7)    Each drive-through aisle shall be appropriately screened with a combination of landscaping, low walls and/or berms to prevent headlight glare from impacting adjacent streets and parking lots.

    (8)    A minimum six-foot high solid decorative wall shall be constructed on each property line that adjoins a residentially zoned or occupied parcel. The design of the wall and the proposed construction materials shall be subject to the approval of the director. A minimum five-foot landscaping strip shall be provided between the wall and any driveway.

    (9)    Notice shall be given in compliance with state law whenever a drive-through facility is subject to permit approval by the city. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.30.040 Keeping of animals and fowl.
    The purpose of this section is to ensure that the raising, keeping and maintenance of animals would not create an adverse impact on surrounding properties by reason of negative impacts (e.g., bright lights, dust, fumes, insect infestations, noise, odor or visual blight) by providing standards for maintaining the animals. Animal keeping uses shall comply with the requirements of this section and other applicable provisions of this code.

    (1)    Regulations. The keeping or maintaining of livestock, fowl or other animals of any kind shall not be allowed in any subdivision except as provided below.

    (2)    Dogs and Cats. A maximum of three dogs and/or cats over six months of age shall be allowed as an accessory use.

    (3)    Other Household Pets. The keeping of other household pets shall be allowed of a type readily classifiable as being customarily incidental and accessory to an allowed principal residential use when no commercial activity is involved. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.30.050 Produce stands.
    This section provides standards for the establishment of produce stands in zoning districts where they are allowed in compliance with the provisions of Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title.

    (1)    Accessory Use. A produce stand shall be allowed only as an accessory use to an agricultural production use on the same or adjacent site.

    (2)    Laws and Regulations. Produce stand operations (including agricultural operations) shall be subject to the laws and regulations administered by other city departments, Orange County Public Health Services, Environmental Health Department, Orange County Agricultural Commissioner’s Office, as well as the requirements of other applicable agencies (e.g., as the Southern California Air Quality Management District, California Department of Transportation (CALTRANS), and the California Department of Food and Agriculture).

    (3)    Site Plan and Information Requirements. Produce stands intended to be in place for a minimum of ninety days shall submit the following information for approval by the director:

    (A)   The applicant shall provide a site plan showing:

    (i)     The location and dimensions of the proposed temporary buildings, parking areas (with each parking space illustrated), signs, portable restroom(s) and other temporary improvements;

    (ii)    Location of ingress and egress points;

    (iii)   Setbacks of buildings and signs from property lines;

    (iv)   A north (compass) orientation, adjacent streets and identifying physical features where applicable.

    (B)   A statement of proposed days/hours of operation and the proposed beginning and ending date of the use shall be provided with the application. The time period allowed for each produce stand shall be the same as the harvest season related to the produce grown and sold on-site.

    (4)    Standards. All produce stands shall comply with the following standards:

    (A)   Only one produce stand shall be allowed per parcel.

    (B)   The produce stand shall be set back in compliance with the regulations in the zoning district in which the use is located, but in no instance shall it be closer than twenty feet to a public street.

    (C)   Parking shall be provided as follows:

    (i)     A minimum of three off-street parking spaces shall be provided;

    (ii)    An all-weather surface (compacted crushed rock, compacted crushed asphaltic concrete, compacted crushed Portland cement concrete or equivalent surface) shall be provided for the vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and off-street parking areas;

    (D)   The produce stand shall be of wood frame type construction.

    (E)   The surface for the produce stand site shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that prevents mud/dirt from being carried onto adjacent public streets and prevents fugitive dust generation.

    (F)    There shall be safe ingress and egress for the site as determined by review of the public works department.

    (G)   Signs for produce stands shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which the use is placed and for the type of sign used. All signs shall be located outside of the public right-of-way.

    (H)   A building permit shall be required for all structures larger than one hundred twenty square feet.

    (I)    No electrical wiring or hook-ups of any kind are allowed.

    (J)    Produce stand establishment and operation shall comply with all applicable sections of the Uniform Fire Code (UFC), Article 32.

    (K)   The parcel on which the produce stand is located shall be kept clean of trash and debris at all times.

    (L)   The parcel on which the produce stand is located shall be completely free of all evidence of the use within seven days following the termination of the use. Produce stand operations that do not comply with this standard shall be subject to a code enforcement action.

    (M)  If restrooms are provided, they shall conform to all applicable rules, regulations and codes of the Orange County Public Health Services, and any other requirements governing the use of these facilities.

    (N)   Agricultural products may not be sold from a motorized vehicle.

    (O)   Any graffiti on the premises shall be removed within twenty-four hours. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.30.060 Outdoor storage.
    This section provides standards for the establishment of outdoor storage areas, in compliance with Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, which shall be subject to the following:

    (1)    Screening. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way by decorative walls, fences and/or landscaping. Screening shall be provided to a height of at least one foot above the approved height of the materials being stored.

    (2)    Storage Setback Area. Outdoor storage areas shall not encroach into required setback areas. In zoning districts where no setback area is required, the outdoor storage area shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from adjoining property lines(s) unless otherwise allowed by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.30.070 Recycling facilities.
    This section provides standards for the establishment of various types and sizes of commercial recycling facilities, in compliance with Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, which shall be subject to the following criteria and standards:

    (1)    Permit Requirements. Recycling facilities are subject to permit review/approval in compliance with Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, provided the following standards are met:

    (2)    Development and Operating Standards. Recycling facilities shall comply with the following standards:

    (A)   Reverse vending machine(s) shall be allowed in all commercial and industrial zoning districts, subject to compliance with the following standards:

    (i)     The machines shall be installed as an accessory use in compliance with the applicable provisions of this title, and shall not require additional parking.

    (ii)    If located inside of a structure, the machines shall be within thirty feet of the entrance and shall not obstruct pedestrian circulation.

    (iii)   If located outside of a structure, the machines shall not occupy required parking spaces, and shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof material(s).

    (iv)   The machines shall not exceed a floor or ground area of fifty square feet for each installation, including any protective enclosure, nor eight feet in height.

    (v)    The machines shall have a maximum sign area of four square feet for each machine, exclusive of operating instructions.

    (vi)   The machines shall have operating hours which are consistent with the operating hours of the main use.

    (vii)  The area in front of the machines shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn.

    (B)   Small collection facilities shall be allowed in all commercial and industrial zoning districts, subject to compliance with the following standards:

    (i)     The facility shall not exceed a floor or ground area of three hundred fifty square feet nor three parking spaces, not including space that would be periodically needed for the removal of materials or exchange of containers.

    (ii)    The facility shall not use power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines.

    (iii)   The facility shall not be located within fifty feet of any parcel zoned or occupied for residential use.

    (iv)   The facility shall be set back at least ten feet from any public right-of-way, and not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian circulation.

    (v)    The facility shall accept only glass, metal or plastic containers, paper and reusable items.

    (vi)   The facility shall use containers that are constructed with durable waterproof and rustproof material(s), secured from unauthorized removal of material and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule.

    (vii)  Collection containers and site fencing shall be of a color and design that would be compatible and harmonious with the surrounding uses and neighborhoods.

    (viii) Collection containers and site fencing shall be of a color and design that would be compatible and harmonious with the surrounding uses and neighborhoods.

    (ix) Signs may be provided as follows:

    a.     Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum area of fifteen percent for each side of the structure or twelve square feet, whichever is greater. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side shall be measured from the ground to the top of the container.

    b.     Signs shall be both compatible and harmonious with the character of their location.

    c.     Directional signs without advertising messages may be installed with the approval of the director.

    (ix)   Additional parking spaces shall not be required for customers of a small collection facility located in the established parking lot of the main use.

    (x)    Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present.

    (xi)   Use of parking spaces by the patrons and the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the main use unless the director determines that existing capacity is not fully utilized during the time the recycling facility would be on the site.

    (C)   A collection facility that is larger than three hundred fifty square feet of floor or ground area, or on a separate parcel not accessory to a main use, shall be allowed in all commercial and industrial zoning districts, subject to compliance with the following standards:

    (i)     The facility shall not abut a parcel zoned or occupied for residential use.

    (ii)    The facility shall be screened from public rights-of-way, by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure.

    (iii)   Structure setbacks and landscaping shall be provided as required for the applicable zoning district.

    (iv)   Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage, excluding truck trailers, shall not be visible above the height of the required solid masonry walls.

    (v)    The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis.

    (vi)   Containers provided for “after hours” donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least one hundred feet from any residential zoning district, constructed of sturdy, rustproof material(s), have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected and be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.

    (vii)  Dust, fumes, odor, smoke or vibration, above ambient levels, shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels.

    (D)   Processing facilities shall be allowed in all industrial zoning districts, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 21.36 of this title and the following standards:

    (i)     The facility shall not abut a parcel zoned or occupied for residential use.

    (ii)    Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials.

    (iii)   A light processing facility shall not exceed forty-five thousand square feet of floor or ground area, may have up to an average of two outbound truck shipments of material each day, and shall not bale, compact or shred ferrous metals, other than beverage and food containers.

    (iv)   A heavy processor may exceed forty-five thousand square feet of floor or ground area and two outbound truck shipments each day, and may perform those functions not allowed at light processing facilities.

    (v)    The facility shall be screened from public rights-of-way, by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure.

    (vi)   Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage, excluding truck trailers, shall not be visible above the height of the required solid masonry walls.

    (vii)  Containers provided for “after hours” donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least one hundred feet from any residential zoning district, constructed of sturdy, rustproof material(s), have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected and be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of the materials.

    (viii) Dust, fumes, odor, smoke or vibration, above ambient levels, shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels.

    (5)    Recycling facilities requiring a conditional use permit shall have a maximum term, in which to operate, established by the review authority. Before permit renewal, the director shall consider the permittee’s history of compliance with the established conditions of approval, as well as all applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.30.080 Violations of specific land use standards.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the specific standards set forth in this chapter applies, to fail to comply with those standards. (Ord. 1358 § 9, 2004)

Chapter 21.32 APPLICATIONS, PROCESSING AND FEES
21.32.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Procedures. This chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing, initial processing and review of applications for the land use entitlements required by this title.

    (b)    Discretionary Land Use Entitlements. Receiving approval of any discretionary land use entitlement identified in Chapters 21.16 through 21.30 of this title is considered a privilege, not a right. The applicable review authority shall make all of the required findings in a positive manner before approving the application.

    (c)    Failure to Follow Requirements. Failure to follow the procedural requirements shall not invalidate any city actions taken, in the absence of a clear showing of intent not to comply with this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.32.020 Authority for land use and zoning decisions.
    Table 4-1 (Review Authority) identifies the city official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application or land use entitlement required by this title.

 

 

TABLE 4-1

REVIEW AUTHORITY

 

Type of Entitlement or Decision

Chapter

Director (1)

Planning Commission

City Council

Conditional Use Permits

21.36

 

Final

Appeal

Development Agreements

21.38

 

Recommend

Final

Development Code Amendments

21.34

 

Recommend

Final

Development Review

21.40

 

Final

Appeal

General Plan Amendments

21.34

 

Recommend

Final

Home Occupation Permits

21.42

Final

Appeal

Appeal

Interpretations

21.02

Final

Appeal

Appeal

Minor Variances

21.50

Final (2)

Appeal

Appeal

Master Sign Plan

21.34

 

Final

Appeal

Precise Plan of Design

21.44

 

Final

Appeal

Sign Permit

21.34

 

Final (3)

Appeal

Specific Plans

21.46

 

Recommend

Final

Temporary Use Permits

21.48

Final

Appeal

Appeal

Variances

21.50

 

Final

Appeal

Zoning Map Amendments

21.34

 

Recommend

Final

 

Notes:

1.  The director may defer action on entitlement applications and refer the item(s) to the commission for the final decision.

2.  The minor variance committee shall have the authority to review, approve, or disapprove minor variances. The committee may also defer action on minor variance applications and refer the item(s) to the commission for the final decision.

3.  The commission’s sign committee shall act as representatives of the commission for purposes of sign review.

 

(Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

 

21.32.030 Application filing.
    (a)    Application Contents. Applications for amendments, entitlements and other matters pertaining to this title shall be filed with the department in the following manner:

    (1)    The application shall be made on forms furnished by the department;

    (2)    All necessary fees shall be paid in compliance with the city’s fee resolution;

    (3)    The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for the particular application, and may include exhibits, maps, materials, plans, reports and other information required by the department, to describe clearly and accurately the proposed work, its potential environmental impact and its effect on the terrain, existing improvements and the surrounding neighborhood;

    (4)    Applicants are encouraged to contact the department before submitting an application to verify which materials are necessary for application filing; and

    (5)    Acceptance of the application does not constitute an indication of approval by the city.

    (b)    Eligible Applicants. Applications may only be made by the owners of property, or their agents or tenants, with the written consent of the owner.

    (c)    Concurrent Application Filing and Processing.

    (1)    An applicant for a development project, which requires the filing of more than one application, shall file all related applications concurrently, unless waived by the director, and submit appropriate processing fees in compliance with Section 21.32.040 (Application fees) of this chapter.

    (2)    Permit processing and environmental review shall be concurrent and the final decision on the project shall be made by the appropriate review authority, in compliance with Table 4-1 (Review Authority).

    (d)    Applicant’s Responsibility. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish the evidence in support of the findings required by the applicable sections entitled “Findings and decision.”

    (e)    Application Not Eligible for Filing.

    (1)    If the director determines that the application is not eligible for filing because it lacks the proper components for the granting of the application (e.g., a request for a zoning map amendment or tentative map that could not be granted in absence of a required general plan amendment application, a request for a conditional use permit allowing a use that is not allowable in the subject zoning district, etc.), the applicant shall be so informed.

    (2)    If the application is subsequently filed and the required fee(s) paid, the fact that the applicant was so informed shall be noted on the application and the signature of the applicant shall constitute verification of being informed.

    (3)    Acceptance of the application does not constitute an indication of approval by the city.

    (4)    Filing Date. The filing date of an application for a conditional use permit, development review, home occupation permit, precise plan of design, temporary use permit or variance shall be the date on which the department receives the last submission, map, plan or other material required as a part of that application by subsection (a) of this section, above, in compliance with Section 21.32.050 (Initial application review) of this chapter and deemed complete by the development and environmental review committee (DERC) or director, as appropriate. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.32.040 Application fees.
    (a)    Filing Fees Required.

    (1)    The council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for amendments, entitlements and other matters pertaining to this title, referred to as the city’s fee resolution.

    (2)    The schedule of fees may be changed or modified only by resolution of the council.

    (3)    The city’s processing fees are cumulative. For example, if an application for a lot line adjustment also requires a minor variance, both fees shall be charged.

    (4)    Processing shall not commence on an application until all required fees have been paid.

    (5)    Without the application fee the application shall not be deemed complete.

    (b)    Refunds and Withdrawals.

    (1)    Recognizing that filing fees are utilized to cover city costs of public hearings, mailing, posting, transcripts and staff time involved in processing applications, no refunds due to a disapproval are allowed.

    (2)    In the case of a withdrawal, the director may authorize a partial refund based upon the pro-rated costs to-date and determination of the status of the application at the time of withdrawal. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.32.050 Initial application review.
    All applications filed with the department shall be initially processed as follows:

    (1)    Completeness Review. The development and environmental review committee (DERC) or director, as appropriate shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete and officially filed.

    (A)   The applicant shall be informed in writing within thirty days of submittal, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, shall be provided.

    (B)   Where the development and environmental review committee (DERC) or director, as appropriate, has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the director is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination, in compliance with Chapter 21.62 (Appeals) of this title.

    (C)   When an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness shall occur. The time available to an applicant for submittal of additional information is limited by following subsection (1)(D) of this section.

    (D)   Expiration of Application.

    (i)     If a pending application is not able to be deemed complete within one hundred eighty days after the first filing with the department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn.

    (ii)    The director may grant one hundred eighty-day extension.

    (iii)   A new application, including exhibits, fees, plans and other materials which shall be required to commence processing of a project application on the same property, may then be filed in compliance with this title.

    (E)   After an application has been accepted as complete, the director may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with Section 21.32.060 (Environmental assessment) of this chapter.

    (2)    Referral of Application. At the discretion of the director, or where otherwise required by this title, state or federal law, an application may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed/requested land use activity. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.32.060 Environmental assessment.
    (a)    CEQA Review. After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed in compliance with this code, the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures, to determine whether:

    (1)    The proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA;

    (2)    The proposed project is not a project as defined by CEQA;

    (3)    Whether a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration may be issued; or

    (4)    Whether an environmental impact report (EIR) shall be required.

    (b)    City’s Guidelines. These determinations and, where required, the preparation of EIRs, shall be in compliance with the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.32.070 Staff report and recommendations.
    (a)    Application Evaluation. The director shall review all applications to determine whether they comply and are consistent with the provisions of this title, other applicable provisions of this code, the general plan, any applicable specific plan and environmental review.

    (b)    Staff Report Preparation.

    (1)    A staff report shall be prepared describing the conclusions/findings about the proposed land use and development as to its compliance and consistency with the provisions of this title, other applicable provisions of the this code and the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan.

    (2)    The written report shall include recommendations, with appropriate findings, on the approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the application, based on the evaluation and consideration of information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report.

    (c)    Report Distribution. Staff reports shall be furnished to applicants at the same time as they are provided to the members of the commission and/or council, before a hearing on the application. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.34 AMENDMENTS
21.34.010 Purpose.
    (a)    This chapter provides procedures for a:

    (1)    General Plan. General plan amendment that may include revisions to actions, goals, land use designations, policies or text;

    (2)    Zoning Map. Zoning map amendment that has the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another;

    (3)    Development Code. Development code amendment that may modify procedures, requirements or standards applicable to the development, and/or use of property within the city; and

    (4)    Specific Plans. Specific plan amendment that may modify procedures, requirement, or standards applicable to the development and/or use of property within the boundaries of the specific plan area.

    (b)    Approval of Amendments. The amendments may be approved by the council whenever required by public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of the city. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.34.020 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Initiation of Hearings. An amendment may be initiated in the following manner:

    (1)    By the council;

    (2)    By the commission; or

    (3)    A verified application filed with the department by one or more owners of property proposed to be changed or by a prospective owner(s) under a bona fide contract for purchase of the subject property, clearly identifying the reasons of public convenience, health, interest, necessity, safety or general welfare of the city requiring the amendment. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the city’s fee resolution.

    (b)    Timing of General Plan Amendments. The general plan may be amended up to four times in a single calendar year.

    (c)    Contents. The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for amendment applications.

    (d)    Notice and Hearing.

    (1)    Upon receipt of a complete application to amend the general plan, the zoning map or this title, or on initiation by the commission or council, and following director review, public hearings shall be set before the commission and council.

    (2)    Notice of the hearings shall be given in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.34.030 Commission’s action on amendments.
    (a)    Commission’s Action. The commission shall forward a written recommendation to the council whether to approve, approve in modified form or disapprove the proposed amendment, based on the findings contained in Section 21.34.050 (Findings and decision)of this chapter.

    (b)    Include Findings. The recommendation shall include the findings of the commission, constituting the basis for the recommendation and shall be signed by the secretary of the commission.

    (c)    Notice of Commission’s Action. The secretary of the commission shall transmit the recommendation (together with the staff report) to the council.

    (d)    Applicant’s Copy. The applicant’s copy of the recommendation shall be mailed to the address shown upon the application. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.34.040 Council’s action on amendments.
    (a)    Hearing by the Council. Following the receipt of either of the following, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing in compliance with state law, and the council shall conduct at least one public hearing on the amendment:

    (1)    Approval. A written recommendation from the commission recommending the approval of the amendment; and

    (2)    Disapproval. A written recommendation from the commission recommending disapproval of the amendment.

    (b)    Council’s Action. The council shall approve, approve in modified form or disapprove the recommendation of the commission based on the findings contained in Section 21.34.050 (Findings and decision) of this chapter.

    (c)    Referral to Commission. If the council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the commission during its hearings, the proposed modification shall be first referred back to the commission for its recommendation, in compliance with state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.34.050 Findings and decision.
    An amendment to the general plan, the zoning map or this title, may be approved only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner, as applicable to the type of amendment. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the required findings.

    (1)    Mandatory findings required for all amendments (e.g., general plan, zoning map and title):

    (A)   The proposed amendment ensures and maintains internal consistency with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, and would not create any inconsistencies with this title, in the case of a title amendment;

    (B)   The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of the city; and

    (C)   The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures.

    (2)    Additional Finding for Zoning Map Amendments: The site(s) is/are physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses and absence of physical constraints) for the requested zoning designation(s) and anticipated land use development(s).

    (3)    Additional finding for title amendments: The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.36 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
21.36.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Review Process. This chapter provides a process for reviewing conditional use permit applications which are intended to allow for specified activities and uses as identified in the various zoning districts whose effect on the surrounding area cannot be determined before being proposed for a particular location.

    (b)    Ensure Compatibility. Applications for conditional use permits shall be reviewed for the configuration, design, location and potential impacts of the proposed use, to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding uses and the suitability of the use to the site, to ensure the protection of the public convenience, health, interest, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.36.020 Applicability.
    A conditional use permit shall be required for any use listed in Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title as requiring a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.36.030 Review authority.
    The commission shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove conditional use permit applications and impose conditions necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, and necessary to make the findings required by Section 21.34.050 (Findings and decision) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.36.040 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Filing. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the department in compliance with Chapter 21.32 (Applications, Processing and Fees) of this title.

    (b)    Contents. The application shall be accompanied by detailed and fully dimensioned plans, architectural drawings/sketches, elevations, floor plans, landscape plans and/or any other data/materials identified in the department handout for conditional use permit applications.

    (c)    Project Review Procedures. Following receipt of a completed application, the director shall make an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the purpose of this chapter.

    (d)    Notice and Hearings.

    (1)    A public hearing is required for all conditional use permits.

    (2)    A public hearing shall be scheduled once the director has determined the application complete.

    (3)    Noticing of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.36.050 Findings and decision.
    The commission, or the council on appeal, shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the decision is based. The conditional use permit shall be approved, with or without conditions, only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (1)    The proposed use is allowed within the respective zoning district with the approval of a conditional use permit and complies with all other applicable provisions of this title and this code;

    (2)    The proposed use would be consistent with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

    (3)    The design, location, shape, size and operating characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity;

    (4)    The subject site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of use being proposed including the provision of public access (e.g., width and pavement type), facilities and utilities (e.g., drainage, fire protection, sewers, water), shape, size, the absence of physical constraints and compatibility with adjoining land uses;

    (5)    Granting the conditional use permit would not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, or injurious to persons, property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; and

    (6)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures.

    (7)    The applicant has demonstrated his understanding of the conditions imposed in any conditional use permit granted to him and has agreed on the record to abide by those conditions. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.36.060 Conditions of approval.
    In approving a conditional use permit, the commission may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, time limits, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to:

    (1)    Compliance with Chapter. Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this chapter, the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan;

    (2)    Compliance with Findings. Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 21.34.050 (Findings and decision) of this title;

    (3)    Protect Interests. Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood;

    (4)    Acknowledgment.

    (A)   Ensure that the applicant acknowledges receipt, full understanding and agreement with all of the conditions before issuance of the conditional use permit.

    (B)   By signing the written acknowledgment, the applicant acknowledges acceptance of the benefits of the conditional use permit and agrees to waive any right to later challenge any condition(s) imposed as unfair, unnecessary or unreasonable.

    (5)    Indemnification. Ensure protection of the city by authorizing the commission to impose a condition requiring the applicant to agree to indemnify and defend the city, its officers, employees and agents from liability arising out of the approved use. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.36.070 Post approval procedures.
    (a)    Procedures. Procedures relating to appeals, changes, performance guarantee, revocation and time extensions, as identified in Chapter 21.32. through 21.50 of this title, in addition to those identified in Chapter 21.54 (Entitlement Implementation, Time Limits and Extensions) of this title, shall apply following the approval of a conditional use permit application.

    (b)    Run with the Land.

    (1)    Continue to Be Valid. A conditional use permit that is valid and in effect, and was granted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing structure on the land.

    (2)    Resolution Review. In addition to securing a business license, any new applicant seeking to operate a previously approved use in substantial compliance with an existing conditional use permit shall submit a project description (e.g., narrative and/or a site and floor plan) to the director ensuring that the new operation would be in compliance with the previous use and that the new applicant agrees to operate in full compliance with the previously issued conditions of approval. A fee may be imposed for the review of the project description and conditions of approval subject to the council’s fee resolution.

    (c)    Substantial Compliance. Once approved by the commission, the design and general appearance (e.g., colors, materials, etc.) of the approved structure(s)/improvements shall not be substantially altered. Substantial changes shall require commission review and approval before construction. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.36.080 Conditional use permit violations.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the standards set forth in this chapter apply, to operate a business or land use in a zone requiring a conditional use permit without such a permit, or to fail to comply with each and every condition of that conditional use permit. (Ord. 1358 § 10, 2004)

Chapter 21.38 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
21.38.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Procedures. This chapter provides procedures and requirements for the review, approval and amendment of development agreements.

    (b)    State Law. The provisions of this chapter are consistent with the provisions of state law governing development agreements (Article 2.5 of Section 4 of Chapter 1 of Title 7, commencing with Government Code Section 65864). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.020 Applicability.
    (a)    Initiation. Consideration of a development agreement may be initiated by:

    (1)    The council; or

    (2)    Property owners or other persons having a legal or equitable interest in the property proposed to be subject to the agreement.

    (b)    Fully Effectuate. In construing the provisions of any development agreement executed in compliance with this chapter, those provisions shall be read to fully effectuate, and to be consistent with, the language of Chapters 21.32. through 21.50 of this title, state law cited above and the agreement itself.

    (c)    Discrepancies. If an apparent discrepancy between the meaning of these documents arises, reference shall be made to the following documents, and in the following order:

    (1)    The terms of the development agreement itself;

    (2)    The provisions of this chapter; and

    (3)    The provisions of state law cited above. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.030 Review authority.
    Applications for a development agreement shall be considered by the commission and council in compliance with subsection (e) of Section 21.38.040 (Notice and public hearings) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.040 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Application Requirements. An owner of real property may request and apply through the director to enter into a development agreement provided the following:

    (1)    The development agreement, if approved, would be in the best interests of the city;

    (2)    The status of the applicant as an owner of the property is established to the satisfaction of the director;

    (3)    The application is made on approved forms and contains all information required by the director; and

    (4)    The application is accompanied by all lawfully required documents, information, materials and applicable fees, in compliance with subsection (c) (Processing and review fees) of this section.

    (b)    Director. The director shall receive, review, process and prepare, together with recommendations for commission and council consideration, all applications for development agreements.

    (c)    Processing and Review Fees.

    (1)    Processing Fees. Processing fees, as established by the city’s fee resolution, shall be collected for any application for a development agreement made in compliance with this chapter.

    (2)    Periodic Reviews. Appropriate fees shall be established and collected for periodic reviews conducted by the director in compliance with Section 21.38.060 (Periodic reviews) of this chapter.

    (d)    Content of Development Agreement.

    (1)    A development agreement entered into in compliance with this chapter shall contain the mandatory provisions specified by state law (Government Code Section 65865.2 [Agreement contents]).

    (2)    A development agreement entered into in compliance with this chapter may contain the permissive provisions specified by state law (Government Code Section 65865.2 [Agreement contents]).

    (e)    Notice and Public Hearings.

    (1)    Notice. Notice of the hearings, identified in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, shall be given in the form of a notice of intention to consider approval of a development agreement in compliance with state law.

    (2)    Commission. The director, upon finding the application for a development agreement complete, shall set the application, together with recommendations, for a public hearing before the commission in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall forward a written recommendation to the council that it approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application.

    (3)    Council. Upon receipt of the commission’s recommendation, the city clerk shall set the application and written recommendation of the commission for a public hearing before the council in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application in compliance with paragraph (7) of this subsection.

    (4)    Terms and Conditions. Should the council approve or conditionally approve the application, it shall, as a part of the action of approval, direct the preparation of a development agreement embodying the terms and conditions of the application as approved or conditionally approved by it, as well as an ordinance authorizing execution of the development agreement by the mayor.

    (5)    Ordinance. The ordinance shall be in compliance with state law and shall contain the findings identified in paragraph (7) of this subsection and the facts supporting them.

    (6)    Evidence. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the required findings.

    (7)    Findings. The development agreement shall be approved only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (A)   The development agreement would be in the best interests of the city.

    (B)   The development agreement is consistent with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan and this title.

    (C)   The development agreement would promote the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of the city.

    (8)    Referendum. The ordinance may be subjected to referendum in compliance with state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.050 Execution and recordation.
    (a)    Effective Date. The city shall not execute a development agreement until on or after the date on which the ordinance approving the agreement, enacted in compliance with subsection (e) of Section 21.38.040 of this chapter, becomes effective.

    (b)    Mutual Consent. A development agreement may be executed only on the mutual written consent of each party to the agreement.

    (c)    Conditioning Approval. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the director, commission or council from conditioning approval of a discretionary entitlement on the execution of a development agreement where the condition is otherwise authorized by law.

    (d)    Recordation. A development agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder no later than ten days after it is executed, in compliance with state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.060 Periodic reviews.
    (a)    Periodic Reviews Required.

    (1)    Every development agreement, approved and executed shall be subject to periodic reviews, as specified in the agreement, by the director/commission during the full term of the agreement.

    (2)    Appropriate fees to cover the city’s cost(s) to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant/contracting party in compliance with subsection (c) of Section 21.38.040 of this chapter.

    (b)    Purpose of Review.

    (1)    The purpose of the review shall be to determine whether the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest has complied in good faith with the terms and/or conditions of the development agreement.

    (2)    The burden of proof shall be on the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest to demonstrate compliance, to the full satisfaction of and in a manner prescribed by, the director.

    (c)    Compliance with the Terms or Conditions. If the commission finds, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the commission may recommend to the council that it order, after a noticed public hearing in compliance with Section 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title, the agreement to be terminated or modified. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.070 Amendment or cancellation of development agreement.
    (a)    Amendments or Cancellations. A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual agreement of all parties to the agreement, or their successor(s)-in-interest.

    (b)    Processing Procedures. The requested amendment or cancellation shall be processed in the same manner identified by this chapter for the adoption of a development agreement. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.080 Effect of development agreement.
    (a)    Rules, Regulations and Policies. Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the policies, regulations and rules governing allowed uses of the land, density, design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, are the policies, regulations and rules in force at the time of execution of the agreement.

    (B)   Applying New Policies, Regulations, and Rules. Unless specifically provided for in the development agreement, the agreement does not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new policies, regulations and rules which do not conflict with those policies, regulations and rules applicable to the property under the development agreement, nor does a development agreement prevent the city from conditionally approving or disapproving a subsequent development project application on the basis of existing or new policies, regulations and rules. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.38.090 Approved development agreements.
    Development agreements approved by the council shall be on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.40 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
21.40.010 Purpose.
    (A)   Review Procedures. This chapter establishes procedures for the commission’s review of the design and appearance of structures to ensure that projects comply with all applicable development and design standards/guidelines, and minimize potential adverse effects, in compliance with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan and this title.

    (b)    Encourage Creativity. This chapter is not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to focus on development and design standards/guidelines that can result in creative, imaginative solutions and a quality design for the city. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to:

    (1)    Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of development within the city;

    (2)    Assist developers to understand the public’s concerns for the aesthetics of development, and ensure that new developments do not cause an adverse health, safety or aesthetic related impact(s) on the community;

    (3)    Achieve a reasonable level of quality in terms of harmony and community objectives for economic, physical and social well being, and to protect existing and potential developments and uses on adjoining property and the surrounding neighborhood;

    (4)    Provide consistency for the comprehensive review of development projects; and

    (5)    Ensure consistency with the previously approved conditions of approval.

    (c)    Allowed Uses Only. This chapter is not intended to deny any use already allowed by this title, or to grant any use not allowed in the respective zoning district. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.40.020 Review authority.
    The commission shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove development review applications, and impose conditions necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, and necessary to make the findings required by Section 21.38.050 (Findings and decision) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.40.030 Applicability.
    Applications for all nonresidential architectural modifications (e.g., building materials, colors, doors, facades, landscaping, roof materials, windows, etc.), and any second story addition to an existing residential structure deemed necessary by the director, shall first require the commission’s approval of a development review in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.40.040 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Filing.

    (1)    Filed with Department. An application for a development review shall be filed with the department in compliance with Chapter 21.32 (Applications, Processing and Fees) of this title.

    (2)    Filed Concurrently. The application may be made and acted upon concurrently with an application for a conditional use permit, variance or other matter requiring city approval in compliance with this chapter.

    (b)    Before Building Permits. The application shall be filed before issuance of any building permit(s) for the subject parcel.

    (c)    Contents. The application shall be accompanied by detailed and fully dimensioned plans, architectural drawings/sketches, elevations, floor plans, landscape plans and/or any other data/materials identified in the department handout for development review applications.

    (d)    Project Review Procedures. Following receipt of a completed application, the director shall make an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the purpose of this chapter.

    (e)    Factors to Be Considered.

    (1)    The commission shall:

    (A)   Ensure that the design and general appearance of the proposed structure(s) are in compliance with the purpose of this chapter; and

    (B)   Consider the location, design, site plan configuration and the overall effect of the proposed project upon the surrounding neighborhood and the city in general.

    (2)    Review shall be conducted by comparing the proposed project to applicable development standards, design guidelines and other applicable city ordinances. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.40.050 Findings and decision.
    The commission, or the council on appeal, shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the decision is based. The development review application shall be approved, with or without conditions, only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (1)    The design and layout of the proposed development would:

    (A)   Be consistent with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan and the development and design standards/guidelines of the applicable zoning district;

    (B)   Not interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future developments, and would not create traffic or pedestrian hazards; and

    (C)   Provide a desirable environment for its occupants and visiting public as well as its neighbors through good/proper aesthetic use of materials, texture and color, and would remain aesthetically appealing and retain an appropriate level of maintenance.

    (2)    The architectural design of the proposed structure(s) would be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and would maintain and enhance the attractive, harmonious and orderly development contemplated by the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan and this chapter;

    (3)    The proposed development would not:

    (A)   Be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the immediate vicinity; or

    (B)   Substantially depreciate property values in the immediate vicinity or interfere with the use or enjoyment of property in the surrounding neighborhood, because of excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness of design in relation to the surrounding neighborhood.

    (4)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.40.060 Conditions of approval.
    (a)    Compliance. In approving a development review the commission may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to:

    (1)    Compliance with Chapter. Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this chapter, the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan;

    (2)    Compliance with Findings. Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 21.38.050 (Findings and decision) of this title;

    (3)    Protect Interests. Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood; and

    (4)    Acknowledgment.

    (A)   Ensure that the applicant acknowledges receipt, full understanding and agreement with all of the conditions before issuance of the development review.

    (B)   By signing the written acknowledgment, the applicant acknowledges acceptance of the benefits of the development review and agrees to waive any right to later challenge any condition(s) imposed as unfair, unnecessary or unreasonable.

    (b)    Conditions. The conditions of approval shall further ensure the following:

    (1)    Adequate pedestrian and vehicular circulation (e.g., access ways and parking) shall be required to be designed, provided and maintained to avoid congestion and to prevent adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood;

    (2)    Elevations shall be designed to be compatible with the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood;

    (3)    Exterior lighting, fences, landscaping, screen planting, walls and other similar appurtenances shall be designed, provided and maintained in a manner that would be compatible (e.g., proportion, scale, style, etc.) with the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood. The commission shall give special consideration to the retention of existing vegetation and land formations in their natural state;

    (4)    Structures shall be arranged to allow convenient access for emergency and service equipment, fire hydrants, standpipes and other fire protection devices; and

    (5)    The proposed development shall not present a hazardous situation due to any erosion, flooding, seismic, soil or topographic condition(s) applicable to the site. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.40.070 Post approval procedures.
    (a)    Procedures. Procedures relating to appeals, changes, performance guarantee, revocation and time extensions, as identified in Chapters 21.52 through 21.64 of this title, in addition to those identified in Chapter 21.54 (Entitlement Implementation, Time Limits and Extensions) of this title, shall apply following the approval of a development review.

    (b)    Run with the Land.

    (1)    Continue to Be Valid. A development review that is valid and in effect, and was granted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing structure on the land.

    (2)    Resolution Review. In addition to securing a business license, any new applicant seeking to operate a previously approved use in substantial compliance with an existing development review shall submit a project description (e.g., narrative and/or a site and floor plan) to the director ensuring that the new operation would be in compliance with the previous use and that the new applicant agrees to operate in full compliance with the previously issued conditions of approval.

    (c)    Substantial Compliance. Once approved by the commission, the design and general appearance (e.g., colors, materials, etc.) of the structure(s) shall not be substantially altered. Substantial changes shall require commission review and approval before construction. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.40.080 Development review violations.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the specific standards set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to obtain development review before a project is constructed or to fail to maintain or operate property for which a development review approval has been given in compliance with that development review approval. (Ord. 1358 § 11, 2004)

Chapter 21.42 HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
21.42.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides a process for reviewing home occupation permit applications which are intended to allow for specified activities that are incidental and accessory to a residential use, are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and are deemed to cause minimal impact(s) on neighboring parcels, if conducted in compliance with the applicable locational and operational standards identified in this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.020 Definition.
    (a)    Home Occupation. A home occupation is any activity producing income, or intended to produce income, conducted entirely within a residential dwelling and by the inhabitants of the dwelling, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for residential purposes and which does not change the character of the dwelling.

    (b)    Allowed Home Occupations. Any business activity allowed under this chapter, when conducted by the resident(s) of a dwelling in a manner accessory to and compatible with the residential characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood, and in compliance with the applicable locational and operational standards identified in this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.030 Authority.
    (a)    Permits Required.

    (1)    A home occupation shall not be established or operated in any manner without the prior approval, issuance, and maintenance of a valid home occupation permit.

    (2)    An application for a home occupation permit shall be submitted for approval, conditional approval, modification or disapproval before the establishment or operation of the proposed use.

    (3)    A business license shall not be issued by the city’s finance director until the director has approved and issued the home occupation permit.

    (b)    Director’s Action. The director may approve home occupation permits, subject to the appeal provisions of Chapter 21.62 (Appeals) of this title.

    (c)    Refer to Commission. The director may elect to defer action and refer the application to the commission. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.040 Prohibited home occupations.
    The following uses, either by operation or nature, are considered not to be incidental to or compatible with residential activities and therefore shall not be allowed as home occupation activities:

    (1)    Any use that generates six or more additional vehicle trips per day;

    (2)    Adult entertainment activities/businesses;

    (3)    Animal hospitals and grooming facilities;

    (4)    Automotive and other vehicle reconditioning, repair, servicing (body or mechanical), painting, storage or upholstery;

    (5)    Commercial cabinet or furniture making businesses (this does not include woodworking as a hobby activity);

    (6)    Commercial kennels;

 

    (7)    Contractor’s storage yards;

    (8)    Dismantling, junk or scrap yards;

    (9)    Exercise studios;

    (10)  Medical clinics, laboratories and offices;

    (11)  Repair, reconditioning, servicing or manufacture of any internal combustion or diesel engines, including automobiles, boats, motorbikes, motorcycles, recreational vehicles or trucks operating as a business;

    (12)  Sale of alcohol, explosives, hazardous products and/or wastes, fire arms and/or ammunition;

    (13)  Sales of home furnishing materials including carpeting, floor covering, tile and other similar materials;

    (14)  Uses which require explosives or highly combustible or toxic materials;

    (15)  Welding and machine shop operations; or

    (16)  Other uses the director deems to be similar to those listed above, that could result in objectionable impacts on neighboring residentially zoned parcels (e.g., noise, increased pedestrian and vehicular traffic, etc.). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.050 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Filing. An application for a home occupation permit shall be filed with the department in compliance with Chapter 21.32 (Applications, Processing and Fees) of this title.

    (b)    Contents. The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for home occupation permit applications.

    (c)    Home Occupation Permit and Business License. Immediately following the effective date of an approved home occupation permit, when no appeal has been filed, the applicant shall obtain a business license. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.060 Compliance with standards.
    Prior to approval of an application for a home occupation permit, the director shall make a finding that all of the following standards are met:

    (1)    There shall be no employment of persons other than the members of the resident family who permanently reside on the premises.

    (2)    There shall be no direct sales of products, either wholesale or retail, on the premises.

    (3)    There shall be no use or storage of material or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household or hobby use.

    (4)    The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the district or neighborhood in which it is located.

    (5)    The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other than a vehicle not to exceed one ton capacity, owned by the operator of the home occupation, which shall be stored in an entirely enclosed garage.

    (6)    The use shall not involve excessive storage of materials or supplies on the premises. All combustible substances shall receive approval of the fire marshal.

    (7)    Signs shall not be displayed in connection with the home occupation, and there shall be no advertising using the home address, with the exception of advertising in the telephone directory.

    (8)    Not more than one room in the dwelling shall be employed for the home occupation. Use of the garage is allowed, provided that all required vehicle storage is maintained in compliance with this title.

    (9)    Accessory structures or space outside of the dwelling shall not be used for home occupation purposes or storage of materials related to the home occupation.

    (10)  The appearance of the dwelling or any accessory structure shall not be so altered so that the dwelling or accessory structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, construction, or materials, lighting, noise, signs, sounds or vibrations, etc.).

    (11)  There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes as defined in the district.

    (12)  Cottage food operations are subject to the requirements located in Section 21.42.065 and shall not be required to comply with Chapter 21.42 to the extent inconsistent with state law. (Ord. 1497 § 4, 2014; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.065 Cottage food operation home occupation permit.
    (a)    Permits Required.

    (1)    A cottage food operation shall not be established or operated without the prior approval, issuance, and maintenance of a valid cottage food home occupation permit.

    (2)    An application for a cottage food operation home occupation permit shall not be issued until the applicant has furnished a valid permit for a cottage food operation from the county of Orange health care agency in compliance with the California Health and Safety Code Section 114365.

    (3)    The applicant of a cottage food operation home occupation permit shall comply with all local ordinances, standards, restrictions, and requirements concerning spacing, concentration, traffic control, parking, and noise standards.

    (b)    Operational Requirements.

    (1)    The cottage food operation shall not have more than one full-time equivalent employee, not including a family member or household member of the cottage food operator within the registered or permitted area of a private home where the cottage food operator resides and where cottage food products are prepared or packaged.

    (2)    There shall be only one cottage food operation per each residential unit.

    (3)    The cottage food operation shall be conducted in the registered or permitted area of the home that contains the kitchen used for the preparation, packaging, storage, or handling of food products and ingredients or equipment and attached rooms within the home that are used exclusively for storage.

    (4)    The garage shall not be used for storage of products or merchandise associated with the cottage food operation and there shall be no use or storage of materials, supplies, or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of the registered or permitted cottage food area as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 113758(7).

    (5)    The cottage food operation shall not generate more than twenty vehicle trips per day.

    (6)    Deliveries and customer traffic shall be limited to seven a.m. to eight p.m., seven days per week.

    (7)    The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 260 for delivery of materials to or from the premises, except for package/courier delivery services and United States Postal Service deliveries that customarily service residential neighborhoods, other than a vehicle not to exceed one-ton capacity loaded weight as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 350, owned by the operator of the home occupation.

    (8)    Signs shall not be displayed in connection with the home occupation at the residence and are subject to FVMC Ch. 21.24, Signs on Private Property and FVMC Ch. 21.25, Signs on Public Property.

    (9)    There shall be one dedicated parking space on-site for customers of the cottage food operation. (Ord. 1497 § 5, 2014)

 

21.42.070 Findings and decision.
    Home occupation permit application may be approved by the director, or by the commission on appeal or referral, only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (1)    The requested home occupation:

    (A)   Is allowed in compliance with subsection (b) of Section 21.42.020 of this chapter;

    (B)   Is not prohibited in compliance with Section 21.42.040 (Prohibited home occupations) of this chapter;

    (C)   Would be consistent with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

    (D)   Would comply with the locational and operational standards identified in this chapter;

    (E)   Would be compatible with adjoining properties and the surrounding neighborhood, and would not alter the residential character of the property.

    (2)    Approval of the requested home occupation:

    (A)   Would ensure that the integrity of the respective residential zoning district would be preserved; and

    (B)   Would not endanger, jeopardize or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of persons residing or working in the city. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.080 Conditions of approval.
    In approving a home occupation permit the director may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, time limits, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to:

    (1)    Compliance with Chapter. Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this chapter, the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan;

    (2)    Compliance with Findings. Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 21.42.070 (Findings and decision) of this chapter;

    (3)    Protect Interests. Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood;

    (4)    Standards. Ensure compliance with the locational and operational standards identified in this chapter; and

    (5)    Acknowledgment.

    (A)   Ensure that the applicant acknowledges receipt, full understanding and agreement with all of the conditions before issuance of the home occupation permit.

    (B)   By signing the written acknowledgment, the applicant acknowledges acceptance of the benefits of the home occupation permit and agrees to waive any right to later challenge any condition(s) imposed as unfair, unnecessary or unreasonable. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.090 Inspections.
    The director shall have the right at any reasonable time, upon request, to enter and inspect the premises subject to a home occupation permit in order to verify compliance with the locational and operational standards identified in this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.100 Post approval procedures.
    Procedures relating to appeals, changes, performance guarantee, revocation and time extensions, as identified in Chapters 21.52 through 21.64 of this title, in addition to those identified in Chapter 21.54 (Entitlement Implementation, Time Limits and Extensions) of this title, shall apply following the approval of a home occupation permit. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.110 Permit not transferable.
    (a)    Not Transferable. The home occupation permit is not transferable.

    (b)    New Resident. A new home occupation permit and business license, for the same or different home occupation conducted by a new resident, shall be obtained before conducting an allowed home occupation.

    (c)    Original Resident. A change in the type of home occupation activity (e.g., a change from one allowed activity to another allowed activity) conducted by the original resident/permittee shall also require a new home occupation permit and business license before conducting an allowed home occupation. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.42.120 Home occupation violations.
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a business in a residential zone without a home occupation permit or to operate such business in violation of the permit or in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1358 § 12, 2004)

Chapter 21.44 PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN
21.44.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Review Procedures. This chapter establishes procedures for reviewing development proposals to ensure that projects comply with all applicable development and design standards/guidelines, and minimize potential adverse effects, in compliance with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan and this title.

    (b)    Encourage Creativity. This chapter is not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to focus on development and design standards/guidelines that can result in creative, imaginative solutions and a quality design for the city. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to:

    (1)    Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of development within the city;

    (2)    Assist developers to understand the public’s concerns for the aesthetics of development, and ensure that new developments do not cause an adverse health, safety or aesthetic related impact(s) on the community;

    (3)    Achieve a reasonable level of quality in terms of harmony and community objectives for economic, physical and social well being, and to protect existing and potential developments and uses on adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood; and

    (4)    Provide consistency for comprehensive review of development projects.

    (c)    Allowed Uses Only. This chapter is not intended to deny any use already allowed by this title, nor to grant any use not allowed in the respective zoning district. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.44.020 Review authority.
    The commission shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove precise plan of design applications, and impose conditions necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, and necessary to make the findings required by Chapter 21.44.050 (Findings and Decision) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.44.030 Applicability.
    An application for precise plan of design shall be required for any proposed structures in the city, except for structures in the R-1 zoning district. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.44.040 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Filing.

    (1)    Filed with Department. An application for a precise plan of design shall be filed with the department in compliance with Chapter 21.32 (Applications, Processing and Fees) of this title.

    (2)    Filed Concurrently. The applicant may choose, or the commission may require, that the application be made and acted upon concurrently with an application for a conditional use permit, final map, variance, zoning map amendment or other matter requiring city approval in compliance with this chapter.

    (b)    Before Building Permits. The application shall be filed before issuance of any building permit(s) for the subject parcel.

    (c)    Contents. The application shall be accompanied by detailed and fully dimensioned site plans, architectural drawings/sketches, elevations, floor plans, landscape plans and/or any other data/materials identified in the department handout for precise plan of design applications.

    (d)    Project Review Procedures. Following receipt of a completed application, the director shall make an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the purpose of this chapter.

    (e)    Factors to Be Considered.

    (1)    The proposed development should be compatible with surrounding developments, including the siting of the project as it relates to the character of the neighborhood and the street, the massing of structures, and architectural style and detailing.

    (2)    Facades of structures visible from streets, freeways or other public rights-of-way should be fully finished and should receive similar architectural treatment as the primary facade.

    (3)    Mechanical equipment, storage, solid waste and recyclable material storage areas and utilities should be located out of public view or otherwise screened from public view (See Section 21.18.080, Screening and buffering of this title).

    (4)    The proposed project should be designed to protect sensitive land uses by promoting a harmonious and compatible transition in terms of scale and character between areas of different land uses and zoning districts.

    Additions/alterations to existing structures should be substantially the same (or an improvement, if warranted) in appearance as the original, especially in terms of exterior materials, color and roof lines(s), windows and doors, etc.

    (f)    Notice and Hearings.

    (1)    Public Hearing Required. An application for a precise plan of design shall be scheduled for a public hearing once the director has determined the application complete.

    (2)    Noticing. Noticing of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.44.050 Findings and decision.
    The commission, or the council on appeal, shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the decision is based. The precise plan of design application shall be approved, with or without conditions, only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (1)    The design and layout of the proposed development would:

    (A)   Be consistent with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan and the development and design standards/guidelines of the applicable zoning district;

    (B)   Not interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future developments, and would not create traffic or pedestrian hazards; and

    (C)   Provide a desirable environment for its occupants and visiting public as well as its neighbors through good/proper aesthetic use of materials, texture and color, and would remain aesthetically appealing and retain an appropriate level of maintenance.

    (2)    The architectural design of the proposed structure(s) would be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and would maintain and enhance the attractive, harmonious and orderly development contemplated by the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan and this chapter;

    (3)    The proposed development would not:

    (A)   Be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the immediate vicinity; or

    (B)   Substantially depreciate property values in the immediate vicinity or interfere with the use or enjoyment of property in the surrounding neighborhood, because of excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness of design in relation to the surrounding neighborhood.

    (4)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.44.060 Conditions of approval.
    (a)    Compliance. In approving a precise plan of design the commission may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to:

    (1)    Compliance with Chapter. Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this chapter, the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan;

    (2)    Compliance with Findings. Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 21.44.050 (Findings and decision) of this chapter;

    (3)    Protect Interests. Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood; and

    (4)    Acknowledgment.

    (A)   Ensure that the applicant acknowledges receipt, full understanding and agreement with all of the conditions before issuance of the precise plan of design.

    (B)   By signing the written acknowledgment, the applicant acknowledges acceptance of the benefits of the precise plan of design and agrees to waive any right to later challenge any condition(s) imposed as unfair, unnecessary or unreasonable.

    (b)    Conditions. The conditions of approval shall further ensure the following:

    (1)    Adequate pedestrian and vehicular circulation (e.g., access ways and parking) shall be required to be designed, provided and maintained to avoid congestion and to prevent adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood;

    (2)    Elevations shall be designed to be compatible with the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood;

    (3)    Exterior lighting, fences, landscaping, screen planting, walls and other similar appurtenances shall be designed, provided, and maintained in a manner that would be compatible (e.g., proportion, scale, style, etc.) with the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood. The commission shall give special consideration to the retention of existing vegetation and land formations in their natural state;

    (4)    Structures shall be arranged to allow convenient access for emergency and service equipment, fire hydrants, standpipes and other fire protection devices;

    (5)    Proposed developments shall not present a hazardous situation due to any erosion, flooding, seismic, soil or topographic condition(s) applicable to the site;

    (6)    Proposed developments shall be conditioned to require the payment of a landscape inspection fee, in compliance with the city’s fee resolution, to ensure that the landscaping is installed in compliance with the approved plans; and

    (7)    Proposed residential developments shall be conditioned to require the dedication of land, or payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication, at the option of the city, for park and recreation land in compliance with the provisions of Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.44.070 Post approval procedures.
    (a)    Procedures. Procedures relating to appeals, changes, performance guarantee, revocation and time extensions, as identified in Chapters 21.52 through 21.64 of this title, in addition to those identified in Chapter 21.54 (Entitlement Implementation, Time Limits and Extensions) of this title, shall apply following the approval of a precise plan of design.

    (b)    Run with the Land.

    (1)    Continue to Be Valid. A precise plan of design that is valid and in effect, and was granted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing structure on the land.

    (2)    Resolution Review. In addition to securing a business license, any new applicant seeking to operate a previously approved use in substantial compliance with an existing precise plan of design shall submit a project description (e.g., narrative and/or a site and floor plan) to the director ensuring that the new operation would be in compliance with the previous use and that the new applicant agrees to operate in full compliance with the previously issued conditions of approval.

    (c)    Substantial Compliance. Once approved by the commission, the design and general appearance (e.g., colors, materials, etc.) of the structure(s) shall not be substantially altered. Substantial changes shall require commission review and approval before construction. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.44.080 Precise plan violations.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the specific standards set forth in this chapter apply, to develop or construct property without a precise plan or to operate or maintain property in violation of the precise plan or to fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1358 § 13, 2004)

Chapter 21.46 SPECIFIC PLANS
21.46.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Process. This chapter provides a process for preparing, processing, reviewing, adopting and amending a specific plan.

    (b)    Compliance. When required by Section 21.46.030 (Applicability) of this chapter, the general plan or this title to systematically implement the general plan for any part of the city, a specific plan shall be prepared, processed, approved and implemented or disapproved, in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.020 Intent.
    An adopted specific plan shall replace the base zoning district for the subject property, and the development standards/guidelines identified in the specific plan shall take precedence over the general standards/guidelines contained in this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.030 Applicability.
    (a)    Authority to Adopt and Amend. An application for a specific plan shall be considered by the commission and council.

    (b)    Specific Plan Required. A specific plan, which is designed to provide for flexibility and encourage use of land resources and development of a variety of housing and other development types shall be required under the following circumstances:

    (1)    SP (Specific Plan) Zoning District. Areas designated SP (Specific Plan) zoning district require the preparation of a specific plan in compliance with Chapter 21.12 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) of this title;

    (2)    Assist in Master Planning. A specific plan, as a tool that is available to private property owners not covered by subsection (b)(1) of this section, could assist in the comprehensive master planning of a specific site(s). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.040 Minimum project area.
    (a)    Five Acres. The minimum project area for a specific plan shall be five acres.

    (b)    Waiver Prohibited. A waiver or variance shall not be allowed to decrease this minimum project area requirement.

    (c)    Ownership. The project area may be one parcel under single ownership or a combination of adjoining parcels subject to a unified planning concept with written notification to all applicable property owners. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.050 Initiation and presubmittal requirements.
    A specific plan may be initiated in the following manner:

    (1)    Council. By a resolution of intention adopted by the council, with or without a recommendation from the commission;

    (2)    Property Owner. By an application being filed by the owner(s) of property that would be the subject of the specific plan. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.060 Preparation and content.
    The application shall be accompanied by the information required by state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.070 Application filing, processing and review.
    A draft specific plan shall be filed with the department, and shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city’s fee resolution. The draft plan shall be processed in the same manner as required for general plans by state law and as follows:

    (1)    Director’s Evaluation.

    (A)   After the filing of a draft specific plan, the director shall review the draft plan to determine whether it conforms with the provisions of this chapter.

    (B)   If the draft plan is not in compliance, it shall be returned to the applicant with written specification(s) as to why it does not comply, and with suggested revisions to ensure compliance.

    (C)   When a draft plan is returned by the applicant to the department and the director determines it is complete and in compliance with this chapter, the plan shall be deemed to be accepted for processing.

    (2)    Staff Report. A written staff report shall be prepared for the draft specific plan which shall include detailed recommendations for changes to the text and/or diagrams of the specific plan, as necessary to make it acceptable for adoption; and

    (3)    Public Hearings. A proposed specific plan shall be subject to public hearings before both the commission and council before its adoption, as follows:

    (A)   Commission.

    (i)     The director shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed specific plan.

    (ii)    The hearing shall receive public notice and be conducted in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title.

    (iii)   After the hearing, the commission shall forward a written recommendation, with appropriate findings to the council, in compliance with Section 21.46.080 (Adoption of specific plan) of this chapter; and

    (B)   Council.

    (i)     After receipt of the commission’s recommendation, the council shall conduct a public hearing on the specific plan in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title.

    (ii)    After the hearing, the council may adopt the specific plan, disapprove the plan, or adopt the plan with changes, with appropriate findings in compliance with Section 21.46.080 (Adoption of specific plan) of this chapter, provided that changes to the plan that were not considered by the commission shall be referred to the commission for its recommendation, in compliance with state law.

    (iii)   Failure of the commission to report within forty-five days after the referral, or a longer period set by the council, shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of the changes. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.080 Adoption of specific plan.
    (a)    Council’s Action. The council may adopt a specific plan only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (1)    The proposed development is generally consistent with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan;

    (2)    The design, location, shape, size, operating characteristics and the provision of public and emergency vehicle access and public services and utilities (e.g., drainage, fire protection, sewers, water, etc.), would ensure that the proposed development would not endanger, jeopardize or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located;

    (3)    The proposed development would:

    (i)     Ensure quality development by encouraging greater flexibility with more creative and aesthetically pleasing designs for major urban developments;

    (ii)    Ensure the timely provision of essential public services and facilities consistent with the demand for the services and facilities; and

    (iii)   Promote a harmonious variety of housing choices and commercial and industrial activities; attain a desirable balance of residential and employment opportunities and result in a high level of urban amenities and the preservation of the natural and scenic qualities of open space.

    (4)    The subject property is physically suitable for the proposed land use designation(s);

    (5)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures; and

    (6)    There would be no potential significant negative effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that would not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a statement of overriding considerations is adopted by the council.

    (b)    Adoption. The specific plan shall be adopted by ordinance, or by resolution of the council, in compliance with state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.090 Implementation and amendments.
    (a)    Development within Specific Plan Area. After the adoption of a specific plan, a public works project, a tentative map or parcel map, for which a tentative map was not required and an amendment to this title may be approved/adopted within an area covered by a specific plan only if it is first found consistent with the specific plan.

    (b)    Specific Plan Fee Surcharge. The council may impose a specific plan fee surcharge on development entitlements within the specific plan area, in compliance with state law.

    (c)    Amendments.

    (1)    An adopted specific plan may be amended through the same procedure specified by this chapter for the adoption of a specific plan.

    (2)    The specific plan may be amended as often as deemed necessary by the council, in compliance with state law.

    (d)    Modifications.

    (1)    A development standard(s) identified in an adopted specific plan may be modified only by action of the council.

    (2)    The council may grant one or more modifications only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (A)   The modification(s) is necessary to properly implement a physically and economically viable project; and

    (B)   The modification(s) would ensure compliance with the general purpose and intent of the adopted specific plan. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.100 Adopted specific plans.
    All adopted specific plans are available for review at the department. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.46.110 Specific plan violations.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the specific plan requirements set forth in this chapter apply, to fail to comply with any specific plan that applies to the property or to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1358 § 14, 2004)

Chapter 21.48 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
21.48.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Process. This chapter provides a process for reviewing proposed temporary uses, that would be conducted on privately owned property outside of a private structure (e.g., car washes, outside displays/sales, special events, etc.).

    (b)    To ensure that:

    (1)    Basic public convenience, health, interest, safety or community welfare standards are maintained and protected from any adverse impacts;

    (2)    The integrity of the applicable zoning district is preserved;

    (3)    The compatibility between the temporary land use and the surrounding neighborhood is maintained; and

    (4)    Suitable temporary uses are approved with the minimum necessary conditions or limitations consistent with the temporary nature of the use. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.020 Review authority.
    The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove temporary use permit applications, and impose conditions necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, and necessary to make the findings required by Section 21.48.080 (Findings and decision) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.030 Applicability.
    (a)    Minor Short-Term Activities. A temporary use permit allows short-term activities that might not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature.

    (b)    Temporary Use Permit Required. Temporary land uses shall not be established, operated, or conducted in any manner without the approval and maintenance of a valid temporary use permit.

    (c)    Categories of Uses. The following two categories of temporary uses identify the level of permit required, if any, based on the proposed duration, size and type of use:

    (1)    Exempt temporary uses are identified in Section 21.48.040 (Exempt temporary uses) of this chapter; and

    (2)    Temporary use permits are identified in Section 21.48.050 (Allowed temporary uses) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.040 Exempt temporary uses.
    The following minor and limited duration temporary uses are exempt from the requirement for a temporary use permit. Uses that do not fall within the categories defined below shall comply with Section 21.48.050 (Allowed temporary uses) of this chapter.

    (1)    Construction Yards—On-Site.

    (A)   On-site contractors’ construction yard(s), in conjunction with an approved construction project on the same site;

    (B)   One adult caretaker may be present during nonconstruction hours;

    (C)   The construction yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion building permit, authorizing the construction project.

    (2)    Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities.

    (3)    Estate, Garage or Yard Sale Events. Estate, garage or yard sale events with no more than four events within a twelve-month period, and for no longer than three consecutive days for each event.

    (4)    Employee Events. Businesses that host an outdoor group activity that is not open to the public, e.g., annual/semi-annual outdoor lunches or meetings, for staff members already located on site and on-site parking is provided for all attendees. (Ord. 1544 § 4, 2019; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.050 Allowed temporary uses.
    The following temporary uses may be allowed, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit by the director. Uses that do not fall within the categories defined below shall comply with the use and development regulations and entitlement review provisions that otherwise apply to the property.

    (1)    Car Washes.

    (A)   Car washes, not more than twelve days each twelve-month period for each location;

    (B)   Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to tax exempt organizations in compliance with 501(c) of the Federal Revenue and Taxation Code.

    (2)    Construction Yards—Off-Site.

    (A)   Off-site contractors’ construction yards, in conjunction with an approved construction project;

    (B)   One adult caretaker may be present during nonconstruction hours;

    (C)   The permit shall expire and the construction yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion building permit, authorizing the construction project.

    (3)    Events.

    (A)   Amusement rides, arts and crafts exhibits, auctions, carnivals, circuses, concerts, fairs, farmer’s markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, outdoor entertainment/sporting events, rodeos, rummage sales, second hand sales and swap meets for eighteen consecutive days or less, or six two-day weekends, within a twelve-month period;

    (B)   Outdoor meetings and group activities within the parking areas for seven consecutive days or less, within a twelve-month period;

    (C)   Church sales, bazaars, dinners, parties or other outdoor events on church owned property other than the uses identified in paragraphs (1)(A) and (B) of this section shall not be limited to the number of occasions or the duration of each.

    (4)    On-Location Filming Activities.

    (A)   The temporary use of a specified and director and fire chief-approved on-location site for the filming of commercials, movie(s), videos, etc.

    (B)   The director shall make an additional finding: The approval would not result in a frequency of uses likely to create incompatibility between the temporary filming activity and the surrounding neighborhood.

    (5)    Outdoor Displays/Sales. The temporary outdoor display/sales of merchandise (e.g., sidewalk sales) shall be allowed only if the merchandise regularly sold on the premises and located immediately adjacent to the structure for a period of eighteen consecutive days or less, within a twelve-month period.

    (6)    Outdoor Sales of Flowers and Produce.

    (A)   The temporary outdoor sales of items (e.g., flowers, fruits, vegetables, etc.) which shall be allowed only if the property is engaged in agricultural production for the duration of the temporary use;

    (B)   The sales stand shall be temporary and located a minimum of seventy-five feet from any existing structure used for residential purposes, if not owned by the applicant for the temporary use permit;

    (C)   The maximum duration shall not exceed ninety consecutive days, within a twelve-month period, if located on a parcel(s) not engaged in agricultural production.

    (7)    Seasonal Sales Lots. Seasonal sales activities (e.g., Halloween, Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc.) including temporary residence/security trailers, on non-residential properties, for forty-five days or less, within a twelve-month period.

    (8)    Temporary Model Homes. Temporary model homes and related facilities (e.g., parking lots) may be established within the area of an approved residential subdivision project, solely for the first sale of homes. The application may be approved for a maximum time period of twelve months.

    (9)    Temporary Structures. A temporary classroom, office or similar portable structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved, for a maximum time period of twelve months, as an accessory use or as the first phase of a development project, in the commercial and industrial zoning districts.

    (10)  Temporary Work Trailers.

    (A)   A trailer or mobile home may be used as a temporary work site for employees of a business:

    (i)     During construction or remodeling of a permanent commercial or manufacturing structure, when a valid Building Permit is in force; or

    (ii)    Upon demonstration by the applicant that the temporary work site is a short-term necessity, while a permanent work site is being obtained.

    (B)   A permit for temporary work trailer(s) may be granted for up to twelve months.

    (11)  Similar Temporary Uses. Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the director, are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses and necessary due to unusual or unique circumstances beyond the control of the applicant.

    (12)  Minor Temporary Uses. Minor temporary uses for non-profit entities that draw less than two hundred people during a four-hour period, do not provide any amplified music, and can accommodate on-site parking for all attendees. (Ord. 1544 § 5, 2019; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.060 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Filing. An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the department in the following manner:

    (1)    An application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted for approval, in compliance with this chapter before the establishment or operation of the proposed temporary use;

    (2)    For events proposed within nonresidential zoning districts: At least fifteen days before the date that the proposed use is scheduled to take place; and

    (3)    For events proposed within residential zoning districts: At least thirty days before the date that the proposed use is scheduled to take place.

    (b)    Contents. The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for temporary use permit applications.

    (c)    Evidence. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 21.48.080 (Findings and decision) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.070 Standards.
    (a)    Appropriate Development Standards. Standards for floor areas, heights, landscaping, parking, setbacks and other structure and property development standards that apply to the category of use or the zoning district of the subject site shall be used as a guide for determining the appropriate development standards for temporary uses.

    (b)    Adjustment of Requirements. The director may authorize an adjustment from the specific requirements deemed necessary or appropriate consistent with the temporary nature of the use.

    (c)    Removal of Materials and Structure(s) Associated with the Former Use. All materials and structure(s) associated with the former use shall be removed within three days from the actual termination of operations, or after the expiration of the temporary use permit, whichever first occurs.

    (d)    Other Permits Required. Temporary uses may be subject to additional licenses, inspections or entitlements required by applicable local, state or federal requirements. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.080 Findings and decision.
    A temporary use permit may be approved, modified, conditioned or disapproved by the director. The director may defer action and refer the application to the commission. The director, or the commission on appeal or referral, may approve, modify, or conditionally approve a temporary use permit application, only for the duration(s) identified in  Section 21.48.050 (Allowed temporary uses) of this chapter, and only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (1)    The temporary use would be located, operated and maintained in compliance with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan, and the applicable provisions of the this code and this title;

    (2)    The location, operation or maintenance of the temporary use would not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding neighborhood;

    (3)    Approved measures for the removal of the use and site restoration have been required to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this title;

    (4)    The temporary use would be compatible with adjoining properties and the surrounding neighborhood, and would not alter the integrity of the applicable zoning district in which it is to be located; and

    (5)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.090 Conditions of approval.
    In approving a temporary use permit, the director may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, eliminating the saturation of an area with like uses, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, time limits, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to:

    (1)    Compliance with Chapter. Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this chapter, the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

    (2)    Compliance with Findings. Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 21.48.080 (Findings and decision) of this chapter;

    (3)    Protect Interests. Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood; and

    (4)    Acknowledgment.

    (A)   Ensure that the applicant acknowledges receipt, full understanding, and agreement with all of the conditions before issuance of the temporary use permit,

    (B)   By signing the written acknowledgment, the applicant acknowledges acceptance of the benefits of the temporary use permit and agrees to waive any right to later challenge any condition(s) imposed as unfair, unnecessary, or unreasonable. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.100 Post approval procedures.
    (a)    Procedures. Procedures relating to appeals, changes, performance guarantee, revocation (temporary use permits only require a twenty-four-hour notice for revocation), and time extensions, as identified in Chapters 21.52 through 21.64 of this title, in addition to those identified in Chapter 21.54 (Entitlement Implementation, Time Limits and Extensions) of this title, shall apply following the approval of a temporary use permit application.

    (b)    Condition of the Site Following Temporary Use.

    (1)    Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, temporary structures or other evidence of the temporary use within three days after the termination of the use, expiration of the temporary use permit, and/or revocation of the temporary use permit, whichever comes first, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this title.

    (2)    A bond or other security approved by the director may be required before initiation of the use to ensure cleanup and restoration after the use is finished.

    (3)    The director shall have the responsibility to verify that the cleanup and restoration identified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section has been completed in a satisfactory manner.

    (c)    Substantial Compliance. Once approved by the director, the design and general appearance (e.g., colors, materials, etc.) of the approved temporary improvements shall not be substantially altered. Substantial changes shall require director review and approval before construction. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.48.110 Temporary permit violations.
    It is unlawful for any owner, operator, tenant or other person in control of property within the city for which the requirements set forth in this chapter apply, to operate or maintain any activities for which a temporary use permit is required without a temporary use permit or to fail to comply with each condition of said temporary use permit or to otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1358 § 15, 2004)

Chapter 21.50 VARIANCES
21.50.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Adjustment of Standards. This chapter provides for the adjustment of the development standards identified in this title.

    (b)    Special Privileges Prohibited.

    (1)    A variance may only be granted when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, topography or other conditions, the strict application of this title denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts, or creates an unnecessary, and non-self created, hardship or unreasonable regulation which makes it obviously impractical to require compliance with the development standards.

    (2)    A variance shall not be granted that would have the effect of granting a special privilege not shared by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts, or which is contrary to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare.

    (c)    Does Not Extend to Uses.

    (1)    The power to grant variances does not extend to allowable land uses.

    (2)    Flexibility in allowable land uses is provided in Chapter 21.36 (Conditional Use Permits) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.50.020 Review authority.
    (a)    Responsibility. The applicable review authority shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove variance applications, and impose conditions necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, and necessary to make the findings required by Section 21.50.050 (Findings and decision) of this chapter.

    (b)    Applicable Authority. Variances may be granted in compliance with the following:

    (1)    Minor Variance Committee. The minor variance committee may grant minor variances, or may defer action and refer the application to the commission, in compliance with subsection  (a) of Section 21.50.030 of this chapter and state law; and

    (2)    Commission. The commission may grant major variances in compliance with subsection (b) of Section 21.50.030 of this chapter, and state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.50.030 Applicability.
    A.    Allowable Minor Variances. An application for a minor variance shall be considered by the minor variance committee, governing only the development standards identified in Table 4-2, below.

 

 

 

 

TABLE 4-2

ALLOWABLE MINOR VARIANCES

 

Types of Minor Variances Allowed

Maximum Adjustment

1. Distances between structures. A decrease in the minimum allowed distances between detached accessory structures and main structures.

10 percent

2. Fence or wall height. An increase in the maximum allowable height of a fence or wall, in compliance with 21.18.070 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).

Up to a 2 foot increase

3. Landscaping area. A decrease in the minimum landscaping area requirements.

10 percent

4. Loading. A decrease in the number of required loading spaces.

10 percent

5. Parking garages. A decrease in the minimum residential garage standards (e.g., depths and widths).

10 percent

6. Projections. An increase in the allowable projection of canopies, cornices, eaves, fireplaces, landings, masonry chimneys, overhangs, raised porches, stairways, and steps into a required setback area, in compliance with 21.18.090 (Setback Measurement and Exceptions).

10 percent

7. Setback area. A decrease in the required setback/yard areas (e.g., front, rear, and side) for structures, swimming pools/spas, and related equipment.

10 percent

8. Other standards. The Committee shall also be allowed to vary other standards including minor operational/ performance standards relating to dust, glare, hours of operation, landscaping, light, noise, etc.

10 percent

9. Required Variance. A request which exceeds the limitations identified in this Section shall require the filing of a Variance application, in compliance with 21.50.

 

 

 

    (b)    Variances. The commission may grant an adjustment from the requirements of this title governing only the following development standards:

    (1)    Development Standards. Any development standard identified in subsection (a) of this section (Minor Variances), where the requested adjustment exceeds the maximum limits for a minor variance;

    (2)    Dimensional Standards. Dimensional standards including distance-separation requirements, fence and wall requirements, landscape and paving requirements, lighting, loading spaces, parcel area, parcel dimensions, parking areas, open space, setbacks, structure heights, etc;

    (3)    Numerical Standards. Number of off-street parking spaces, loading spaces, landscaping, etc;

    (4)    Signs. Sign regulations (other than prohibited signs); and

    (5)    Other. Other standards including operational/performance standards relating to dust, glare, hours of operation, landscaping, light, noise, number of employees, etc. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.50.040 Application filing, processing and review.
    (a)    Filing. An application for a variance shall be filed with the department in compliance with Chapter 21.32 (Applications, Processing and Fees.) of this title

    (b)    Contents. The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for variance applications.

    (c)    Applicant’s Responsibility. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish the evidence in support of the findings required by the Section 21.50.050 (Findings and decision) of this chapter.

    (d)    Project Review Procedures. Each application shall be analyzed by the director to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose of this chapter.

    (e)    Notice and Hearings.

    (1)    Major Variances.

    (A)   A public hearing is required for all major variances, which shall be considered by the commission.

    (B)   A public hearing shall be scheduled once the director has determined the application complete.

    (C)   Noticing of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title.

    (2)    Minor Variances. A public hearing shall not be required for a minor variance committee’s decision on a minor variance. However, the applicant shall secure signatures from all abutting property owners. In the event that all required signatures cannot be secured, the application shall be processed in compliance with subsection (e)(1) (Major Variances) of this section (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000).

 

21.50.050 Findings and decision.
    The applicable review authority shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the decision is based, in compliance with state law. The applicable review authority may approve a variance application, with or without conditions, only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

    (1)    There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g., location, shape, size, surroundings, topography or other conditions), so that the strict application of this title denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts or creates an unnecessary and non-self created hardship or unreasonable regulation which makes it obviously impractical to require compliance with the development standards;

    (2)    Granting the Variance:

    (A)   Is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other property owners in the same vicinity and zoning district, and denied to the property owner for which the variance is sought;

    (B)   Would not adversely affect the actions, goals, objective and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

    (C)   Would not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and in the same zoning district; and

    (D)   Would not be materially detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of the city, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located.

    (3)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.50.060 Conditions of approval.
    In approving a variance, the applicable review authority:

    (1)    No Special Privileges. May impose conditions to ensure that the variance does not grant special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; and

    (2)    Compliance. May impose conditions (e.g., buffers, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to:

    (A)   Compliance with Chapter. Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this chapter, and the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

    (B)   Compliance with Findings. Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 21.50.050 (Findings and decision) of this chapter;

    (C)   Protect Interests. Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood; and

    (D)   Acknowledgment.

    (i)     Ensure that the applicant acknowledges receipt, full understanding, and agreement with all of the conditions before issuance of the variance;

    (ii)    By signing the written acknowledgment, the applicant acknowledges acceptance of the benefits of the variance and agrees to waive any right to later challenge any condition(s) imposed as unfair, unnecessary or unreasonable. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.50.070 Post approval procedures.
    (a)    Procedures. Procedures relating to appeals, changes, performance guarantee, revocation and time extensions, as identified in Chapters 21.52 through 21.64 of this title, in addition to those identified in Chapter 21.54 (Entitlement Implementation, Time Limits and Extensions), shall apply following the approval of a variance application.

    (b)    Substantial Compliance. Once approved by the applicable review authority, the design and general appearance (e.g., colors, materials, etc.) of the structure(s) shall not be substantially altered. Substantial changes shall require review authority review and approval before construction. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.52 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
21.52.010 Purpose.
    This chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of the council, commission, department, planning director and city staff in the administration of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.52.020 Planning agency defined.
    As provided by state law, the council, planning commission, planning director and planning department shall perform the functions of a planning agency. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.52.030 City council.
    The council, in matters related to the city’s planning process, shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this title, which include the following:

    (1)    Review Authority on Specified Planning Matters. Final decisions on development agreements, title amendments, general plan amendments, specific plans, zoning map amendments and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the city’s planning process;

    (2)    Appeals. The review of appeals filed from commission decisions; and

    (3)    Compliance. The above listed functions shall be performed in compliance with Section 21.32.020 (Authority for land use and zoning decisions) of this title, Table 4-1 (Review Authority), the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.52.040 Planning commission.
    (a)    Appointment. The appointment, terms, removal and the filing of vacancies of the commissioners shall be in compliance with Section 2.76.030 of this code.

    (b)    Duties and Authority. The commission shall perform the duties and functions prescribed by state law and this title, including the following:

    (1)    The review of development projects;

    (2)    The recommendation, to the council for final decisions, on development agreements, title amendments, environmental documents, general plan amendments, specific plans, zoning map amendments and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the city’s planning process;

    (3)    The investigation and preparation of an annual report to the council regarding the status of the general plan and progress in its implementation in compliance with state law; and

    (4)    The above listed functions shall be performed in compliance with Section 21.32.020 (Authority for land use and zoning decisions), Table 4-1 (Review Authority), the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.52.050 Planning director.
    (a)    Appointment. The planning director shall be appointed by the city manager in compliance with Section 2.76.101 of this code.

    (b)    Duties and Authority. The director shall:

    (1)    Have the responsibility to perform all of the functions designated by state law;

    (2)    Perform the duties and functions prescribed in this title, including the review of administrative development projects, in compliance with Section 21.32.020 (Authority for land use and zoning decisions) of this title, Table 4-1 (Review Authority), state law, the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s environmental review procedures;

    (3)    Perform other responsibilities assigned by the council, commission and city manager;

    (4)    Delegate the responsibilities of the director to department staff under the supervision of the director; and

    (5)    Serve in an advisory capacity, in compliance with state law (Map Act Section 66415). The director is charged with the responsibility of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.52.060 Development and environmental review committee (DERC).
    (a)    Membership. The development and environmental review committee (DERC) shall be composed of the following city administrators:

    (1)    The director;

    (2)    Fire chief/building services manager;

    (3)    The public works director;

    (b)    Authority. The development and environmental review committee (DERC) shall have the authority to:

    (1)    Review development projects for compliance with the title;

    (2)    Review development applications for completeness;

    (3)    Determine the level of CEQA review (i.e., exempt, negative declaration or EIR). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.52.070 Minor variance committee.
    (a)    Membership. The minor variance committee shall be composed of the following city administrators:

    (1)    The director;

    (2)    The superintendent of building and safety; and

    (3)    The public works director.

    (b)    Authority. The minor variance committee shall have the authority to review, approve or disapprove minor variances, in compliance with Chapter 21.50 (Variances) of this title. The committee may also defer action on minor variance applications and refer the item(s) to the commission for the final decision. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.52.080 Sign committee.
    (a)    Membership. The sign committee shall be composed of the following:

    (1)    Two commission members appointed by the commission; and

    (2)    The director.

    (b)    Authority. The sign committee shall have the authority to review, approve or disapprove signs permits and master sign programs. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.54 ENTITLEMENT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS AND EXTENSIONS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.54.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides requirements for the implementation or “exercising” of the entitlements identified in this title, including time limits and procedures for granting extensions of time. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.54.020 Conformance to approved plans.
    (a)    Compliance. All work performed under a building permit for which project drawings and plans have received approval by the director, commission or council shall be in substantial compliance with the approved drawings and plans, any statements (written or oral) made in support of the application, and any conditions of approval imposed by the review authority.

    (b)    Changes. Changes to an approved project shall be submitted and processed in compliance with Section 21.54.060 (Changes to an approved project) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.54.030 Effective dates.
    (a)    Entitlements/Variances. A conditional use permit, development review, home occupation permit, precise plan of design, temporary use permit or variance shall become effective on the twenty-first day following the date the decision is rendered by the applicable review authority.

    (b)    Plans/Amendments. Council actions to adopt or amend a development agreement, a specific plan, the zoning map, or this title shall become effective on the thirtieth day following the second reading by the council. An amendment to the general plan shall become effective immediately upon the council’s action.

    (c)    Issued on the effective date. Certificates and/or other entitlements shall not be issued until the effective date, provided that no appeal of the review authority’s decision has been filed, in compliance with Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.54.040 Applications deemed approved by state law.
    (a)    Applicable Provisions. An entitlement application deemed approved in compliance with state law shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this title, which shall be satisfied by the applicant before a building permit is issued or a land use not requiring a building permit is exercised or established.

    (b)    Public Hearing. The entitlement application shall be deemed approved only if the application was properly noticed in compliance with Chapters 21.32 though 21.50 and Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.54.050 Time limits and extensions.
    (a)    Time Limits.

    (1)    To ensure continued compliance with the provisions of this chapter, each approved entitlement shall expire twelve months from the date of approval, unless otherwise specified in the entitlement, if the use has not been exercised.

    (2)    Time extensions may be granted in compliance with subsection (c) of this section.

    (3)    If an entitlement has not been exercised within the established time frame, and a time extension is not granted, the provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall deem the entitlement void.

    (b)    Entitlement Implementation.

    (1)    An approved entitlement shall be exercised before its expiration. The entitlement shall not be deemed exercised until the applicant has:

    (A)   Obtained a and building permit continuous on-site construction activity including pouring of foundations, installation of utilities or other similar substantial improvements has commenced;

    (B)   Obtained a grading permit and has completed a significant amount of on-site grading, as determined by the director;

    (C)   Diligently continued the approved construction/grading activities without stopping for more than one hundred eighty days; or

    (D)   Actually implemented the allowed land use, in its entirety, on the subject property in compliance with the conditions of approval.

    (2)    Project Phasing.

    (A)   Where the entitlement provides for development in two or more phases or units in sequence, the entitlement shall not be approved until the review authority has approved a phasing plan for the entire project site.

    (B)   The applicant shall not be allowed to develop a portion of the proposed development under the original approval, and then develop the remaining portion(s) in compliance with this section, without prior review authority approval.

    (C)   Subsequent phases of an approved project shall be commenced within twelve months of the exercising of the previous phase’s entitlement or the entire project entitlement shall expire.

    (D)   If the application for the entitlement also involves the approval of a tentative map, the phasing shall be consistent with the tentative map and the entitlement shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

    (c)    Extensions of Time.

    (1)    The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the department at least thirty days before the expiration of the entitlement, together with the filing fee required by the city’s fee resolution.

    (2)    The review authority shall determine whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to exercise the entitlement.

    (3)    The burden of proof is on the applicant to establish, with substantial evidence beyond the control of the applicant (e.g., demonstration of financial hardship, legal problems with the closure of the sale of the parcel, poor weather conditions in which to complete construction activities, etc.), why the entitlement should be extended.

    (d)    Action on Expiration/Extension.

    (1)    Upon good cause shown, extensions may be approved or approved with modifications by the review authority that originally approved the entitlement, whose decisions may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title.

    (2)    The maximum number of months that an entitlement may be extended shall not exceed a total of two additional one hundred eighty-day periods (for a maximum of twelve months total) beyond the expiration of the original approval. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.54.060 Changes to an approved project.
    (a)    Application.

    (1)    A development or new land use allowed through a conditional use permit, development review, home occupation permit, precise plan of design, temporary use permit or variance shall be in substantial compliance with the approved drawings and plans, any statements (written or oral) made in support of the application and any conditions of approval imposed by the review authority, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section.

    (2)    An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for the request.

    (3)    Requested changes may involve changes to one or more conditions imposed by the review authority or actual changes to the entitlement (e.g., hours of operation, expansion of a use, etc.) as originally proposed by the applicant or approved by the review authority.

    (4)    Changes shall be approved before implementation of the changes, and may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use.

    (b)    Public Hearing. If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the review authority shall hold a public hearing on the requested change(s), and give notice, in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title.

    (c)    Minor changes. The director may authorize minor changes to an approved site plan, architecture or the nature of the approved use if the changes:

    (1)    Are consistent with all applicable provisions of this title and the spirit and intent of the original approval;

    (2)    Do not involve a feature of the project that was:

    (A)   A basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project;

    (B)   A basis for conditions of approval for the project; or

    (C)   A specific consideration by the review authority (e.g., the director, commission or council) in the approval of the entitlement.

    (3)    Do not result in an expansion of the use.

    (d)    Major Changes. Major modifications are changes to the project involving features described in subsection (c) of this section, and shall only be approved by the review authority through a new entitlement application or modification and applicable fee, processed in compliance with this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.54.070 Resubmittals.
    (a)    Resubmittals Prohibited Within Twelve Months. For a period of twelve months following the approval, disapproval or revocation/modification of a discretionary entitlement, no application for the same or substantially similar discretionary entitlement for the same site shall be filed.

    (b)    Director’s Determination. The director shall determine whether the new application is for a discretionary entitlement which is the same or substantially similar to the previously approved or disapproved entitlement. the determination of the director may be appealed to the commission, in compliance with Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title.

    (c)    Council Wavier. The council may waive the prohibition identified in subsection (a) of this section if the council finds that by reason of changed legal, physical or sociological circumstances, reconsideration would be in the best interests of the city. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.56 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND PARCELS
21.56.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Regulations. This chapter establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of legal nonconforming land uses, structures and parcels. Within the zoning districts established by this title, there exist land uses, structures and parcels that were lawful before the adoption, or amendment of this title, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted differently under the terms of this title or future amendments.

    (b)    Discourage Continuation. It is the intent of this title to discourage the long-term continuation of these nonconformities, providing for their eventual elimination, but to allow them to exist under the limited conditions identified in this chapter.

    (c)    Encourages Abatement. Generally, this chapter is intended to be administered in a manner that encourages the eventual abatement/elimination of these nonconformities.

    (d)    Amortization Program. The adoption of a reasonable amortization program ensures the eventual abatement/elimination of these nonconformities while informing the owner and the public of the date upon which the nonconformity shall be terminated. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.56.020 Definitions.
    Nonconformities are defined as follows:

    “Nonconforming parcel” means a parcel that was legally created before the adoption of this title and which does not conform to current ordinance provisions/standards (e.g., access, area or width requirements, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the parcel is located.

    “Nonconforming structure” means a structure, or a portion of the structure, that was legally altered or constructed before the adoption of this title and which does not conform to current ordinance provisions/standards (e.g., area, distance between structures, height, open space, setbacks, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the structure is located.

    “Nonconforming use” means a use of a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) or land that was legally established and maintained before the adoption of this title and which does not conform to current ordinance provisions governing allowable land uses for the zoning district in which the use is located.

    “Nonconformity upon annexation” means that nonconformities shall include a use, structure or parcel legally existing and located in the unincorporated territory and which upon annexation to the city, does not comply with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.56.030 Restrictions on nonconforming uses and structures.
    Nonconformities may be continued subject to the following provisions:

    (1)    Nonconforming Uses of Land. A nonconforming use of land may be continued, transferred or sold, provided that the use shall not be enlarged or intensified, nor be extended to occupy a greater area than it lawfully occupied before becoming a nonconforming use, except in compliance with subsection (3)(B) of this section; and

    (2)    Nonconforming Use of a Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming use may be replaced by another nonconforming use only in compliance with the following:

    (A)   The replacement use shall serve as the “new bench mark” in terms of establishing the acceptable level of nonconformity.

    (B)   A use that is less restrictive than the replacement use shall not be allowed in the future.

    (3)    Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming structure may continue to be used as follows:

    (A)   Changes to, or Expansion of, a Structure. The addition, enlargement, extension, reconstruction or relocation of a nonconforming structure, may be allowed, if the additions or improvements conform to applicable provisions of this title and the exterior limits of the new construction do not encroach further into the setbacks than the comparable portions of the existing structure.

    (B)   Findings. The addition, enlargement, extension, reconstruction or relocation of the nonconforming structure would not result in the structure becoming:

    (i)     Incompatible with other structures in the surrounding neighborhood;

    (ii)    Inconsistent with the actions, goals, objectives and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

    (iii)   A restriction to the eventual/future compliance with the applicable regulations of this title;

    (iv)   Detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of persons residing in the surrounding neighborhood; and

    (v)    Detrimental and/or injurious to property and improvements in the surrounding neighborhood.

    (C)   Parking. A nonconforming structure, rendered nonconforming due to lack of compliance with current parking standards, may undergo changes (e.g., replacement of use, expansion or modification of the structure) in compliance with subsection (3) of this section subject to the following provisions:

    (i)     Residential Uses.

    a.     A single-family use that does not conform to the parking requirements of this title shall be brought into compliance at the time additions or alterations are made that cumulatively increase the existing floor area by more than twenty-five percent, as measured over a five-year period preceding and including the proposed modification.

    b.     Additional parking spaces or driveway paving shall not be required provided the change does not result in:

    A.    An increase in the number of dwelling units within the structure; or

    B.     The elimination of the only portion of the parcel which can be used for the required/existing vehicle parking or access.

    c.     The director may waive the requirement for covered parking when a nonconforming structure is proposed for rehabilitation if the director determines that the existing structure location, parcel size or topography renders the requirement unreasonable.

    (ii)    Nonresidential Uses. A nonresidential structure not complying with off-street parking standards may undergo changes subject to the provisions and standards identified for the use or structure, except for applicable parking requirements, provided the following:

    a.     A parking analysis shall be required by the director to support a proposed parking reduction;

    b.     The proposed use has the same or lesser parking requirements as the existing or previous use;

    c.     The change does not result in the elimination of the only portion of the parcel that can be used for the required/existing vehicle parking or access; and

    d.     The proposed changes are completed in compliance with the plans and specifications for which the building permit was issued.

    (D)   Maintenance and Repairs. A nonconforming structure may undergo normal maintenance and repairs in the following manner:

    (i)     Minor normal maintenance and repairs to a nonconforming structure:

    a.     Provided no structural alterations are made and the work does not exceed twenty-five percent of the current value of the structure during any twelve-month period;

    b.     For purpose of this subsection:

    1.     The value of the structure may be calculated by one the following methods identified in subsection (b)(2)(A) of this chapter; and

    2.     The cost of any required foundation work shall not be counted within the twenty-five percent limitation.

    c.     A nonconforming publicly owned structure(s) may be reconstructed, remodeled or repaired without complying with the twenty-five percent limitation provided that the same or similar materials as used in the existing structure(s) are used in the repaired structure(s).

    (3)    Major Repairs. Major repairs to a nonconforming structure, when the cost of repairing or replacing the damaged portion(s) of the structure does not exceed fifty percent of the current value of the structure during any twelve-month period, before the damage or destruction.

    (E)   Repairs or Alterations Otherwise Required by Law Shall Be Allowed. Reconstruction required to reinforce unreinforced masonry structures or to comply with building code requirements shall be allowed without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting and code compliance are limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards and other applicable building code requirements, including, state law (e.g., Title 24, California Code of Regulations, etc.);

    (F)    Ensure Added Safety and Conformity.

    (i)     The addition, enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration of a nonconforming structure may be allowed provided the modification is necessary to ensure added safety, to reduce the fire hazard and/or to ensure aesthetic advantages through the alignment, architecture or closer conformity to surrounding allowed structures in the immediate neighborhood; and

    (ii)    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a property owner from making necessary repairs to a nonconforming structure(s) for purposes of ensuring safety for the employees, residents, tenants or visitors to the structure(s).

    4.     Nonconforming Use of a Conforming Structure.

    (A)   The nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the structure, nor shall any additions or structural alterations, except those required by law be made.

    (B)   If the nonconforming use is unlawfully expanded or extended, or discontinued in compliance with subsection (a) of Section 21.56.040 (Termination by discontinuance) of this chapter, any future use of the structure shall comply with all of the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.56.040 Loss of nonconforming status.
    (a)    Termination by Discontinuance.

    (1)    Termination of Rights. All rights to a legal nonconforming status shall terminate, regardless of the owner’s intention(s), if the nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a period of at least one hundred eighty consecutive days or a total of twelve nonconsecutive months.

    (2)    Abandonment. The determination of abandonment shall be supported by evidence, satisfactory to the director (e.g., the actual removal of equipment, furniture, machinery, structures or other components of the nonconforming use, the turning-off of the previously connected utilities or where there are no business receipts/records available to provide evidence that the use is in continual operation).

    (3)    Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status. Without further action by the city, further use of the site or structure shall comply with all of the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this title.

    (b)    Termination by Destruction.

    (1)    Involuntarily Damaged. If a nonconforming structure, or a conforming structure used for a nonconforming use, is involuntarily damaged, destroyed or demolished due to a catastrophic event (e.g., explosion, fire or other casualty, or by act of God, or by act of war), the right to continue occupancy of the nonconforming structure or to continue the nonconforming use, shall cease.

    (2)    Costs. The structure may be repaired or rebuilt and reoccupied only if the cost of repairing or replacing the damaged portion of the structure does not exceed fifty percent of the current value of the structure, immediately before the damage or destruction.

    (A)   Alternate Methods of Assessment. The value of the structure may be calculated by one the following methods:

    (i)     The current appraised value as shown on the latest county equalized assessment role;

    (ii)    The current value as established by a state licensed appraiser;

    (iii)   The current costs to construct the original structure as shown on the building department’s official records; and

    (iv)   In determining the current value, the cost of the land shall not be included.

    (B)   Timely Restoration. The restoration (reconstruction, repair or replacement) may only occur if the restoration is started within twelve months of the date of damage or destruction, and is diligently pursued to completion in compliance with this title and the city’s adopted Uniform Building Code. Otherwise, all rights to restore, in compliance with this section, are terminated.

    (C)   Termination by Operation of Law.

    (1)    Amortization Schedule.

    (A)   Commencing with the service of notice described in paragraph (B) of this subsection, all nonconformities (structures/uses) except single-family and multi-family residential structures shall be discontinued or brought into conformity with this title. The length of the amortization period shall be as provided in Table 5-1 below.

 

 

 

TABLE 5-1

AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE

 

Description of Property

Length of Amortization*

Where the property is unimproved.

One year.

Where the property is unimproved except for structures of a type for which the City Building Code does not require a Building Permit.

Three years.

Where the property is unimproved except for structures which contain less than 100 square feet of gross floor area.

Three years.

Signs.

fifteen years.

A nonconforming use conducted in a structure designed to serve a use allowed in the zoning district.

Five years.

Type IV and Type V structures (light incombustible frame and wood frame construction).

twenty-five years.

Type I and Type II structures (fire resistive) and Type III structures (heavy timber construction and ordinary masonry construction).

thirty years.

 

    *The length of amortization shall be measured from the effective date, or operative date where later, of the ordinance or amendment establishing the nonconforming status.

 

 

    (B)   Owners of property which are in receipt of an official city notice regarding the property’s nonconformity before the adoption of this title shall conform with the standards for abatement in effect at the time of original notice; and

    (C)   Any use which does not comply with this subsection shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be abated accordingly, unless an exception/extension is granted by the commission.

    (2)    Notice.

    (A)   Upon determination that the provisions of this subsection apply to a given parcel of land, the director shall send a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner as shown on the current tax assessor’s rolls, shall cause the property to be posted with a similar notice, and shall publish the notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation;

    (B)   The notice provided for in this subsection shall state the following:

    (i)     That the property in question is a nonconformity;

    (ii)    The date of abatement established in paragraph (1) of this subsection; and

    (iii)   That the date of abatement may be appealed to the commission within thirty days of the date indicated on the notice; and

    (C)   The city has no legal obligation to notify subsequent owners of the affected parcels of land.

    (3)    Appeal. The owner of any parcel upon which a nonconforming structure or use is being maintained may appeal the length and/or the classification of the amortization period described in the notice provided in compliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection above by submitting an appeal, on a form provided by the director and accompanied by any required fee in compliance with the city’s fee resolution, within thirty days of the date indicated on the notice.

    (4)    Hearing.

    (A)   Within sixty days after receipt of an appeal, the commission shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the nonconformity should be abated as indicated in the notice, or whether a time extension should be granted as provided in paragraph (8) (Extension of time) of this subsection;

    (B)   Notice of the hearing shall be provided in the same manner as the notice of abatement. In addition, notice shall be provided by mail to the owners of abutting parcels;

    (C)   The commission shall receive written and oral testimony at the hearing relating to the term of abatement. During the hearing, the owner shall be permitted to call witnesses and be represented by counsel;

    (D)   At the close of the hearing, the commission shall determine whether the nonconformity should be abated, and whether the owner of the parcel can amortize the investment in the term for abatement provided in paragraph (1) (Amortization schedule) of this subsection, and if not, what term for abatement should be provided. The burden of proof shall be upon the owner to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the owner is entitled to a longer abatement period than provided for in paragraph (1)  (Amortization schedule) of this subsection;

    (E)   In the case of a nonconforming use, the commission shall also determine whether the structure including the nonconforming use can economically be used in its present condition or can successfully be modified for a purpose allowed by the zoning district in which it is located; and

    (F)    The commission may require reasonable modifications or alterations to any nonconformity to improve the nonconformity’s appearance or compliance with this title, code or state law, except that any modification or alteration which would extend the useful life of the nonconformity is expressly prohibited.

    (5)    Decision and Order. The decision of the commission, and the findings in support thereof, shall be in the form of a written order and shall be served upon the property owner personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten days after the decision is rendered. The order shall be binding upon the owner, and the owner’s successors, heirs and assignees.

    (6)    Right of Further Appeal.

    (A)   Any interested person may appeal the decision of the commission to the council within ten days of service of the order upon the owner. the appeal hearing shall be noticed in the same manner as the original hearing before the commission;

    (B)   The appeal shall be accompanied by any documents, information and fee the director deems necessary to adequately explain and to provide proper notification for the appeal. The appeal shall outline specifically and in detail the grounds for the appeal. The council may refuse to consider issues not raised in the written appeal of the commission’s decision;

    (C)   When an appeal has been accepted, the director shall forward to the council all documents and information on file pertinent to the appeal, together with the minutes or official action of the commission and a report on the basis of the decision and the appropriateness of the appeal;

    (D)   The council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing, including all information and evidence submitted with the original application, and any additional information and evidence the appellant may submit which the council finds to be pertinent; and

    (E)   The action of the council shall be to sustain, disapprove, conditionally sustain or refer the appeal back to the commission with direction(s), all in compliance with the same requirements and procedures that were applicable to the commission.

    (7)    Recordation of Order. At the conclusion of all hearings, notice of the decision and order of the commission, or the council in the case of an appeal, shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

    (8)    Extension of Time.

    (A)   The commission may grant an extension of the time for abatement of a nonconformity where it finds that an unreasonable hardship would otherwise be imposed on the property owner; and

    (B)   The commission shall base its decision as to the length of the allowed amortization period on any competent evidence presented, including the following:

    (i)     The nature of the use;

    (ii)    The amount of the owner’s investment in improvements;

    (iii)   The convertibility of improvements to allowed uses;

    (iv)   The character of the neighborhood;

    (v)    The detriment, if any, caused to the neighborhood by continuance of the nonconforming use;

    (vi)   The amount of time needed to amortize the investment; and

    (vii)  The depreciation schedule attached to the owner’s latest federal income tax return. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.56.050 Unlawful uses and structures.
    (a)    Violations. Uses and structures which did not comply with the applicable provisions of this title or prior planning and zoning regulations when established are violations of this title and are subject to the provisions of Chapter 21.64 (Enforcement Provisions) of this title.

    (b)    Illegal Uses and Structures Prohibited. This chapter does not grant any right to continue occupancy of property containing an illegal use or structure.

    (c)    Entitlements Required. The activity shall not be lawfully allowed to continue unless/until entitlements required by this title and the this code are first obtained. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.56.060 Nuisance abatement.
    In the event that a nonconforming use or structure is found to constitute a public nuisance, appropriate action shall be taken by the city, in compliance with Chapter 8.04 of this code. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.58 PUBLIC HEARINGS
21.58.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides procedures for public hearings before the director, commission and council. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.020 Notice of hearing.
    When an amendment, appeal, entitlement or other matter requires a public hearing, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing(s) in compliance with state law.

    (1)    Contents of Notice. notice of a public hearing shall include:

    (A)   The date, time and place of the hearing, the name of the hearing body, and the phone number and street address of the department where an interested person may call or visit to receive additional information;

    (B)   A general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description, in text and/or by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing;

    (C)   A statement that persons wishing to be heard on the matter may attend and be heard; and

    (D)   If a proposed negative declaration or final environmental impact report has been prepared for the project in compliance with the city’s environmental review procedures, the notice shall include a statement that the hearing body shall also consider approval of the proposed negative declaration or certification of the final environmental impact report.

    (2)    Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter for an amendment, appeal, or entitlement shall be given as follows, as required by state law:

    (A)   Publishing. Notice shall be published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days before the hearing;

    (B)   Posting. Notice shall be posted, at least ten days before the hearing, in at least three public places in the city, in compliance with the department’s handout on public hearing requirements.

    (C)   Mailing.

    (i)     Notice shall be mailed, or delivered, at least ten days before the hearing, through the United States mails with postage prepaid, to:

    a.     The owner(s) of the property being considered or the owner’s agent, and the applicant(s);

    b.     Each local agency expected to provide schools, water, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the facilities and services may be significantly affected;

    c.     All owners and tenants of real property as shown on the county’s latest equalized assessment roll within a five hundred-foot radius of the subject parcel; and

    d.     Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the director.

    (ii)    The five hundred-foot radius shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the subject parcel to the exterior boundaries of the neighboring parcels, without reference to structures existing on either parcel(s).

    (3)    Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the director may provide additional notice with content or using a distribution method as the director or commission determines is necessary or desirable (e.g., use of a greater radius for notice, on the Internet, etc.). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.030 Notice of decision commission.
    (a)    Action. The commission shall announce and record the decision at the conclusion of the scheduled hearing.

    (b)    Decision. The decision shall contain applicable findings, any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed reasonable and necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of the city. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.040 Finality of decision by commission.
    The decision of the commission is final unless appealed in compliance with Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.050 Recommendation by commission.
    At the conclusion of a public hearing on a proposed adoption or amendment of a development agreement, this title, the general plan, a specific plan or the zoning map the commission shall forward a written recommendation, including all required findings, to the council for final action. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.060 Notice of decision council.
    (a)    Action. For applications requiring council approval, the council shall announce and record its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing.

    (b)    Decision. The decision shall contain the findings of the council, any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed reasonable and necessary to mitigate impacts and protect the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare of the city. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.070 Continuance of the hearing.
    (a)    May Continue Hearing. If a hearing cannot be completed on the scheduled day, the presiding review authority member, before the adjournment or recess of the hearing, may continue the hearing by publicly announcing the date, time and place to which the hearing will be continued.

    (b)    Notice not Required. Additional notice for the continued hearing shall not be required.

    (c)    Applicant Requested Continuance. A continuance requested by the applicant or appellant shall be accompanied by a fee in compliance with the city’s fee resolution. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.080 Mailing of the notice of decision.
    A notice of the decision, recommendation, any applicable conditions of approval and the reporting/monitoring requirements shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.58.090 Permanent record.
    A summary of all pertinent evidence offered at the public hearing(s) held in compliance with chapter, and the names of persons testifying, shall be recorded and filed with the application as part of the department’s official records. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.60 APPEALS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1563. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.60.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes procedures for the following:

    (1)    Commission’s Review. The commission’s review of a decision rendered by the director;

    (2)    Council’s Review. The council’s review of a decision rendered by the director or commission; and

    (3)    Other. The filing of an appeal by other than the commission or council, of a decision rendered by the director or commission. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.60.020 Commission’s review.
    (a)    Review. The commission may choose to review a decision rendered by the director.

    (b)    Discussion.

    (1)    A member of the commission may request the opportunity to discuss any decision previously rendered.

    (2)    A majority vote of the commission is required to initiate an appeal of the decision.

    (c)    Appeal. Once the vote to initiate an appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing by the director. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.60.030 Council’s review.
    (a)    Review. The council may choose to review a decision rendered by the director or commission.

    (b)    Discussion.

    (1)    A member of the council may request the opportunity to discuss any decision previously rendered.

    (2)    A majority vote of the council is required to initiate an appeal of the decision.

    (c)    Appeal. Once the vote to initiate an appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing by the city clerk.

    (d)    Decision Final. The decision of the council on the appeal shall be final and shall become effective upon adoption of the resolution by the council. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.60.040 Review authority.
    An appeal filed by other than the council or commission, shall be heard by the following review authorities:

    (1)    Director Appeals. A determination or decision rendered by the director may be appealed to the commission; and

    (2)    Commission Appeals. A decision rendered by the commission may be appealed to the council. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.60.050 Application filing, processing and review of, and action on appeals.
    (a)    Timing and Form of Appeal.

    (1)    Appeal applications shall be submitted in writing and filed with the department or city clerk, as applicable to the review authority, on a city application form, before 5:00 p.m. of the twentieth day following the date the decision was rendered by the director or the commission, as applicable.

    (2)    An appeal by the original applicant from the decision of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk before 5:00 p.m. of the twentieth day following the date the decision was rendered by the commission. The council, by unanimous consent, may waive the twenty-day requirement, and allow the filing of a late appeal.

    (3)    Any interested and aggrieved party owning land within a five hundred-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the property under consideration may file an appeal before 5:00 p.m. of the twentieth day following the date the decision was rendered.

    (4)    Appeal applications addressed to the commission shall be filed with the department, while appeals addressed to the council shall be filed with the city clerk.

    (5)    The appeal application shall:

    (A)   Specifically state the pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal;

    (B)   Be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for appeal applications; and

    (C)   Be accompanied by the filing fee established by the city’s fee resolution.

    (b)    Delay of Proceedings. Filing of an appeal shall delay all proceedings associated with the matter subject to the appeal (e.g., issuance of a building or grading permit, etc.), pending the city’s final action on the appeal.

    (c)    Scheduling the Hearing. The director shall schedule the hearing within forty-five days of the filing of the appeal or the adoption by the commission or council of a motion to review an action, in compliance with Section 21.58.020 (Notice of Hearing) of this title and prepare a written report for consideration by the applicable review authority identified in subsection (a) of this section.

    (d)    Withdrawal. An appeal may not be withdrawn nor dismissed before the scheduled public hearing without approval of the director.

    (e)    Joining an Appeal.

    (1)    Only those persons who file an appeal within the twenty-day appeal period in compliance with subsection (a) of this section, shall be considered appellants of the matter under appeal.

    (2)    Any person who wishes to join an appeal shall follow the same procedures for an appellant in compliance with subsection (a) of this section.

    (3)    A person(s) shall not be allowed to join an appeal after the end of the twenty-day appeal period.

    (f)    Action. The appeal hearing shall be considered a hearing de novo and the review authority may consider any issue(s) associated with the appeal, in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal.

    (1)    When reviewing an appeal the review authority may:

    (A)   By resolution, affirm, affirm in part or reverse the action, the determination, or decision that is the subject of the appeal;

    (B)   Adopt additional conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary, and may even address issues or concerns that go beyond the subject of the appeal; or

    (C)   Disapprove the land use entitlement approved by the previous review authority, even though the appellant only requested a modification or elimination of one or more conditions of approval.

    (2)    If new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the commission or council, may, but shall not be required to, refer the matter to the director or commission, as applicable, for further consideration.

    (g)    Findings. When reviewing an appeal the review authority shall adopt findings in support of the intended action on the appeal. The nature of the findings shall be in compliance with the findings adopted by the original review authority (e.g., Conditional Use Permit—Chapter 21.36, Precise Plan of Design—Chapter 21.44, Variance—Chapter 21.50, etc.).

    (h)    Mailing of Resolution. The director or city clerk, as applicable to the level of review authority, shall mail a copy of the resolution to the appellant, the applicant (if not the appellant), the commission, and the council after the decision is rendered. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.62 REVOCATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
21.62.010 Purpose.
    (a)    Procedures. This chapter provides procedures for securing punitive revocation or modification of previously approved applications and entitlements.

    (b)    Revocations. The city’s action to revoke an entitlement shall have the effect of terminating the entitlement and denying the privileges granted by the original approval.

    (c)    Modifications.

    (1)    The city’s action to modify an entitlement, rather than to revoke it, shall have the effect of changing the operational aspects of the entitlement.

    (2)    The changes may include the operational aspects related to buffers, duration of the entitlement, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.62.020 Procedures for revocation or modification.
    (a)    Hearings and Notice.

    (1)    The council shall hold a public hearing to revoke or modify an entitlement application granted in compliance with the provisions of this title.

    (2)    At least ten days before the public hearing (except for temporary use permits that only require a twenty-four-hour notice), notice shall be delivered in writing to the owner as shown on the county’s equalized assessment rolls, to the project applicant, if not the owner of the subject property, and to the occupant(s) at the address of the subject property, in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title.

    (3)    The notice shall not be deemed complete unless it identifies, in general terms, the grounds of the proposed revocation or modification.

    (b)    Council’s Action.

    (1)    Land Use Entitlement. A land use entitlement may be revoked or modified by the council if any one of the following findings of fact can be made:

    (A)   Circumstances under which the entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original entitlement can no longer be made in a positive manner, and the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare require the revocation;

    (B)   The entitlement was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application, or in the applicant’s testimony presented during the public hearing, for the entitlement;

    (C)   One or more of the conditions of the entitlement have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated;

    (D)   The improvement/use authorized in compliance with the entitlement is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation or statute of the city, state or federal governments; or

    (E)   The improvement/use authorized in compliance with the entitlement has become detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare, or the manner of operation constitutes or is creating a nuisance.

    (2)    A minor variance or variance may be revoked or modified by the council if any one of the following findings of fact can be made, in addition to those identified in subsection (b)(1) of this section:

    (A)   Circumstances under which the entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original entitlement can no longer be made in a positive manner, the public convenience, health, interest, safety or welfare require the revocation, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the minor variance or variance; or

    (B)   One or more of the conditions of the minor variance or variance have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the minor variance or variance. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.64 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
21.64.010 Citation authority.
    Those persons designated by the planning director shall have the authority to make citation arrests pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of the this code. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.64.020 Zoning violations.
    No person, firm or corporation shall alter, enlarge, erect, construct or maintain any use, structure or property contrary to the provisions of this code, including this title, or any applicable condition of approval and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this code, in addition to the other penalties provided herein which shall be deemed to be cumulative. (Ord. 1358 § 16, 2004; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.64.025 Public nuisance.
    In addition to the misdemeanor penalty provided above, violations of this chapter shall also be a public nuisance. (Ord. 1358 § 17, 2004)

 

21.64.027 Stop work orders.
    (a)    Construction in violation of this code or a condition imposed on an entitlement shall be subject to a “stop work order.”

    (b)    Violation of a “stop work order” shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1358 § 18, 2004)

 

21.64.030 Remedies are cumulative.
    (a)    Cumulative—Not Exclusive. All remedies contained in this title for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this code, including this title and other related ordinances of the city, shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of city, county, state or federal law.

    (b)    Other Remedies. If a person is found guilty and convicted of an infraction or misdemeanor for the violation of any provision of this code, the conviction shall not prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy(ies) to correct the violation. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.64.040 Inspection.
    (a)    Access to Premises.

    (1)    Pre-Approval. Every applicant seeking an application, entitlement or any other action in compliance with this code, including this title and other related ordinances of the city, shall allow appropriate city officials access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application.

    (2)    Post-Approval. If the entitlement or other action is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate city officials access to the premises to determine continued compliance with the approved entitlement and/or any conditions of approval.

    (b)    Effect of Refusal. Failure to allow inspections shall automatically make all applications, entitlements and approvals void.

    (c)    Interference Prohibited. Any person refusing admittance to, impeding, obstructing or interfering with any appropriate city official identified in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.66 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
21.66.010 Purpose.
    The provisions of Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 constitute the city of Fountain Valley subdivision ordinance. These provisions are intended to supplement, implement and work with the Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66410 et seq. of the California Government Code, hereafter referred to as the “Map Act”. These chapters are not intended to replace the Map Act, and must be used in conjunction with the Map Act in the preparation of subdivision applications, and the review, approval, and construction of proposed subdivisions. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.66.020 Authority.
    Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 are adopted in compliance with the Map Act as a local ordinance as the term is used in the Map Act. All provisions of the Map Act and future amendments to the Map Act not incorporated in Chapter 21.66 through 21.84 shall, nevertheless, apply to all subdivision maps and proceedings under these chapters. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.66.030 Applicability.
    (a)    Subdivision Approval Required. Subdivision of an existing parcel into two or more parcels shall require approval by the city in compliance with the provisions of Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title. In general, the procedure for subdivision first requires the approval of a tentative map, and then the approval of a parcel map (for four or fewer parcels) or a final map (for five or more parcels) to complete the subdivision process. The tentative map review process is used to evaluate the compliance of the proposed subdivision with the standards of Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title, and the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision design. Parcel and final maps are precise engineering documents that detail the location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries in an approved subdivision and, after approval, are recorded in the office of the county recorder.

    Table 6-1 (Review Authority) identifies the city official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application (e.g., tentative map, parcel map or final map) required by this title.

    The Map Act determines when the filing and approval of tentative maps, parcel maps and final maps are required, and identifies circumstances when certain subdivisions are exempt from these requirements.

    (b)    Conflicts with Map Act. In the event of any conflicts between the provisions of this title and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control.

    (c)    Compliance with Other Regulations Required. The approval or conditional approval of a subdivision map shall not authorize or be deemed to authorize an exception or deviation from any zoning regulation in this title, or as an approval to proceed with any development in violation of other applicable provisions of this code or other applicable ordinances or regulations of the city.

 

 

TABLE 6-1

REVIEW AUTHORITY

 

Type of Entitlement or Decision

Chapter

Subdivision Review Committee

Planning Commission

City

Council

Final Maps

21.72

 

 

Final

Lot Line Adjustments

21.76

Final (1)

Appeal

Appeal

Parcel Maps

21.72

 

 

Final

Tentative Parcel Maps

21.70

Final (1)

Appeal

Appeal

Tentative Tract Maps

21.70

Recommend

Final

Appeal

Notes:     The subdivision review committee may defer action and refer the item(s) to the commission for the final decision.

(Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

 

 

21.66.040 Responsibility for administration.
    The planning director and city engineer are authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 and applicable provisions of the Map Act for subdivisions within the city, except as otherwise provided by Chapters 21.66 through 21.84. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.66.050 Advisory agency.
    (a)    Composition of Advisory Agency. An advisory agency as described in the Map Act is hereby established. The advisory agency shall consist of: the subdivision review committee, comprised of the planning director, public works director, building official, city manager and the planning commission.

    (b)    Authority and Duties. The advisory agency shall perform the following duties:

    (1)    The subdivision review committee shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all lot line adjustments, tentative parcel maps and applications for waiver of parcel map requirements;

    (2)    The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all tentative tract maps;

    (3)    Review and make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions in adjacent cities, and in the unincorporated areas of Orange County in compliance with the provisions of the Map Act when the advisory agency has elected to do so;

    (4)    Perform additional duties and exercise additional authorities as prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act (Map Act) and Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.66.060 Enforcement.
    (a)    Notification of Director. Any city officer or employee who has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Map Act or Chapters 21.66 through 21.64 of this title, shall immediately notify the director.

    (b)    Notice of Violation. Upon the director receiving information from any source that real property has been divided in violation of the Map Act or Chapters 21.66 through 21.64 of this title, the city shall take the actions described in Map Act Section 66499.36.

    (c)    Permit Issuance Prohibited. No commission, officer or employee of the city shall issue any permit or certificate or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property within the city if it is known or suspected that the property was divided, or resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Map Act or Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.66.070 Filing fees.
    Fees to cover the direct costs associated with establishing, adopting and implementing these procedures shall be set by separate council resolution. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.66.080 Applications deemed approved.
    Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65956 or Map Act Article 2, Chapter 3 (Government Code Sections 66452 et seq.), shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any building permits or land use permits are issued. Parcel or final maps filed for record after their tentative map is deemed approved shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of Chapters 21.66 through 21.84 of this title and the Map Act, including Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.68 SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
21.68.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction or installation of public improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new usable parcels that are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.020 Applicability of design and improvement standards.
    The requirements of this chapter apply to subdivisions, and applicable requirements of this title, as follows:

    (1)    Extent of Required Improvements. All subdivisions shall provide the improvements required by this chapter, and any additional improvements required by conditions of approval.

    (2)    Applicable Design Standards—Timing of Installation. The subdivider shall construct all on- and off-site improvements according to standards approved by the city engineer. No final or parcel map shall be presented for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city for the work.

    (3)    Subdivision Improvement Standards—Conditions of Approval. The applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this chapter and any other improvements and dedications required by the review authority in compliance with Section 21.70.070 (Tentative map approval or disapproval) of this title, shall be described in conditions of approval adopted for each approved Tentative Map (Section 21.70.080). The design, construction or installation of all subdivision improvements shall comply with the requirements of the city engineer.

    (4)    Conflicting Provisions. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this title, or other provisions of this code, the most restrictive provisions shall control. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control.

    (5)    Extent of Improvements Required—Four or Fewer Parcels. As required by Map Act Section 66411.1, improvements required for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements and the construction of reasonable offsite and onsite improvements for the parcels being created.

    (6)    Oversizing of Improvements. At the discretion of the review authority, improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may also be required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may be required to be dedicated to the city, in compliance with Article 6, Chapter 4 of the Map Act. In the event that oversizing is required, the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of Map Act Sections 66485 et seq., including the reimbursement provisions of Map Act Section 66486. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.030 Access—Circulation—Streets.
    Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide adequate access from each new parcel to a city street, in compliance with this section.

    (1)    General Access and Circulation Requirements. The subdivider shall provide a comprehensive street system, designed and constructed in compliance with this section the city’s improvement standards, and with the circulation element of the general plan.

    (A)   Street design shall provide for safe vehicular operation at a specified design speed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

    (B)   Public streets shall be required when:

    (i)     The street is shown as an arterial or collector in the circulation element of the general plan, or any other specific or precise plan;

    (ii)    The street will be used by the general public as a through access route; or

    (iii)   A public street is necessary for special needs including bus routes, public service access, bicycle routes and pedestrian access.

    Private streets are allowed only in compliance with subsection (6) of this section.

    (2)    Alternative Standards. The review authority may consider and approve proposed access and street design solutions that differ from the provisions of this section, and the city’s improvement standards where deemed necessary to properly address the characteristics of adjacent land uses and/or anticipated traffic volumes or to maintain neighborhood character.

    (3)    Access to Subdivision. Every subdivision shall be designed to have access to a city street. Access shall be provided by:

    (A)   The subdivision abutting a city street, where the length of the subdivision along the street, the street right-of-way and the width of the right-of-way will accommodate the construction of all road improvements required by this section; or

    (B)   The subdivision being connected to a city street by a non‑exclusive right-of-way easement for street, utility and appurtenant drainage facilities purposes, where the easement shall be:

    (i)     Offered for dedication;

    (ii)    Unencumbered by any senior rights that might serve to restrict its proposed use; and

    (iii)   Of a width and location to accommodate the construction of all improvements required by this section and the city’s improvement standards.

    (4)    Access to New Parcels. Parcels within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access as follows.

    (A)   City Street Access Required. Each parcel within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access by being located on an existing city street or a new city street designed and improved in compliance with subsection (3) of this section, or to a private street if allowed by subsection (6) of this section. If a subdivision block has more than twenty homes or a length of more than five hundred feet, it shall be accessed by two or more streets. Exception: The city council may approve a large subdivision with only one access street if there is on record at the time of approval of a final map, a precise plan indicating a future street extension that will permit a second street to the subdivision.

    (B)   Frontage Roads. When lots are proposed to front on a major arterial or state highway, the review authority may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a service or frontage road separate from the arterial or highway.

    (5)    Design and Improvement of Proposed Streets. New streets proposed or required within a new subdivision or adjacent to a new subdivision shall be located and designed as follows, and in compliance with the city’s improvement standards.

    (A)   Alignment—Intersections—Curves. The alignment of streets shown on a tentative map shall be:

    (i)     Consistent with the circulation element of the general plan, where applicable;

    (ii)    Located to be in alignment with existing adjacent streets by continuation of their centerlines, or by adjustments by curves; and

    (iii)   Located so that all streets intersect at an angle as near to ninety degrees as feasible.

    The centerline curve radii of all proposed streets shall be subject to approval by the city engineer.

    (B)   Right-of-Way and Surfaced Width. The width of the right-of-way and improved surface of streets shown on a tentative map shall be as provided by Table 6-1, except where other standards are approved by the city engineer.

 

 

TABLE 6-1

REQUIRED STREET WIDTHS

 

Street Type

Minimum Right-of-Way Width

Minimum Paved Travel Way

Arterial

 

 

Major Highway

120 feet

6 lanes/divided highway

Secondary Highway

80 feet

4 lanes/divided highway

Primary

100 feet

4 lanes/divided highway

 

 

Minimum centerline radius 1,200 ft.

Local

60 feet

34 to 36 ft. roadway

Industrial

80 feet

60 ft. roadway

 

 

 

    (C)   Corners. All block corners and “T” alley intersections shall be rounded or cut off as approved by the city engineer. At the intersections of local streets, the corner property line radius shall be designed so that it does not reduce the parkway width of the street or highway below city standard when using a minimum curb radius of twenty-five feet.

    (D)   Access to Unsubdivided Property. When a proposed subdivision abuts vacant land that is designated by the general plan for future subdivision and development, the review authority may require that streets to be constructed with the proposed subdivision be extended to the boundary of the property to provide access to the future development.

    (E)   Improvements to Existing Streets. When an existing city street provides access to, passes through, or is contiguous with a proposed subdivision, the review authority may require dedication of additional right-of-way and/or improvements in compliance with the general plan, if it determines that the proposed subdivision will create the need for the improvements.

    (F)    Cul-De-Sac Streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall have a sixty foot right-of-way, improved with a thirty-four-foot or thirty-six-foot roadway, as determined by the city engineer. The centerline radius shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty feet. The length of street from a centerline intersection to a radius point of a cul-de-sac shall not be more than five hundred feet. The minimum terminal curb radius shall be designed so that the parkway strip will not be reduced. Exception: Cul-de-sac streets complying with the length restriction herein may have fifty-six feet of right-of-way and thirty-six feet of improved roadway.

    (G)   Service Road. A service road shall be separated from an arterial highway by a raised median strip. The service road shall provide the primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties.

    (H)   Partial Width Streets. Any land intended to be a part of the ultimate width of a street, which is adjacent to the boundary of any lot or subdivision shall have a width of one-half of the ultimate street width as determined by the city engineer, plus one eight-foot lane. The approval of any final map indicating a partial street along a parcel boundary shall not be granted unless the council approves a precise plan for the project.

    (I)    Paving. All streets shall be graded and paved to the lines and grades approved by the city engineer, in accordance with any applicable geotechnical report, and in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications.

    (J)    Curbs and Sidewalks. Concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed upon all streets in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications. The location of sidewalks shall conform to that of adjacent areas and shall be at the discretion of the review authority.

    (6)    Private Roads. Private roads are allowed as provided in this section. Private roads shall not be permitted except where the commission determines that a private street system will adequately serve the proposed subdivision, will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining properties and will not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in the vicinity of the subdivision.

    (A)   Maintenance Requirements. Provisions satisfactory to the city engineer and city attorney shall be made for lot owners association or other organization to assume responsibility for the maintenance of private roads and ownership of the street right-of-ways of any subdivision.

    (B)   Design and Improvement Standards. Private roads shall be designed and improved as set forth in subsections (2) and (3) of this section.

    (C)   Security and Conditions. The commission and/or council may require any guarantees and conditions it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this title pertaining to private roads. Private roads and easements providing access to parcels within a subdivision shall be located and shown on the parcel or final map.

    (D)   Offer of Dedication. All proposed private roads shall be subject to irrevocable offers of dedication to the city on the applicable parcel or final map, or separate instrument submitted to the city along with the parcel or final map.

    (7)    Alternative Circulation Systems. Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide rights-of-way for pedestrian paths, bikeways and multiple use trails consistent with the circulation element of the general plan and/or other applicable general plan provisions. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.050 Fire hydrants.
    The subdivider shall install resilient wedge seat valves, extensions and risers extending thirty inches above the finished grade of the gutter for fire hydrants, of sizes and at locations approved by the fire chief and city engineer. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.060 Grading.
    Prior to the issuance of building permits, a grading plan prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer shall be submitted to the city engineer. Grading plans shall show the elevations of the natural ground at all lot corners, the finished grade at corners, the finished pad elevation, finished floor elevations, rates and directions of all drainage swales and finished sidewalk elevations at all front lot lines and existing topographic elevations and drainage direction one hundred feet outside the boundary of proposed project area and/or map.

    (1)    Minimum Slopes. The minimum rate of grade of all drainage swales on lots shall be one-half of one percent.

    (2)    Pad Elevation—Residential. All building sites shall comply with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood zone requirements, and the following standards. In the event of any conflict between the following requirements and FEMA requirements, the FEMA requirements shall control.

    (A)   The building pad elevation of residential lots shall be established at a minimum of ten inches above the design sidewalk elevation at the low side of the lot.

    (B)   The finished floor elevation of slab floor houses shall be a minimum of sixteen inches above the sidewalk elevation.

    (C)   The pad elevation of all residential lots shall be established at least one foot above the design water surface in an adjacent storm drain channel or the ponded surface in an adjacent sump for collection of storm drain waters. An exception may be permitted in the case of a tract served by a storm drain pump station.

    (3)    Drainage Scheme. No inter-lot or cross drainage shall be permitted. All lots shall drain their own water to the public street, public drainage facility or natural drainage course without passing through or across an adjacent lot. No lot shall drain water over the bank of a flood control channel.

    (4)    Grading Exceptions. Specific exceptions to the above requirements may be authorized at the discretion of the city engineer. Exceptions are considered to be the case of an individual lot or at most a tier of lots and are not to be construed as extending to an entire subdivision.

    (5)    As-Built Grading Plan. Upon completion of grading operations the owner shall furnish to the city engineer two prints and a digital submittal of an as-built grading plan prepared by the owner’s engineer. In case no grading plan had been prepared and no grading permit had been granted, the subdivider shall furnish to the city engineer two prints of a map signed by the owner’s engineer and certifying that no fills had been made on the lots or else two prints of a map prepared by the owner’s engineer showing the location and depth of all compacted or uncompacted fills that had been made. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.070 Erosion and sediment control.
    New subdivisions shall be designed so that all proposed grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control measures in compliance with applicable city and National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.080 Monuments.
    The subdivider shall install monuments in compliance with Chapter 21.82 (Surveys and Monuments) of this title, and the Map Act. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.090 Parcel and block design.
    The size, shape and arrangement of proposed parcels shall comply with this section, or with any general plan policy, applicable specific plan requirement, other title provisions, or other municipal code provisions applicable to a proposed subdivision.

    (1)    Parcel Area. The minimum area for new parcels shall be as required by Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, except that the minimum lot area requirements of these chapters shall not apply to condominiums and condominium conversions, planned developments, townhouses, zero lot line and similar projects, but shall apply to the creation of the original parcel or parcels that are the location of the common interest development.

    (2)    Dimensions. The dimensions of new parcels shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title or as otherwise required by the review authority.

    (3)    Driveway Standards. Proposed parcels shall be designed to accommodate driveways designed in compliance with Section 21.22.080 (Driveways) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.100 Public utilities and utility easements.
    Each approved parcel shall be provided connections to public utilities, including electricity, gas, water, sewer and telecommunications services, which shall be installed as part of the subdivision improvements as provided by this section, and by Sections 21.68.120 (Sewage disposal) and 21.68.150 (Water supply) of this chapter.

    (1)    Underground Utilities Required. Utilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground, as follows. These requirements do not apply to utility lines which do not serve the area being subdivided.

    (A)   When Undergrounding Is Required. All existing and proposed utility distribution facilities (including electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision shall be installed underground. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts, shall also be underground, unless otherwise approved by the review authority based on the recommendations of the city engineer.

    The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for facility installation. The review authority may waive the requirements of this section if topographical/ soil or any other conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical.

    (B)   Location of Installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights‑of‑way or along a lot line, subject to appropriate easements being provided if necessary. When installed within street rights‑of‑way, their location and method of installation, insofar as it affects other improvements within the street right‑of‑way, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.

    (2)    Utility Easements—Minimum Width. The minimum width of easements for public or private utilities, sanitary sewers or water distribution systems shall be determined by the review authority based on the recommendations of the city engineer for city facilities, and the recommendations of the applicable utility company, for public or private utilities.

    (3)    Overhead Lines. When overhead utility lines are approved by the review authority, easements shall be located at the rear of lots where practical, and along the side of lots where necessary. Where practical, the poles supporting overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alley or easement designated exclusively for drainage purposes.

    (4)    Timing of Installation. All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets, shall be constructed before the streets are surfaced. Connections to all underground utilities, water lines and sanitary sewers shall be laid to sufficient lengths to avoid the need for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.120 Sewage disposal.
    Each parcel within an approved subdivision shall be provided a connection to the city’s sewage collection, treatment and disposal system, in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.130 Street lighting.
    All proposed subdivisions shall provide street lighting facilities designed and constructed in compliance with the city’s improvement standards and specifications. The subdivider shall also pay the street light maintenance and energy fee required by Section 21.78.040 of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.140 Storm drainage.
    Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the drainage area. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development; off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement. Any easement for drainage or flood control shall be improved as specified by the city engineer. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.68.150 Water supply.
    Each approved parcel shall be served by the city’s water system. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.70 TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
21.70.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval or disapproval of tentative maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.020 Tentative map preparation—Application contents.
    Tentative map submittal shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the department. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.030 Tentative map filing—Initial processing.
    (a)    General Filing and Processing Requirements. Tentative map applications shall be submitted to the department for processing, be reviewed for completeness and accuracy, referred to affected agencies, reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) where applicable and evaluated in a staff report in compliance with Chapter 21.32 (Application Filing and Processing, Fees) of this title.

    (b)    Referral to Affected Agencies. In addition to the procedures outlined in Chapter 21.32 (Application Filing and Processing, Fees) of this title, a tentative map application shall be referred to affected agencies as required by the Map Act, as well as any other city department, county, state or federal agency, or other individual or group that the director believes may be affected by the subdivision, or may have information useful to the city about issues raised by the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.040 Evaluation of application.
    After completion of the initial processing and the application being deemed complete in compliance with Section 21.32.050 of this title, the director shall:

    (1)    Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this title, the general plan, any applicable specific plan and the Map Act;

    (2)    Determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision complies with the findings in Section 21.70.070 (Tentative map approval or disapproval) of this chapter; and

    (3)    Prepare a staff report to the review authority in compliance with Section 21.70.060 (Tentative map public hearings) of this chapter, describing the conclusions of the evaluations of the map, and recommending to the review authority the approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.050 Review and decision.
    (a)    Review Authority. Tentative parcel map applications (tentative map applications proposing four or fewer parcels) shall be reviewed, and approved or disapproved by the subdivision review committee. Tentative tract map applications (tentative map applications proposing five or more parcels) shall be reviewed, and approved or disapproved by the commission.

    (b)    Review Procedure. After review of a tentative map in compliance with Section 21.70.040 of this chapter, the applicable review authority shall take the following actions.

    (1)    The commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed tentative tract map in compliance with Section 21.70.060 (Tentative map public hearings) of this chapter, and consider the recommendations of the director, any agency comments on the map and any public testimony. No public hearing is required for a tentative parcel map unless an environmental impact report (EIR) has been prepared.

    (2)    The review authority shall evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this title, the general plan, any applicable specific plan and the Map Act. The review authority’s evaluation shall be based on the staff report, information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report (EIR), where applicable, and any public testimony received.

    (3)    Within thirty days after the filing of the report and recommendation of the director with the review authority, approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map.

    Approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall be granted only after the review authority has first made all findings required by Section 21.70.070 (Tentative map approval or disapproval) of this chapter. The review authority may impose conditions of approval in compliance with Section 21.70.080 (Conditions of approval) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.060 Tentative map public hearings.
    When a public hearing is required by this title for a tentative map, the hearing shall be scheduled and conducted in compliance with this section, with public notice provided in compliance with Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title.

    (1)    Scheduling of Hearing—Action. A public hearing on a tentative map shall be scheduled, and action shall be taken, within fifty days after the tentative map application has been deemed complete.

    (2)    Distribution of Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map shall be mailed to the subdivider (and each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a condominium conversion (Chapter 21.74 of this title) at least three days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the review authority. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.070 Tentative map approval or disapproval.
    In order to approve a tentative map and conditions of approval, or to disapprove a tentative map, the review authority shall first make the findings required by this section. In determining whether to approve a tentative map, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the department determined that the application was complete in compliance with Section 21.70.030 (Tentative map filing—Initial processing) of this chapter, except where the city has initiated changes to the general plan, a specific plan or this title, and provided public notice as required by Map Act Section 66474.2.

    (1)    Required Findings for Approval. The review authority may approve a tentative map only when it shall first find that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan, and that none of the findings for denial in subsection (3) of this section can be made. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as well as the entire subdivision, including any parcel identified as a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Section 66424.6.

    (2)    Supplemental Findings. In addition to the findings required for approval of a tentative map by subsection (1) of this section, the review authority shall not approve a tentative map unless it can also make the following findings, when they are applicable to the specific subdivision proposal.

    (A)   Construction of Improvements. It is in the interest of the public health and safety, and it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area, to require the construction of road improvements within a specified time after recordation of the parcel map, where road improvements are required.

    (B)   Condominiums. Any applicable findings required by Section 21.74.030 of this title for condominium conversions.

    (C)   Dedications or Exactions. Any applicable findings required by Section 21.78.030 (Findings required for dedications or exactions) of this title, if dedications or exactions are required.

    (D)   Waiver of Parcel Map. The findings required by Section 21.72.030 (Waiver of parcel map) of this title, if waiver of a parcel map has been requested with the tentative map application.

    (3)    Findings Requiring Denial. A tentative map shall be denied if the review authority makes any of the following findings:

    (A)   The proposed subdivision including design and improvements is not consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan;

    (B)   The site is not physically suitable for the type or proposed density of development;

    (C)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

    (D)   The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health or safety problems;

    (E)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. This finding may not be made if the review authority finds that alternate easements for access or use will be provided, and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This finding shall apply only to easements of record, or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the review authority to determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

    (F)    The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board;

    (G)   A preliminary soils report or geological hazard report indicates adverse soil or geological conditions and the subdivider has failed to provide sufficient information to the satisfaction of the city engineer or the review authority that the conditions can be corrected in the plan for the development; or

    (H)   The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all applicable provisions of this title and any other applicable provisions of this code and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.080 Conditions of approval.
    along with the approval of a tentative Map, the adoption of conditions of approval shall occur in compliance with this Section, provided that all conditions shall be consistent with the requirements of the Map Act.

    (a)    Mandatory Conditions.  The review authority shall adopt conditions of approval that will:

    (A)   Require that parcels, easements or rights-of-way be provided for streets, water supply and distribution systems, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage facilities, solid waste disposal and public utilities providing electric, gas and communications services, as may be required to properly serve the subdivision. Easements for public utilities shall be limited to those needed to provide service to present and future development;

    (B)   Mitigate or eliminate environmental problems identified through the environmental review process, except where a statement of overriding consideration has been adopted in compliance with CEQA;

    (C)   Carry out the specific requirements of Chapters 21.68 (Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements) and 21.80 (Improvement Plans and Agreements) of this title;

    (D)   Secure compliance with the requirements of this title and the general plan; and

    (E)   Require that any designated remainder parcels not be subsequently sold or further subdivided unless a certificate or conditional certificate of compliance is obtained in compliance with the Map Act; and

    (F)    Require the dedication of additional land for bicycle paths, local transit facilities, (including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, etc.), sunlight easements and school sites, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3, where required by the General Plan.

    (2)    Optional Conditions.  The review authority may also require as conditions of approval:

    (A)   The waiver of direct access rights to any existing or proposed streets;

    (B)   The reservation of sites for public facilities, including schools, and fire stations, libraries and other public uses in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 4;

    (C)   Time limits or phasing schedules for the completion of conditions of approval, when deemed appropriate; or

    (D)   Any other conditions deemed necessary by the review authority to achieve compatibility between the proposed subdivision, its immediate surroundings and the community, or to achieve consistency with city ordinances or state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.090 Effective date of tentative map approval.
    The approval of a tentative map shall become effective for the purposes of filing a parcel or final map, including compliance with conditions of approval, immediately after the adoption of the resolution of decision by the review authority. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.100 Changes to approved tentative map or conditions.
    A subdivider may request changes to an approved tentative map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a parcel or final map in compliance with this section. Changes to a parcel or final map after recordation are subject to Section 21.72.130 (Amendments to recorded maps) of this title.

    (1)    Limitation on Allowed Changes. Changes to a tentative map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section include major adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements, and reductions in the number of approved lots (but no increase in the number of approved lots) and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by subsection (4) of this section. Other changes shall require the filing and processing of a new tentative map.

    (2)    Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the department, using the forms furnished by the department, together with the following additional information:

    (A)   A statement identifying the tentative map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are requested and any facts that justify the changes; and

    (B)   Any additional information deemed appropriate by the department.

    (3)    Processing. Proposed changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative map, except as otherwise provided by this section.

    (4)    Findings for Approval. The review authority shall not modify the approved tentative map or conditions of approval unless it shall first find that the change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by subsections (1) and (2) of Section 21.70.070 of this chapter can still be made:

    (A)   There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval;

    (B)   There has been a change of circumstances related to the original approval; and

    (C)   A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this title.

    (5)    Effect of Changes on Time Limits. Approved changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by Section 21.70.120 (Expiration of approved tentative map) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.110 Completion of subdivision process.
    (a)    Compliance with Conditions—Improvement Plans. After approval of a tentative map in compliance with this chapter, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the conditions and the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare, file and receive approval of improvement plans in compliance with Chapter 21.80 (Improvement plans and agreements—Dedications) of this title, before constructing any required improvements.

    (b)    Parcel or Final Map Preparation—Filing and Recordation.

    (1)    A Parcel Map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded in compliance with Chapter 21.72 (Parcel maps and final maps), of this title to complete the subdivision, unless a parcel map has been waived in compliance with Section 21.72.030 (Waiver of parcel map) of this title.

    (2)    A final map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 21.72 (Parcel maps and final maps) of this title, to complete the subdivision. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.120 Tentative map expiration and extensions of time.
    The processing of a tentative map shall be completed, and an approved tentative map shall be subject to the time limits for expiration and procedures for extension as follows.

    (1)    Expiration of Approved Tentative Map. An approved tentative map is valid for twenty-four months after its effective date (Section 21.70.090 of this chapter), except as otherwise provided by Map Act Sections 66452.6, 66452.11, 66452.13, or 66463.5. At the end of twenty-four months, the approval shall expire and become void unless:

    (A)   A parcel or final map, and related bonds and improvement agreements, have been filed with the city engineer in compliance with Chapter 21.72 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps) of this title; or

    (B)   An extension of time has been granted in compliance with subsection (2) of this section.

    Expiration of an approved tentative map or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall not be reactivated unless a new tentative map application is filed.

    (2)    Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps. When a subdivider has not completed all tentative map conditions of approval and filed a parcel or final map with the city within the time limits established by subsection (1) of this section, time extensions may be granted as follows. Extension requests shall be in writing and shall be filed with the department on or before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee.

    (A)   Tentative Maps and Vesting Tentative Maps. The review authority may grant extensions to the initial time limit up to a maximum total of three years, only after finding that:

    (i)     There have been no changes to the provisions of the general plan, any applicable specific plan or this title applicable to the project since the approval of the tentative map;

    (ii)    There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the general plan or other standards of this title apply to the project; and

    (iii)   There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, roads or schools so that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project.

    (B)   Tentative Maps with Multiple Final Maps. Where a subdivider is required to expend more than one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars on improvements as specified in Map Act Section 66452.6 and multiple final maps are filed covering portions of a single approved tentative map, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the tentative map by an additional thirty-six months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later, provided that the total of all extensions shall not extend the approval of the tentative map more than ten years from its approval. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.70.130 Vesting tentative maps.
    This section establishes procedures to implement the vesting tentative map requirements of state law, Map Act Sections 66498.1 et seq.

    (1)    Applicability. Whenever this title requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, provided that the vesting tentative map is prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this section. A vesting tentative map may be filed for either residential, commercial or industrial developments.

    (2)    Procedures for Processing a Vesting Tentative Map. A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and, shall be processed in the same manner as set forth by this chapter as a tentative map, except as follows.

    (A)   Application Content. The vesting tentative map shall include the following information in addition to that required by Section 21.70.020 (Tentative map preparation—Application contents) of this chapter:

    (i)     Title. The vesting tentative map shall be prepared with the words “Vesting Tentative Map” printed conspicuously on its face; and

    (ii)    Intended Development. The vesting tentative map application shall include accurately drawn, preliminary floor plans and architectural elevations for all buildings and structures intended to be constructed on the property after subdivision.

    (B)   Findings for Approval. The approval of a vesting tentative map shall not be granted unless the review authority first determines that the intended development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of filing, in addition to all other findings required for tentative map approval by Section 21.70.070 (Tentative map approval or disapproval) of this chapter.

    (3)    Expiration of Vesting Tentative Map. An approved vesting tentative map shall be subject to the same time limits for expiration as are established for tentative maps by Sections 21.70.120 et seq. (Tentative map time limits) of this chapter.

    (4)    Changes to Approved Map or Conditions. The subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map or conditions of approval at any time before the expiration of the vesting tentative map. An amendment request shall be considered and processed through the same procedures as a new application, in compliance with this section and in compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act Section 66498.2.

    (5)    Development Rights Vested.

    (A)   The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development of the subdivided lots in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards (excluding fees) as provided in Map Act Section 66498.1.

    (B)   If Map Act Section 66474.2 is repealed, approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the map is approved or conditionally approved.

    (C)   Subsequent land use permits, building permits, extensions of time or other entitlements filed on parcels created by the subdivision may be conditioned or denied only if the review authority determines that:

    (i)     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; or

    (ii)    The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

    (D)   Fees charged for building or land use permits, filed after the approval of a vesting tentative map shall be as required at the time the subsequent permit applications are filed, including any related utility or development impact fees (e.g., sewer/water hookup fees, traffic mitigation fees, etc.). Application contents shall be as required by ordinance requirements in effect at the time the subsequent application is filed.

    (6)    Duration of Vested Rights. The development rights vested by this section shall expire if a parcel map or final map is not approved before the expiration of the vesting tentative map in compliance with Sections 21.70.120 et seq. (Tentative map time limits) of this chapter. If the parcel or final map is approved and recorded, the development rights shall be vested for the following periods of time.

    (A)   An initial time period of twenty-four months from the date of recordation of the parcel or final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

    (B)   The initial twenty-four months shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if processing exceeds thirty days from the date the application is accepted for processing as complete.

    (C)   The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial twenty-four months expires. Application for an extension shall be submitted to the department and shall be accompanied by the required fee. The council shall approve or deny any request for extension.

    (D)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (6)(1) and (6)(2) of this section, the vested rights shall continue until the expiration of the building permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.72 PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
21.72.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval and recordation of parcel and final maps, consistent with the Map Act. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.020 Parcel maps.
    As required by Sections 21.66.030 (Applicability), and 21.70.110 (Completion of subdivision process) of this title, a parcel map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a parcel map is waived as set forth in Section 21.72.030 of this chapter. A parcel map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 21.72.040 through 21.72.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.030 Waiver of parcel map.
    A subdivider may request waiver of a parcel map, and the waiver may be granted, in compliance with this section.

    (1)    When Waiver Is Allowed. Waiver of a parcel map may be requested by a subdivider and granted by the review authority for an approved subdivision where the following circumstances exist, and the boundaries of the original parcel have been previously surveyed and a map recorded, and are certain as to location.

    (A)   The proposed division of land complies with the requirements of the city as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply protection, environmental protection and all other requirements of the Map Act and any applicable provisions of this code.

    (B)   The original, unsubdivided parcel contains less than five acres, each proposed parcel abuts upon a maintained public street and no dedications and improvements are required by this title; or

    (C)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has approved access to a maintained public street; or

    (D)   The parcel(s) have approved access to a public street which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has city approval for street alignments or width; or

    (E)   Each parcel has a minimum gross area of forty acres, or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or

    (F)    The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision in compliance with Map Act Section 66418.2; or

    (G)   The subdivision or interests in the subdivision have been created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition or other civil judgments or decrees; or

    (H)   The subdivision results from the conveyance of land or interest to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.

    (1)    Required dedications or offers of dedication shall be made by deed.

    (2)    Application Processing and Approval. A request for waiver of parcel map shall be submitted with the tentative map application, together with the required filing fee. The waiver request shall be processed and acted upon concurrently with the tentative map application. The review authority may grant a requested waiver if:

    (A)   The proposed tentative map satisfies all findings required for approval by Section 21.70.070 (Tentative map approval or disapproval) of this title; and

    (B)   The proposed subdivision complies with all applicable requirements of the Map Act and this title as to lot area, improvement and design, drainage, flood control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection.

    (3)    Expiration of Waiver. An approved waiver of parcel map shall be subject to the same time limits and opportunities for extension of time as the accompanying tentative map, in compliance with subsections (1) and (2) of Section 21.70.120 of this title, and subsection (4) of this section, following.

    (4)    Completion of Subdivision. A subdivision for which a parcel map has been waived shall be completed by the subdivider satisfying any tentative map conditions of approval, including any conditions providing for the payment of fees, and by the city engineer filing with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided and a plat map showing the division. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.040 Parcel map form and content.
    A parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified, registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Parcel map submittal shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the department. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.050 Filing and processing of parcel maps.
    (a)    Filing with the City Engineer. The parcel map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 21.72.040 of this chapter shall be concurrently submitted to the city engineer and the county surveyor’s office. The parcel map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act.

    (b)    Review of Parcel Map.

    (1)    The city engineer shall determine whether all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act have been complied with; the county surveyor shall determine whether the map is accurate and technically correct.

    (2)    The city engineer shall obtain verification from the department that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

    If the parcel map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data if the tentative map has not expired. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.060 Parcel map approval.
    After the parcel map has been determined to be in compliance and technically correct, the city engineer shall forward the parcel map to the council for approval. After action by the council to approve the parcel map, the city engineer shall transmit the map to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Map Act Section 66450. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.070 Final maps.
    As required by Section 21.66.030 (Applicability) of this title, a final map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of five or more parcels. A final map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 21.72.080 through 21.72.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.080 Final map form and content.
    A final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Final map submittal shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by the department. A final map submittal shall also include a digital copy of the final map, prepared using computer software and standards specified by the city engineer. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.090 Filing and processing of final maps.
    (a)    Filing with City Engineer. The final map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 21.72.080 of this chapter shall be concurrently submitted to the city engineer and the county surveyor. The final map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act.

    (1)    Review of Final Map.

    (A)   The city engineer shall determine whether all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act have been complied with; the county surveyor shall determine whether the map is accurate and technically correct.

    (B)   The city engineer shall obtain verification from the department that the final map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

    If the final map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes prior to tentative map expiration and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data.

    (c)    Multiple Final Maps. The subdivider may file multiple final maps on the approved tentative map if the subdivider either included a statement of intention with the tentative map or, if after the filing of the tentative map, the director approved the request.

    (d)    Tract Map Checking Fee. In addition to all other fees, charges and deposits required by law, the subdivider shall pay a map-checking fee upon submitting a final map of a subdivision. The amount of the fee shall be in compliance with the council’s fee resolution. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.100 Final map approval.
    After the parcel map has been determined to be in compliance and technically correct, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer’s certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act Section 66442, and forward the final map to the council for action, as follows.

    (1)    Review and Approval by Council. The council shall approve or disapprove the final map at its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, unless that time limit is extended with the mutual consent of the city engineer and the subdivider.

    (A)   Criteria for Approval. The council shall approve the final map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this title that were applicable at the time that the tentative map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map.

    (B)   Waiver of Errors. The council may approve a final map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this title or the map act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, when the council finds that the failure of the map is a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the council does not materially affect the validity of the map.

    (C)   Approval by Inaction. If the council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension, and the map conforms to all applicable requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the city clerk shall certify its approval on the map.

    (2)    Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the final map, the council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the final map. If the city council rejects the offer of dedication, the offer shall remain open and may be accepted by the city council at a later date in compliance with Map Act Section 66477.2. Any termination of an offer of dedication shall be processed in compliance with Map Act Section 66477.2 and the street vacation procedure.

    (3)    Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this title, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed at the time of approval of the final map, the council shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city as specified in Map Act Section 66462, and Section 21.80.040 (Improvement agreements and security) of this title, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map.

    (4)    Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the council, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the city clerk and county surveyor’s office shall transmit the final map to county recorder for filing, in compliance with Section 21.72.120 (Recordation of maps) of this chapter.

 

21.72.110 Supplemental information sheets.
    In addition to the information required to be included in parcel maps and final maps (Sections 21.72.020 and 21.72.070 of this chapter, respectively), additional information may be required to be submitted and recorded simultaneously with a final map as required by this section.

    (1)    Preparation and Form. The additional information required by this section shall be presented in the form of additional map sheets, unless the director determines that the type of information required would be more clearly and understandably presented in the form of a report or other document. The additional map sheet or sheets shall be prepared in the same manner and in substantially the same form as required for parcel maps by Section 21.72.040 (Parcel map form and content) of this chapter.

    (2)    Content of Information Sheets. Supplemental information sheets shall contain the following statements and information:

    (A)   Title. A title, including the number assigned to the accompanying parcel or final map by the city engineer, the words “Supplemental Information Sheet”;

    (B)   Explanatory Statement. A statement following the title that the supplemental information sheet is recorded along with the subject parcel or final map, and that the additional information being recorded with the parcel or final map is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing and is not intended to affect record title interest;

    (C)   Location Map. A location map, at a scale not to exceed one inch two thousand feet. The map shall indicate the location of the subdivision within the city;

    (D)   Areas Subject to Flooding. Identification of all lands within the subdivision subject to periodic inundation by water;

    (E)   Soils or Geologic Hazards Reports. When a soils report, or geological hazard report has been prepared, or a seismic hazard report has been prepared in compliance with State Seismic Hazard Zone requirements, the existence of the report shall be noted on the information sheet, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report; and

    (F)    Information Required by Conditions of Approval. Any information required by the approval body to be included on the supplemental information sheet(s) because of its importance to potential successors in interest to the property, including any other easements or dedications. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.120 Recordation of maps.
    (a)    At the time of filing of a parcel or final map with the county recorder, the subdivider shall present to the county recorder evidence that, at the time of filing the map, the parties consenting to the filing are all parties having vested fee interest in the property being subdivided and are parties required to sign the certificate described in Map Act Section 66445(e).

    (b)    The county recorder will review and act upon parcel and final maps filed with that office as set forth in Article 6, Chapter 3 of the Map Act and other applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.72.130 Amendments to recorded maps.
    A recorded parcel or final map shall be modified to correct errors in the recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision only as set forth in this section.

    (1)    Corrections. In the event that errors in a parcel or final map are discovered after recordation, or that other corrections are necessary, the corrections may be accomplished by either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, in compliance with Article 7, Chapter 3 of the Map Act. For the purposes of this section, “errors” include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the parcel or final map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions or any other map error or omission as approved by the city engineer and county surveyor that does not affect any property right, including but not limited to lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Other corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the proper character or location of any monument that was incorrectly shown, or that has been changed.

    (2)    Changes to Approved Subdivision. In the event that a subdivider wishes to change the characteristics of an approved subdivision, including but not limited to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with Section 21.80.040 (Improvement agreements and security) of this title, a new tentative and parcel or final map shall be filed and approved as required by Section 21.66.030 (Applicability) of this title. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.74 CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
21.74.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes requirements for applications for the creation of a condominium or other common interest development (including a community apartment project, planned development or stock cooperative, as provided by California Civil Code Section 1351) simultaneously with the construction of a new structure, and the conversion of an existing structure to a condominium, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.74.020 Condominiums.
    When a residential structure is proposed at the time of construction as a condominium or other common interest development, a tentative map for the project shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or denied in the same manner in compliance with Chapter 21.70 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing) of this title. Chapter 21.72 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps) of this title determines whether a parcel or final map shall also be filed. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.74.030 Condominium conversions.
    A condominium conversion is the conversion of real property to a common interest development as defined by Civil Code Section 1351.

    (1)    Approvals Required. A conversion shall require the approval of a tentative map, and parcel or final map, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived in compliance with Map Act Sections 66428(b) or 66428.1, for the conversion of a mobile home park. If a parcel map is waived, a tentative map shall still be required.

    (2)    Application Filing and Processing. A tentative map for a condominium conversion shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner as set forth in Chapter 21.70 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing) of this title, except as otherwise provided by the following provisions of this section.

    (3)    Application Contents. Condominium conversion applications shall include the same information and materials as tentative map applications, except for conversions of residential projects, which shall also include the following information and materials.

    (A)   Tentative Map. The tentative map for a condominium, community apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative need not show the buildings or the manner in which the airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided. However, the applicant shall provide an illustration of how division will occur to enable verification of the accuracy of the legal descriptions on deeds for the transfer of ownership of the units.

    (B)   Verification of Stock Cooperative Vote. If the development being converted to a condominium is a stock cooperative, the application shall also include verification of the vote required by Map Act Section 66452.10.

    (C)   Relocation Assistance Program. A program proposed by the applicant that will assist tenants displaced through the conversion in relocating to equivalent or better housing.

    (D)   Vacancy Rate Assessment. An assessment of the vacancy rate in multi-family housing within the city.

    (E)   Mobile Home Park Conversion Impact Report. If the development being converted to a condominium is a mobile home park, the application shall also include the report required by Map Act 66427.4.

    (3)    Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map for the condominium conversion (Section 21.74.030 of this chapter) shall be provided the subdivider and each tenant of the subject property at least three days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the commission or council.

    (4)    Public Notice. The following notice shall be provided in addition to that required by Chapter 21.58 (Public Hearings) of this title:

    (A)   Tenant Notice. The subdivider shall give notice to all existing or prospective tenants as set forth in Map Act Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9, and shall provide the department satisfactory proof that the notice was given; and

    (B)   Public Hearing Notice. Notice of the public hearing(s) on the tentative map shall be provided to all tenants of the subject property, as required by Map Act Section 66451.3.

    (5)    Approval of Conversion—Required Findings.

    (A)   Time Limit—Stock Cooperatives. The approval or disapproval of the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative shall occur within one hundred twenty days of the application being found complete in compliance with Section 21.32.050 (Initial application review) of this title. The one hundred twenty-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city.

    (B)   Conversion Findings—Residential Projects. Approval of a tentative or final map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative shall not be granted unless the findings set forth in Map Act Section 66427.1 are first made.

    (6)    Completion of Conversion. The filing, approval and recordation of a parcel map or final map in compliance with Chapter 21.72 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps) of this title shall be required to complete the subdivision process, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived for the conversion of a mobile home park in compliance with Map Act Section 66428(b). (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.76 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS AND PARCEL MERGERS
21.76.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides procedures for the preparation, filing, processing and approval or denial of lot line adjustment applications, consistent with the policies of the general plan and the requirements of Map Act Section 66412(d). This chapter also provides procedures for voluntary parcel mergers. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.76.020 Applicability.
    (a)    As provided by Map Act Section 66412(d), the lot line adjustment procedure is for the purpose of relocating lot lines between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. For the purposes of this chapter, an “adjacent parcel” is one that directly touches at least one of the other parcels involved in the adjustment.

    (b)    Parcels combined by encumbrances or encroachments of existing structures shall be considered a single original parcel for purposes of an adjustment in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.76.030 Adjustment application and processing.
    A lot line adjustment application shall be prepared, filed and processed as provided by this section.

    (1)    Application Content. A lot line adjustment application shall include all information and other materials required by the department.

    (2)    Processing. Lot line adjustment applications shall be submitted to the department and shall be processed in compliance with the procedures specified by Chapter 21.32 (Applications, Processing and Fees) of this title. No environmental review shall be required, in compliance with the CEQA Guidelines. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.76.040 Approval or denial of adjustment.
    The subdivision review committee shall determine whether the parcels resulting from the adjustment will conform with the applicable provisions of this title. The county surveyor shall determine the technical accuracy of the documents. The subdivision review committee may approve, conditionally approve or deny the lot line adjustment in compliance with this section. Decisions made by the subdivision review committee may be appealed to the commission in compliance with Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title.

    (1)    Required Findings. A proposed lot line adjustment shall be denied if the subdivision review committee finds any of the following:

    (A)   The adjustment will have the effect of creating a greater number of parcels than exist before adjustment;

    (B)   Any parcel resulting from the adjustment will conflict with any applicable regulations of this title; or

    (C)   The adjustment will result in an increase in the number of nonconforming parcels.

    (2)    Conditions of Approval. In approving a lot line adjustment, the subdivision review committee shall adopt conditions only as necessary to conform the adjustment and proposed parcels to the requirements of this title and Title 18 (Building Code) of this code, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.76.050 Completion of adjustment.
    Within twelve months after approval of the lot line adjustment process shall be completed in compliance with this section through the recordation of a deed or record of survey, after all conditions of approval have been satisfied.

    (1)    Completion by Deed. A lot line adjustment shall not be effective or finally completed until a grant deed is signed by the record owners and has been recorded. The applicant shall concurrently submit deeds to the city engineer and county surveyor’s office for review and approval in compliance with subsection (1) of this section (Review and Approval), before recordation of the grant deed. The legal descriptions provided in the deeds shall be prepared by a qualified registered civil engineer, or a licensed land surveyor licensed or registered in the state.

    (2)    Completion by Record of Survey. If required by Business and Professions Code Section 8762 et seq., a lot line adjustment shall not be effective or final until a record of survey has been checked by the city engineer and county surveyor’s office and recorded by the county recorder. Where not required, a lot line adjustment may also be completed by record of survey in compliance with this subsection at the option of the applicant.

    (3)    Review and Approval by City Engineer. The city engineer and county surveyor’s office shall:

    (A)   Examine the deeds to ensure that all record title owners and lien holders have consented to the adjustment;

    (B)   Verify that all conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed and that the deeds are in substantial compliance with the lot line adjustment as approved by the review authority;

    (C)   Verify that the property owners have either obtained partial reconveyances from any mortgagor or other lien holder for any portion of a parcel being transferred to an adjacent parcel, and that any liens covering the adjacent property have been modified to cover the newly created larger parcel;

    (D)   If satisfied that the deeds comply with the above requirements, place an endorsed approval upon the deeds; and

    (E)   After approval of the legal descriptions, assemble the deeds and return them to the applicant for recordation.

    (4)    Expiration. The approval of a lot line adjustment shall expire and become void if the adjustment has not been completed as required by this section within twelve months of approval. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.76.060 Parcel mergers.
    (a)    Merger not Required. Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of this title or the Map Act shall not merge by virtue of the fact that the contiguous parcels are held by the same ownership. No further proceedings under this title shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, except as provided by this chapter.

    (b)    Processing of Requested Merger. Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the city may approve the merger of the property in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.20 3/4. The request shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by data and documents as required by the city engineer’s and county surveyor’s offices.

    (A)   Review Authority. The city engineer and county surveyor’s office shall have the authority to review and approve proposed parcel mergers, except that council review and approval shall be required for a proposed merger associated with a project that has not been previously considered by the commission.

    (B)   Conditions of Approval. In approving a merger, the city may impose reasonable conditions. The reasonableness of conditions imposed by the city engineer may be appealed within ten days of written notice of the conditions to the council in compliance with Chapter 21.60 (Appeals) of this title.

    (C)   Completion of Merger. Upon approval, a notice of lot merger shall be filed with the county recorder. The form and content of the notice shall be as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.78 DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS
21.78.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes standards for subdivider dedications of land or payment of fees, in conjunction with subdivision approval. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.020 Applicability.
    (a)    Compliance Required. All proposed subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of this chapter for dedications, reservations or the payment of fees.

    (b)    Conditions of Approval. The requirements of this chapter as they apply to a specific subdivision shall be described in conditions of approval adopted by the review authority for the tentative map. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.030 Findings required for dedications and exactions.
    The review authority may require any of the dedications or exactions described in this chapter through conditions of approval of a proposed tentative map only after first making findings which:

    (1)    Identify the purpose for the dedication or exaction; and

    (2)    Demonstrate that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the dedication or exaction and the characteristics and impacts of the subdivision from which the dedication or exaction is required.

    The above findings are not required for the taxes and fees imposed by Section 21.78.040 (Street light maintenance and energy fee) of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.040 Street light maintenance and energy fee.
    Prior to approval of a parcel or final map, the subdivider shall pay the city a subdivision street light maintenance and energy fee per streetlight installed in the amount established by the council as a condition of tentative map approval. The collected fee shall be placed in the general fund. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.050 School site dedications.
    (a)    Dedication Requirement. In compliance with Map Act Section 66478, a subdivider may be required to dedicate land as the review authority determines to be necessary for adequate elementary school facilities for the residents of the subdivision. Dedication may be required only if the subdivider and/or successors in interest to the property:

    (1)    Have owned the land being subdivided for less than ten years before filing the tentative map; and

    (2)    Develop, or complete the development, of a subdivision of more than four hundred dwelling units within a single school district, within a period of three years or less.

    (b)    Tentative Map Approval. If any school district within the city responds to the referral of the tentative map application with a report to the city describing the land the district deems necessary and suitable to provide adequate elementary school service to residents of the proposed subdivision, the review authority shall require the dedication of land as a condition of approval of the tentative map. As required by Map Act Section 66478, the dedication requirement shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible, or exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedures of the State Allocation Board.

    (c)    Timing of Dedication. The required dedication may occur before, concurrently with, or up to sixty days after the filing of a final map on any portion of the subdivision. If the school district accepts the dedication, the district shall pay the subdivider the amounts required by Map Act Section 66478, and shall record the certificate required by Map Act Section 66478.

    (d)    Termination of Dedication Requirement. The requirement of dedication shall automatically terminate unless, within thirty days after the requirement is imposed by the review authority, the school district makes a binding commitment to the subdivider agreeing to accept the dedication at any time before the construction of the first four hundred dwelling units. Upon acceptance of the dedication, the school district shall repay to the subdivider and/or successors the costs specified in Business and Professions Code Section 11525.2.

    (e)    Judicial Review. Any person who is aggrieved by or fails to agree to the reasonableness of any requirement imposed in compliance with this section may bring a special proceeding in the Superior Court in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.37.

    (f)    Reversion of Land—Repurchase. Should the school district find itself unable to accept the dedication for reasons other than specified in the commitment with the subdivider, the dedicated land shall revert to the subdivider. If the dedication is accepted and the school district within ten years from the date of acceptance offers the property or any substantial part thereof for public sale, the subdivider shall have the first option to repurchase the property for the price paid by the district, plus a sum equal to the amount of property taxes which would have been paid during the period of public ownership. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.060 Reservations of land for public facilities.
    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the city may require the subdivider to reserve sites appropriate in area and location for fire stations, libraries or other public uses, pay an in-lieu fee or both at the option of the city in compliance with this section.

    (1)    Standards for Reservation of Land.

    (A)   Location of Land. Where a fire station, library or other public use is shown in the general plan or applicable specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as determined by the city in compliance with the standards in the applicable plan.

    (B)   Configuration. The reserved area shall be of a size and shape that will permit the balance of the property to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The land to be reserved shall be in multiples of streets and parcels that will permit an efficient division of the reserved area if it is not acquired within the period determined by subsection (2) (Procedure for Reservation of Land) of this section.

    (2)    Procedure for Reservation of Land. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the parcel or final map enter into a binding agreement with the subdivider to acquire the reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless a longer time is authorized by mutual agreement.

    (3)    Purchase Price of Reserved Land. The purchase price shall be the market value of the land at the time the tentative map is filed, plus the property taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintaining the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

    (4)    Termination of Reservation. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement as described in subsection (2) (Procedure for Reservation of Land) of this section, the reservation shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.070 Park land dedications and fees.
    (a)    Purpose. This section provides for the dedication of land and/or the payment of fees to the city for park and recreational purposes as a condition of the approval of a tentative map. This Section is enacted as authorized by the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 4 of the Map Act, also known as the “Quimby Act.”

    (b)    Applicability.

    (1)    Land Dedication and/or Fee Payment Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate land and/or pay a fee in compliance with this section for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreation facilities to serve the subdivision.

    (2)    Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to industrial or commercial subdivisions, condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added, or to any other subdivisions exempted by Map Act Section 66477.

    (c)    Amount of Parkland Required. The amount of acreage required to be dedicated by a residential subdivider for park and recreational purposes shall be based upon the number of dwelling units expected in the subdivision. The required dedication shall be computed using the following formula:

 

X = .005(UP)

 

Where:

 

X =  Amount of parkland required, in acres.

U =  Total number of approved dwelling units in the subdivision.

P =   3.4 for attached single-family dwellings;

2.9 for attached single-family (townhouse) dwellings, duplexes, and multi-family dwellings containing four or fewer dwelling units;

2.1 for multi-family dwellings containing five or more units; and

2.0 for mobile homes.

 

    (d)    Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land. If the entire parkland obligation for a proposed residential subdivision is not satisfied by dedication in compliance with subsection (c) of this section, the subdivider shall pay a fee to the city in lieu of dedication, as a condition of tentative map approval. The fee shall equal the parkland obligation derived from the formula in subsection (c) of this section, less the amount of parkland, if any, offered for dedication by the subdivider, times the average per-acre fair market value for the appropriate park planning area.

    For purposes of determining the required fee, the term “fair market value” shall mean the market value of the land as determined by the staff of the city, and approved by the commission or council, prior to or at tentative map approval. If the subdivider objects to the valuation, the subdivider, at his/her own expense, may obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser approved by the city whose appraisal may be accepted by the city if found reasonable. Fair market value may be determined by mutual agreement of the city and subdivider; however, decisions of the city as to fair market value shall be final and conclusive.

    (e)    Criteria for Requiring Dedication and Fees. In subdivisions of over fifty lots, the city may require the subdivider to dedicate both land and pay a fee, as follows:

    (1)    Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

    (A)   The parks, recreation and open space element of the general plan, master plan of parks and any applicable specific plans, and the compatibility of dedication with those plans;

    (B)   Topography, geology, access, size, shape and the location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

    (C)   Feasibility of dedication; and

    (D)   Availability of previously acquired park property.

    (2)    Fees Only. Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions of fifty parcels or less, except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds fifty dwelling units, dedication of land may be required even though the number of actual parcels may be less than fifty.

    (3)    Procedure for Determining Land or Fee. The review authority shall determine whether the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay in-lieu fees or provide a combination of both, at the time of tentative map approval. The determination of the review authority shall be based on a report and recommendation from the director. The recommendation by the director and the action of the review authority shall consider the factors in subsection (e)(1) of this section, and shall include the following:

    (A)   The amount of land required;

    (B)   Whether a fee shall be charged in lieu of land;

    (C)   Whether land and a fee shall be required, and/or that a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation facilities;

    (D)   The location and suitability of the park land to be dedicated or use of in‑lieu fees; and

    (E)   The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

    The determination of the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

    (4)    Formula for Land and Fees. When both land dedication and fee payment are required, they shall be subject to the following formula:

    (A)   When only a portion of the land to be subdivided has been identified by the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or city parks plan as the site for a local park, that portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes, and a fee computed as provided by subsection (d) of this section shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated by subsection (c) of this section.

    (B)   When a major part of the local park or recreational site has been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, the remaining portion shall be dedicated, and a fee computed as provided by subsection (d) of this section shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land that would otherwise have been required to be dedicated by subsection (c) of this section. The fees shall be used for the improvement of the existing park or recreational facility serving the subdivision.

    (5)    Credit for Improvements. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements on dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any installed equipment shall be a credit against the required fees or land.

    (6)    Credit for Private Recreation or Open Space. Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision, and will be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed seventy-five percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the review authority finds all of the following:

    (A)   Yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of the private open space;

    (B)   The private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyances or restrictions;

    (C)   The use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants, which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city;

    (D)   The proposed private open space is usable for active recreation; and

    (E)   Facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial compliance with the provisions of the resource management element and master plan of parks.

    (f)    Suitability of Land to Be Dedicated. Each park site proposed for dedication in compliance with this section shall be physically suited for the intended use. Land which is made part of a park site for subdivision design purposes, but which is physically unsuited for park use, shall not be considered when calculating the area of the park site provided in compliance with this section. The park space provided shall be calculated from the road rights-of-way and interior property lines abutting the site, and not from any abutting roadway centerline. If the council determines that any of the land proposed to be dedicated is not suitable for park use, it may reject all or any portion of the land offered, and in that event the subdivider shall instead pay a fee in compliance with subsection (d) of this section.

    (g)    Conveyance of Land—Payment of Fees. Real property being dedicated for park purposes shall be conveyed by the parcel or final map in fee simple absolute, to the city by the subdivider, free and clear of all encumbrances except those which, in the opinion of city attorney, will not interfere with use of the property for park and recreational purposes, and which the council agrees to accept. The amount of required fees shall be deposited with the city at the time of submittal of a parcel or final map. The fees shall be held by the city until the map is recorded, or the time for recordation expires. The subdivider shall provide all fees and instruments required to convey the land, and title insurance approved by the city attorney in favor of the city in an amount equal to the value of the land.

    (h)    Use of Collected Fees: Fees collected in compliance with this section shall be used only for the purpose of providing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the proposed subdivision. Any fees collected shall be committed within five years after payment, or issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.080 Right-of-way dedications.
    (a)    Offers of Dedication Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication in fee simple of all land within the subdivision that is determined by the review authority to be needed for public and private streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights; drainage; public and private greenways; scenic easements, public utility easements and any other necessary public and private easements.

    (b)    Improvements. The subdivider shall construct or agree to construct all improvements approved or required for the subdivision, including access rights and abutters’ rights, in compliance with the city’s improvement standards.

    (c)    Rights-of-Way—Generally. Rights‑of‑way shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required improvements. In addition, where parcels front on a city-maintained road of insufficient width, or when the existing right‑of‑way is not deeded, the subdivider shall dedicate right‑of‑way sufficient for the ultimate facility.

    (d)    Limited Access Designation. When vehicular access rights shall be offered for dedication to the city by appropriate certificate on the title sheet and a note stating, “ALL VEHICULAR ACCESS RIGHTS DEDICATED TO THE CITY OF FOUNTAIN VALLEY” shall be lettered along the highway adjacent to the lots affected on the final map.

    (3)    Bicycle Paths. If the approved subdivision contains two hundred or more parcels, any subdivider who is required to dedicate roadways to the public, shall dedicate additional land for bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision.

    (f)    Transit Facilities. Dedications in fee simple or irrevocable offers of dedication of land within the subdivision will be required for local transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing paths and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if:

    (1)    The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown in the general plan; and

    (2)    The review authority finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be available to the subdivision.

    (G)   Alternative Transportation Systems. Whenever the subdivision falls within an area designated for the development of bikeways, hiking or equestrian trails in the general plan, parks and recreation or bikeways master plans, applicable specific plan, or implementing legislation, the subdivider shall dedicate land as is necessary to provide for these ways.

    (h)    Underground Water Rights. The subdivider shall dedicate to the city on the final map all rights to subsurface water, without the right to surface entry for purposes of developing said water. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.78.090 Median beautification fee.
    (a)    Purpose. In order to implement the goals and objectives for the construction of a median system in the city and to improve community aesthetics to benefit new development, certain public median improvements must be constructed. The council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development’s fair share of improvements.

    (b)    Applicability. A median beautification fee is established for new developments within corporate city limits. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities and describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments.

    (c)    Use of Funds. The revenue raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:

    (1)    Pay for the future construction of facilities described in the resolution or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

    (2)    Reimburse developers who have been required or allowed to install listed facilities that are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. A developer may apply to the council for a reduction or adjustment to the fee, or a waiver of the fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the landscaping need impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.80 IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS
21.80.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for the review and approval of improvement plans, the installation of improvements, agreements and guarantees for their installation, and dedications. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.80.020 Improvement plans.
    After the approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall diligently proceed to complete any improvements necessary to fulfill the conditions of approval. Improvement shall be defined as any infrastructure including streets, storm drains, sewers and the like. Before the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the city as follows:

    (1)    Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall include the following information:

    (A)   Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports and other information required by the city engineer;

    (B)   Grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control, and a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the entire subdivision; and

    (C)   The improvement plan/specification checking and construction inspection fees required by the city fee resolution.

    (2)    Submittal of Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the city engineer and other reviewing agencies for review and approval. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with subsection (3) of this section, the subdivider shall also submit to the city engineer a detailed cost estimate of all improvements, based on guidelines provided by the city.

    (3)    Review and Approval. Improvement plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer, within the time limits provided by Map Act Section 66456.2.

    (4)    Effect of Approval. The final approval of improvement plans shall generally be required before approval of a parcel or final map. The approval of improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.80.030 Installation of improvements.
    Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of a tentative map in compliance with subsection (2) of Section 21.70.080 of this title shall be installed as provided by this section.

    (1)    Timing of Improvements. Required improvements shall be constructed or otherwise installed only after the approval of improvement plans in compliance with this chapter, and before the approval of a parcel or final map in compliance with Sections 21.72.060 (Parcel map approval) or 21.72.100 (Final map approval) of this title, except where:

    (A)   Improvements are deferred in compliance with Section 21.80.040 (Improvement agreements and security) of this chapter; or

    (B)   Improvements are required as conditions of the approval of a subdivision of four or fewer lots, in which case construction of the improvements shall be required:

    (i)     Only when a permit for development of an affected parcel is issued by the department; or

 

    (ii)    At the time the construction of the improvements is required in compliance with an agreement between the subdivider and the city, as set forth in Section 21.80.040 (Improvement agreements and security) of this chapter; or

    (iii)   At the time set forth in a condition of approval, when the review authority finds that fulfillment of the construction requirements by that time is necessary for public health and safety, or because the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

    To avoid breaking up street paving, underground utility or service lines required to be installed as part of a subdivision and are planned to run across or underneath the right-of-way of any street or alley shall be installed prior to the preparation of subgrade and prior to the surfacing of any streets or alleys. In the event that the development of the subdivision requires the utility company to perform utility construction work, the developer shall pay a deposit satisfactory to the utility company within sufficient time to permit construction work to be performed prior to subgrade preparation. In no event shall subgrade preparation commence before installation of all necessary utilities and laterals.

    (2)    Inspection of Improvements. The construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur as follows.

    (A)   Supervision. Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative who shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts with the city. The designated representative shall be present at the work site at all times while work is in progress. At times when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the city engineer shall be made for any emergency work that may be required.

    (B)   Inspection Procedures.

    (i)     Inspections Required. The city engineer shall make any inspections as he or she deems necessary to ensure that all construction complies with the approved improvement plans. Where required by the city engineer, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the city to pay the full cost of any contract inspection services determined to be necessary by the city engineer.

    (ii)    Access to Site and Materials. The city engineer shall have access to the work site at all times during construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for verifying that the materials and workmanship are in accordance with the approved improvement plans.

    (iii)   Authority for Approval. The work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed.

    (iv)   Improper Work or Materials. Work or materials not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be rejected, regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the city engineer. In the event that the city engineer determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required by the approved plans and specifications, he or she shall order the work stopped and shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective measures necessary to resume work. Any work done after issuance of a stop work order shall be a violation of this title.

    (C)   Notification. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer upon the completion of each stage of construction as outlined in this chapter, and shall not proceed with further construction until authorized by the city engineer. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.80.040 Improvement agreements and security.
    A subdivider may file a parcel or final map before completion of all the improvements required by this title and conditions of approval of the tentative map, only when the subdivider first obtains council approval of a subdivision improvement agreement executed and submitted for council review by the subdivider, and provides the city performance security as required by this section. Improvement agreements and required security shall also comply with Chapter 5 of the Map Act.

    (1)    Contents of Improvement Agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall be submitted on a form provided by the city engineer and approved by the city attorney and shall include the following provisions.

    (A)   Description of Improvements. A description of all improvements to be completed by the subdivider, with reference to the approved subdivision improvement plans.

    (B)   Time Limit for Construction. The period within which all required improvements will be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

    (C)   Completion by City. Provide that if the subdivider fails to complete all required improvements within the specified time, the city may elect to complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expenses thereof from the subdivider or the surety, including any attorney and legal fees associated with enforcement of the agreement.

    (D)   Surety Requirement. Require the subdivider to secure the agreement by furnishing security to ensure full and faithful performance and to insure payment to laborers and material suppliers, as specified in subsection (2) of this section. The amount of surety shall be based on an engineer’s cost estimate submitted by the subdivider as provided by subsection (2) and approved by the city engineer. The total cost of improvements to be guaranteed shall be as provided in the approved engineer’s cost estimate.

    (E)   Phased Construction. Provisions for the construction of improvements in units, at the option of the subdivider.

    (F)    Time Extensions. Provisions for an extension of time under conditions specified therein, at the option of the subdivider, consistent with the requirements of subsection (4) of this section.

    (G)   Progress Payments or Partial Release. Provide for progress payments from surety deposits, or partial release of the surety filed to ensure faithful performance of the contract, at the option of the subdivider, in compliance with the requirements of subsection (3) of this section; provided that no progress payment or partial release shall be construed to be acceptance by the city of any portion of the required improvements or any defective work or improper materials.

    (2)    Security Required to Guarantee Improvements. A subdivision improvement agreement or a subdivision road maintenance and repair agreement shall be secured by adequate surety in a form approved as to form and sufficiency by the city attorney, as follows:

    (A)   Type of Security. Subdivision improvement agreements shall be secured by all of the following:

    (i)     A guarantee for “faithful performance,” in the amount of one hundred percent of the engineer’s estimate;

    (ii)    A guarantee for “materials and labor,” in the amount of one hundred percent of the engineer’s estimate;

    (iii)   Five thousand dollars for survey; and

    (iv)   A one-year guarantee and warranty for work in the amount of ten percent of the engineer’s estimate.

    (B)   Form of Security. The required surety shall consist of one or more of the following forms selected by the city engineer for the full amounts specified in subsection (2)(A) of this section.

    (i)     A deposit, either with the local agency or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the local agency, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys;

    (ii)    A bond or bonds executed by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties;

    (iii)   An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal or local government when any said agency provides at least twenty percent of the financing for the portion of the act or agreement requiring security, or from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution;

    (iv)   A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the city, where the review authority finds that it would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than two years after the recordation of the map; or

    (v)    Any form of security, including security interests in real property, which is acceptable to the local agency.

    (3)    Progress Payments or Partial Release. No progress payment or partial release of the surety filed to ensure faithful performance of the contract shall be made except when the city engineer has certified that the work required to qualify for payment or release has been satisfactorily completed and the payment or release has also been approved by the city engineer. No certificate given, progress payment made or release of surety, except the final certificate of acceptance, shall be considered as any evidence of the performance of the agreement either wholly or in part. There shall be no partial acceptance of any improvements.

    (4)    Time Extensions. An extension of time for completion of improvements under a subdivision improvement agreement shall be granted by the council only as follows:

    (A)   Public Works Report. The city engineer notifies the council that either the subdivider is proceeding to do the work required with reasonable diligence or is not yet ready to develop the subdivision, and has given satisfactory evidence of being able and willing to complete all required work within the time of the requested extension.

    (B)   Agreement by Sureties. The sureties agree in writing to extend for the additional period of time at the original amount of the bond or other surety, or if recommended by the city engineer, at an increased amount.

    (C)   Council Action. The council approves the extension by at least a four-fifths vote. As a condition of granting a time extension, the council may impose whatever additional requirements the council deems reasonable to protect the public interest.

    (5)    Acceptance of Improvements. Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval by the council of subdivision improvements, the city engineer shall verify that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 1495 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.80.045 Exoneration and partial release of improvement security delegated.
    Pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.7, the authority to exonerate and release, or partially release, improvement security, including bonds and other forms of security for subdivision and other developments in the city, is hereby delegated to the city engineer. The city engineer is authorized to release said obligations if satisfactory completion has occurred by his or her signature. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2014)

 

21.80.050 Soils reports.
    Soils reports shall be provided by the subdivider as required by this section.

    (1)    Preliminary Soils Report. A preliminary soils report based upon adequate test borings and prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be required for every subdivision. The preliminary soils report shall be submitted with the tentative map application.

    (A)   Form of Report. A preliminary soils report may be divided into two parts:

    (i)     Soils Reconnaissance. The soil reconnaissance shall include a complete description of the site based on a field investigation of soils matters. The soils matters reviewed shall include stability, erosion, settlement, feasibility of construction of the proposed improvements, description of soils related hazards and problems and proposed methods of eliminating or reducing these hazards and problems; and

    (ii)    Final Soils Investigation and Report. This investigation and report shall include field investigation and laboratory tests with detailed information and recommendations relative to all aspects of grading, filling and other earthwork, foundation design, pavement design and subsurface drainage.

 

    The report shall also recommend any required corrective action for the purpose of preventing structural damages to the subdivision improvements and the structures to be constructed on the lots. The report shall also recommend any special precautions required for erosion control, and the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property.

    If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, or environmental impacts, a subsequent soils investigation of each parcel in the subdivision may be required and submitted to the city engineer before approval of a parcel or final map.

    (B)   Preliminary Soils Report Waiver. The preliminary soils report may be waived if the city engineer determines that existing available information on the qualities of the soils of the subdivision makes no preliminary analysis necessary.

    (2)    Final Soils Report. A final soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be required where a preliminary soils report was required, unless the final report is waived by the city engineer.

    (A)   Two copies of the final soils investigation and report shall be filed with the improvement plans.

    (B)   The report shall contain sufficient information to ensure compliance with all recommendations of the preliminary soils report and the specifications for the project.

    (C)   The report shall also contain information relative to soils conditions encountered which differed from that described in the preliminary soils reports, along with any corrections, additions or modifications not shown on the approved plans.

    (3)    Geologic Investigation and Report. If the city engineer determines that conditions warrant, a geologic investigation and report may also be required. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.80.060 Seismic hazards report.
    A seismic hazards report shall be prepared by the developer and submitted to the city engineer together with the fee required by the council. The report shall be reviewed by a city-designated geotechnical engineer or other approved reviewer. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.82 SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS
21.82.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides requirements for subdivision survey work, and the placement of subdivision monuments. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.82.020 Survey procedure and practice.
    The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, whether for preparation of a final map or parcel map shall conform to the standard practices and principles of land surveying, the California Land Surveyor’s Act, and the provisions of this chapter. All related documents shall be executed by a California-registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying, or licensed land surveyor.

    (1)    Traverse. The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision computed from field measurements of the ground must close within a limit of error of one foot to ten thousand feet of perimeter before balancing the survey, or comply with other requirements established by the county surveyor.

    (2)    Field Notes. When required by the county surveyor, the engineer or surveyor making the survey shall prepare complete field notes, in a form satisfactory to the county surveyor, showing references, ties, locations, elevations and other necessary data relating to monuments, set in compliance with these regulations, and shall submit the notes to the county surveyor to be indexed and retained as a part of the permanent public record of his office.

    (3)    Geodetic Monuments. Whenever the county surveyor has established a system of coordinates which is within a reasonable distance of the subdivision boundary, as determined by the county surveyor, the field survey shall be tied into the system. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.82.030 Monuments.
    In surveying a subdivision, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient permanent monuments so that any part of the survey may be readily retraced. Survey monuments shall be set by the engineer or surveyor for all new subdivisions requiring a parcel map or final map, and for any lot line adjustment unless waived by the county surveyor, in compliance with this section. Survey monuments shall be set in compliance with city standards.

    (1)    Boundary Monuments.

    (A)   Boundary monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and ends of curves and at intermediate points approximately one thousand feet apart. The locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so noted on the final map or parcel map.

    (B)   All exterior boundary monuments shall be set prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map or as certified on the final map.

    (2)    Interior Monuments. Whenever interior monuments are required, the monuments shall be set at:

    (A)   All block and lot corners and angle points;

    (B)   The beginnings and ends of curves;

    (C)   Points of intersection with centerlines of other existing and proposed streets and alleys; and

    (D)   The points of intersection with the exterior boundary lines.

    (3)    Monument Type and Positioning. All monuments set in the course of the survey shall be as specified by the county surveyor and shall be set to the depth and in the manner prescribed by the county surveyor.

    (4)    Identification Marks. All monuments shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signs the engineer’s or surveyor’s certificate and under whose supervision the survey is made.

    (5)    Replacement of Destroyed Monuments. Any monument which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements by the city shall be replaced by the subdivider.

    (6)    Timing of Monument Installation. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be completely monumented or referenced before the final map or parcel map is submitted to the county surveyor for filing. interior monuments need not be set at the time the final map or parcel map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnishes the city a bond, instrument of credit, or cash deposit in a sufficient amount to guarantee payment of the cost of setting the monuments in compliance with Map Act Section 66496.

    (7)    Notice of Completion. Within five days after all monuments have been set, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and the county surveyor that the final monuments have been set. Verification of payment to the engineer or surveyor shall be filed as required by Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Map Act. The cost of setting monuments shall be included in the engineer’s estimate for improvements in compliance with Section 21.80.040 (Improvement agreements and security) of this title. If requested, this amount of the bond may be released upon verification of the setting of the monuments by the county surveyor.

    (8)    Inspection and Approval. All monuments shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the county surveyor. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.82.040 Survey information on final or parcel map.
    The following survey information shall be shown on each final map or parcel map for which a field survey was made in compliance with this title.

    (1)    Stakes, monuments (together with their precise position) or other evidence found on the ground, to determine the boundaries of the subdivision;

    (2)    Corners of all adjoining properties identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision names, numbers and pages of record or by section, township and range, or other proper designation;

    (3)    All information and data necessary to locate and retrace any point or line without unreasonable difficulty;

    (4)    The location and description of any required monuments to be set after recordation of the final map, and the statement that they are “to be set”;

    (5)    Bearing and length of each lot line, block line and boundary line and each required bearing and distance;

    (6)    Length, radius and angle of each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve;

    (7)    The centerlines of any street or alley in or adjoining the subdivision which have been established by the county surveyor, together with reference to a field book or map showing the centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be so stated;

    (8)    Any other survey data or information as may be required to be shown by the county surveyor or by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.84 CONDITIONS, COVENANTS OR RESTRICTIONS
21.84.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides requirements for the provision of conditions, covenants or restrictions in conjunction with the approval of tract or parcel maps. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.84.020 Applicability.
    All subdivisions shall be subject to conditions, covenants, or restrictions or a similar recordable document which shall be filed with the Orange County recorder and which shall be effective for at least thirty years or the life of the improvements, whichever is greater. The document shall provide for the continued maintenance and viability of the project as approved. This requirement may be waived by the commission or the subdivision review committee at the time of approving a tract or parcel map. Other developments not constituting a subdivision may also be subject to this requirement if the commission or the subdivision review committee determine that such a document is necessary to ensure orderly development and the continued maintenance of the project. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.84.030 Deed reference required.
    Every set of documents described in Section 21.84.020 of this chapter shall also contain a covenant that the covenantor shall reference the set of documents in every deed or other document that attempts to convey or hypothecate the subject property. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.84.040 Reference to approving resolutions required.
    Every set of documents described in Section 21.84.020 of this chapter shall reference all city resolutions affecting the property at the time of approval and shall specifically reference any resolutions approving a specific plan, precise plan, tract map or conditional use permit. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.84.050 Amendments.
    The document shall contain a prohibition against revocation, amendment, or revocation of the terms of the document or the document itself without city approval. The city attorney may limit the pertinent provisions of the document that will require city approval before modification may occur. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.84.060 Right of enforcement.
    Every document shall give to the city a right of enforcement of its terms which shall include all of the alternative remedies and procedures, both legal and equitable, and which shall provide for the payment of attorneys’ fees. The city attorney may limit the pertinent provisions of the document that will give the city a right of enforcement thereto. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.84.070 Review and fee required.
    Each set of documents referred to in Section 21.84.020 of this chapter shall be subject to review and approval by the city attorney, director of public works and the planning director. A fee, as prescribed by resolution of the council, shall be paid by the developer to cover this processing, review and approval. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

21.84.080 Recording.
    The developer shall be required to record the document concurrently with the recording of the tract or parcel map and after all city fees are paid and after all necessary approvals and signatures are obtained from the city. The city shall be provided a conformed copy of the recorded document at the developer’s cost. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 21.90 DEFINITIONS/GLOSSARY*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1558 and 1562. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


21.90.010 Purpose.
    This chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this title that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this chapter conflict with definitions in other provisions of the municipal code, these definitions shall control for the purposes of this title. If a word is not defined in this chapter, or in other provisions of the title, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct. (Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 21.90.020 Definitions of specialized terms and phrases.
    As used in this title, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

    (1)    Definitions “A.”

    “Accessory dwelling unit” means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:

    (a)    An efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

    (b)    A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

    “Accessory entertainment use” means a use that is incidental to the main use which involves entertainment devices and equipment (e.g., electronic and mechanical games and rides, amplified music,and similar devices) and live entertainment and performances (e.g., music, dance, comedy act, karaoke).

    “Accessory residential use” means a use that is customarily related to a residence, including garages, greenhouses, storage sheds, studios, above ground swimming pools/spas and workshops which do not include living area.

    “Accessory retail sales” means the retail sales of various products (including food service) in a store or similar facility that is located within a health care, hotel, office or industrial complex. These uses include pharmacies, gift shops and food service establishments within hospitals; convenience stores and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes.

    “Accessory structure” means a structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with the primary structure. For the purposes of this title, accessory structures and uses include: detached garages, greenhouses, artist’s studios and workshops; hot tubs, Jacuzzi, spas and swimming pools, together with any enclosures; and any other open air enclosures, including gazebos and detached patio covers.

    “Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same parcel, which does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the parcel where the principal use is located.

    “Adult businesses” means as defined in this code.

    “Agent” means a person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with city employees, committees, commissions and the council, regarding matters regulated by this title.

    “Agricultural products processing” means the processing of crops after harvest, to prepare them for on-site marketing or processing and packaging elsewhere. Includes the following:

    (A)   Alfalfa cubing;

    (B)   Corn shelling;

    (C)   Cotton ginning;

    (D)   Custom grist mills;

    (E)   Custom milling of flour, feed and grain;

    (F)    Dairies (but not feedlots);

    (G)   Drying of corn, rice, hay, fruits and vegetables;

    (H)   Grain cleaning and custom grinding;

    (I)    Hay baling and cubing;

    (J)    Pre-cooling and packaging of fresh or farm-dried fruits and vegetables;

    (K)   Sorting, grading and packing of fruits and vegetables;

    (L)   Tree nut hulling and shelling.

    Any of the above activities performed in the field with mobile equipment not involving permanent structures are included under the definition of agricultural production.

    “Agricultural production” means commercial agricultural field and orchard uses including production of:

    (A)   Field crops;

    (B)   Flowers and seeds;

    (C)   Fruits;

    (D)   Grains;

    (E)   Melons;

    (F)    Ornamental crops;

    (G)   Tree nuts;

    (H)   Trees and sod;

    (I)    Vegetables.

    Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities, such as mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction, spraying, crop processing and sales in the field not involving a permanent structure.

    “Alcoholic beverage sales” means the retail sale of beer, wine and/or other alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premises consumption.

    “Alley” means a public or private roadway, generally not more than thirty feet wide that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public street frontage, that is not intended for general traffic circulation.

    “Allowed use” means a use of land identified by Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title as a permitted or conditional use that may be established with land use permit and, where applicable, site plan and/or design review and/or building permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this title.

    “Alteration” means any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure or a change in the external appearance of any structure, not including painting.

    “Ambulance service” means a commercial facility where ambulances are stored, and from which ambulances and emergency personnel are dispatched to emergencies.

    “Antenna” means a device used in communications which transmits or receives radio signals, including the following.

    (A)   Antenna—Dish means a dish-like antennas used to link communication sites together by wireless transmissions of voice or data. Also called microwave dish antenna.

    (B)   Antenna—Panel means an antenna or array of antennas that are flat and rectangular and are designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Also referred to as a directional antenna.

    (C)   Antenna—Satellite means an antenna for the home, business or institutional reception of television, data and other telecommunications broadcasts from orbiting satellites.

    (D)   Antenna—Whip means an antenna that transmits signals in three hundred sixty degrees. These are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than six inches in diameter. Also called omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas.

    “Antiques, art galleries, collectibles stores” means retail sales uses including antique shops, art galleries, curio, gift and souvenir shops, and the sales of collectible items including sports cards and comic books. Stores selling handcrafted items that are produced on the site are instead defined as “artisan shops.”

    “Approval” includes both approval and approval with conditions.

    “Area, net” means the portion of a parcel which is:

    (A)   Not subject to any easement or included as a proposed public or private facility, such as an alley, highway, street or other necessary public site within a proposed development project; or

    (B)   Subject to an easement where the owner of the underlying fee has the right to use the entire surface except the portion where the owner of the easement may place utility poles or minor utility structures.

    Except as provided above, portions of a parcel to a highway easement or any other private or public easement shall not be counted as part of the net area.

    “Assembly uses” means a structure or part of a structure in which facilities are provided for purposes as meetings for civic, educational, political, religious or social purposes.

    “Attic” means the area located between the uppermost plate and the roof or ridge of a structure.

    “Auto parts sales” means stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation. Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under “vehicle services” or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, which are included under “recycling—scrap and dismantling yards.”

    “Auto repair and maintenance” means the repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (including self-service and attended car washes) or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes the following categories:

    (A)   “Major repair/body work” means repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles. These establishments provide towing, collision repair, other body work and painting services; and also include tire recapping establishments.

    (B)   “Minor maintenance/repair” means facilities specialize in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (e.g., muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube, etc.).

    Does not include automobile parking, repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site; automobile service stations, which are separately defined; or automobile dismantling yards, which are included under “recycling—scrap and dismantling yards.”

    “Auto sales/rental” means retail establishments selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership; bicycle and moped sales; mobile home sales; recreational vehicle sales; tire recapping establishments; businesses dealing exclusively in used parts; or “service stations,” which are separately defined.

    “Automated teller machines (ATM)” means computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations, in compliance with Section 21.30.030 of this title.

    (2)    Definitions “B.”

    “Bakeries, retail” means a retail business where bread, pastries and other baked goods are produced for retail sale from the site, primarily for off-site consumption.

    “Balcony” means a platform that projects out from the wall of a structure, typically on the second floor, is not supported by columns or pillars, and is surrounded by a rail or parapet. A balcony may, or may not, contain a roofed covering.

    “Banks and financial services” means financial institutions including:

    (A)   Banks and trust companies;

    (B)   Credit agencies;

    (C)   Holding (but not primarily operating) companies;

    (D)   Lending and thrift institutions;

    (E)   Other investment companies;

    (F)    Securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers;

    (G)   Security and commodity exchanges;

    (H)   Vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies.

    “Bedroom” means a room capable of being used for sleeping purposes that is separable from other rooms by walls and a door, and that has access to a bathroom including dens, libraries, studies and all-purpose rooms.

    “Block” means all property fronting upon one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and a waterway, dead end street, park, or city boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of a street which it intercepts.

    “Broadcasting studios” means commercial and public communications uses including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings. Transmission and receiving apparatus, including antennas and towers, are included under the definition of “telecommunications facilities.”

    “Building material stores” means retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready‑mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a specific zoning district. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in “warehousing and distribution.” Hardware stores are listed in the definition of “general retail stores,” even if they sell some building materials.

    “Business support services” means establishments primarily within buildings, providing other businesses with services including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, etc., also includes:

    (A)   Blueprinting;

    (B)   Business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair);

    (C)   Commercial art and design (production);

    (D)   Computer-related services (rental, repair);

    (E)   Copying, quick printing and blueprinting services;

    (F)    Equipment rental businesses within buildings (rental yards are “Storage Yards and Sales Lots”);

    (G)   Film processing laboratories;

    (H)   Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site;

    (I)    Janitorial services;

    (J)    Mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping);

    (K)   Other “heavy service” business services;

    (L)   Outdoor advertising services;

    (M)  Photocopying;

    (N)   Photofinishing;

    (O)   Protective services (other than office related);

    (P)    Soils and materials testing laboratories;

    (Q)   Window cleaning.

    “Butcher shop” means a retail store or portion of a larger store selling food items, which sells meat, fish, fowl and poultry products, and which may on the same site cut the products sold from larger animal carcasses prior to packaging and/or sale. Does not include the slaughtering of live animals on the same site.

    (3)    Definitions “C.”

    “California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)” means state law (California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur.

    “California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)” means the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the state.

    “Car washes” means permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing services. Temporary car washes are fund-raising activities, typically conducted at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one day. Chapter 21.48 of this code (Temporary Use Permits).

    “Caretaker’s quarters” means a residence that is accessory to a nonresidential primary use of the site, where needed for security, or twenty-four-hour care or supervision.

    “Cell site” means a geographical area with a radius of two to eight miles that contains both transmitting and receiving antennae.

    “Cellular” means an analog or digital wireless communication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites, each of which contains antennae.

    “Certificate of public convenience and necessity” means a certificate issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).

    “Chemical product manufacturing” means manufacturing facilities that produce or use basic chemicals and other establishments creating products predominantly by chemical processes. Facilities included in this definition manufacture three general classes of products:

    (A)   Basic chemicals, including acids, alkalis, salts and organic chemicals;

    (B)   Chemical products to be used in further manufacture, including synthetic fibers, plastic materials, dry colors and pigments; and

    (C)   Finished chemical products to be used for ultimate consumption, including drugs, cosmetics and soaps; or to be used as materials or supplies in other industries including paints, fertilizers and explosives.

    “City” means the city of Fountain Valley, state of California, referred to in this title as the “city.”

    “City council” means the Fountain Valley city council, referred to in this title as the “council.”

    “Clubs, lodges and membership meeting halls” means permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for:

    (A)   Business associations;

    (B)   Civic, social and fraternal organizations;

    (C)   Labor unions and similar organizations;

    (D)   Political organizations;

    (E)   Professional membership organizations;

    (F)    Other membership organizations.

    “Co-location” means the locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single ground-mounted, roof-mounted or structure-mounted facility.

    “Concrete, gypsum and plaster product manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments producing bulk concrete, concrete building block, brick and all types of precast and prefab concrete products. Also includes ready‑mix concrete batch plants, lime manufacturing, and the manufacture of gypsum products, including plasterboard. A retail ready‑mix concrete operation as an incidental use in conjunction with a building materials outlet is defined under “building material stores.”

    “Condominium” means as defined by Civil Code Section 1315, a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map. The area within the boundaries may be filled with air, earth or water or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to any land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support.

    “Convenience stores” means retail stores of generally three thousand five hundred square feet or less in gross floor area, which carry a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and travelers’ shopping needs. These stores may be part of a service station or an independent facility.

    “Cottage food operation” means an enterprise defined in Health and Safety Code Section 113758 as that law may be amended.

    “County” means the county of Orange, state of California.

    (4)    Definitions “D.”

    “Day care facilities” means facilities that provide nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services.

    (A)   “Adult day care facility” means a facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for six or fewer adults.

    (B)   “Child day care center” means commercial or non-profit child day care facilities designed and approved to accommodate fifteen or more children. Includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use.

    (C)   “Large family day care home” means a day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for seven to fourteen children. Children under the age of ten years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility.

    (D)   “Small family day care home” means a day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for eight or fewer children. Children under the age of ten years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility.

    “Deck” means a platform, either freestanding or attached to a structure that is supported by pillars, posts, or the first floor of the structure. A deck may, or may not, contain a roofed covering.

    “Density” means the number of housing units per net acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses.

    “Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density.

    “Department” means the Fountain Valley planning department, referred to in this title as “department.”

    “Detached” means any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure.

    “Development” means any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of structures. New development is any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after the effective date of this title.

    “Development agreement” means a contract between the city and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with Chapter 21.38 (Development Agreements) of this title and Government Code Section 65864 et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed subject to the policies, rules, regulations and conditions of approval applicable to the project at the time of approval, regardless of any changes to city policies, rules and regulations after project approval. In return, the city may be assured that the applicant will provide infrastructure and/or pay fees required by a new project.

    “Development code” means the Fountain Valley development code, Title 21 of this code, referred to herein as “this title.”

    “Director” means the city of Fountain Valley planning director, or designee of the director.

    “Drive-in and drive-thru facilities” means facilities where food or other products may be purchased by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include fast-food restaurants, drive-through coffee, dairy products, photo stores, etc.

    “Duplex” means a residential structure under single ownership containing two dwellings.

    “Dwelling, dwelling unit or housing unit” means a room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a long-term basis.

    (5)    Definitions “E.”

    “Easement” means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.

    “Efficiency unit” means a habitable space as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

    “Electronics, equipment and appliance manufacturing” means establishments engaged in manufacturing machinery, apparatus, and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including:

    (A)   Appliances such as stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers, laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners, sewing machines;

    (B)   Aviation instruments;

    (C)   Electrical transmission and distribution equipment;

    (D)   Electronic components and accessories, and semiconductors, integrated circuits, related devices;

    (E)   Electronic instruments, components and equipment such as calculators and computers;

    (F)    Electrical welding apparatus;

    (G)   Lighting and wiring equipment such as lamps and fixtures, wiring devices, vehicle lighting;

    (H)   Industrial apparatus;

    (I)    Industrial controls;

    (J)    Instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control, associated sensors and accessories;

    (K)   Miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies such as batteries, X-ray apparatus and tubes, electromedical and electro-therapeutic apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines;

    (L)   Motors and generators;

    (M)  Optical instruments and lenses;

    (N)   Photographic equipment and supplies;

    (O)   Pre-recorded magnetic tape;

    (P)    Radio and television receiving equipment such as television and radio sets, phonograph records and surgical, medical and dental instruments, equipment and supplies;

    (Q)   Surveying and drafting instruments;

    (R)   Telephone and telegraph apparatus;

    (S)    Transformers, switch gear and switch-boards;

    (T)   Watches and clocks.

    Does not include testing laboratories (soils, materials testing, etc.) or research and development facilities separate from manufacturing.

    “Emergency shelters” means facilities for the temporary shelter and feeding of indigents or disaster victims, operated by a public or non-profit agency.

    “Enhanced specialized mobile radio” means a digital wireless communication technology that specializes in providing dispatching services.

    “Enlargement of use” means the expansion of a land use activity on a site or within a structure so that the use/activity occupies more floor or site area.

    “Environmental impact report (EIR)” means an informational document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

    “Equipment sales and rental” means service establishments with outdoor storage/rental yards, which may offer a wide variety of materials and equipment for rental, including construction equipment.

    (6)    Definitions “F.”

    “Fabric product manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments fabricating clothing, draperies and other products by cutting and sewing purchased textile fabrics, and related materials such as leather, rubberized fabrics, plastics and furs. Custom tailors and dressmakers not operating as a factory and not located on the site of a clothing store (“general retail stores”) are instead included under “personal services.”

    “Family” means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use. A family shall be deemed to include domestic help employed by the family.

    “Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

    “Floor area ratio (FAR)” means the ratio of floor area to total lot area. FAR restrictions are used to limit the maximum floor area allowed on a site. The maximum floor area of all structures (measured from exterior wall to exterior wall) permitted on a site shall be determined by multiplying the floor area ratio (FAR) by the total net area of the site (FAR x net site area = maximum allowable floor area). For the purpose of calculating floor area, floor area shall not include carports, garages, parking garages, elevator shafts, mechanical rooms, and exterior patios associated with the use within the same development, except as indicated in Section 21.08.040, Table 2-3.

 

 

FIGURE 7-1 FLOOR AREA RATIO

 



 

 

    “Flower tower” means a structure that integrates a monopole into a light pole or other utility pole.

    “Food and beverage manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods and beverages for human consumption, and certain related products. Includes:

    (A)   Bakeries;

    (B)   Bottling plants;

    (C)   Breweries;

    (D)   Candy, sugar and confectionery products;

    (E)   Manufacturing;

    (F)    Catering services separate from stores or restaurants;

    (G)   Coffee roasting;

    (H)   Dairy products manufacturing;

    (I)    Fats and oil product manufacturing;

    (J)    Fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing;

    (K)   Grain mill products and by‑products;

    (L)   Meat, poultry and seafood canning, curing;

 

    (M)  By-product processing;

    (N)   Soft drink production;

    (O)   Miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products.

    May include tasting and accessory retail sales of beverages produced on-site. A tasting facility separate from the manufacturing facility is included under the definition of “night clubs and bars” if alcoholic beverages are tasted, and under “restaurant” if beverages are non-alcoholic.

    Does not include: bakeries which sell all products on-site, which are included in the definition of “general retail stores”; or beer brewing as part of a brew pub, bar or restaurant.

    “Furniture, furnishings and equipment stores” mean stores engaged primarily in selling the following products and related services, including incidental repair services:

    (A)   Draperies;

    (B)   Floor coverings;

    (C)   Furniture;

    (D)   Glass and chinaware;

    (E)   Home appliances;

    (F)    Home furnishings;

    (G)   Home sound systems;

    (H)   Interior decorating materials and services;

    (I)    Large musical instruments;

    (J)    Lawn furniture;

    (K)   Movable spas and hot tubs;

    (L)   Office furniture;

    (M)  Other household electrical and gas appliances;

    (N)   Outdoor furniture;

    (O)   Refrigerators;

    (P)    Stoves;

    (Q)   Televisions.

    (7)    Definitions “G.”

    “Garage or carport” means parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of this title.

    (A)   A garage is an attached or detached accessory structure with a door, enclosed on at least three sides.

    (B)   A carport is an attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides.

    “General plan” means the city of Fountain Valley general plan, including all its elements and all amendments to the general plan, as adopted by the city council under the provisions of Government Code Section 65300 et seq., and referred to in this title as the “general plan.”

    “General retail stores” mean stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. These stores and lines of merchandise include:

    (A)   Art galleries;

    (B)   Artists’ supplies;

    (C)   Bakeries (all production in support of on-site sales);

    (D)   Bicycles;

    (E)   Books;

    (F)    Cameras and photographic supplies;

    (G)   Clothing and accessories;

    (H)   Collectibles (cards, coins, comics, stamps, etc.);

    (I)    Department stores;

    (J)    Drug and discount stores;

    (K)   Dry goods;

    (L)   Fabrics and sewing supplies;

    (M)  Florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only outdoor sales are “plant nurseries”);

    (N)   Furniture, home furnishings and equipment;

    (O)   General stores;

    (P)    Gift and souvenir shops;

    (Q)   Hardware;

    (R)   Hobby materials;

    (S)    Jewelry;

    (T)   Luggage and leather goods;

    (U)   Musical instruments, parts and accessories;

    (V)   Newsstands;

    (W)  Orthopedic supplies;

    (X)   Pet supplies sales with no animals but fish;

    (Y)   Religious goods;

    (Z)   Small wares;

    (AA)            Specialty shops;

    (BB) Sporting goods and equipment;

    (CC) Stationery;

    (DD)            Toys and games;

    (EE) Variety stores;

    “Glass product manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments producing flat glass and other glass products which are pressed, blown, or shaped from glass produced in the same establishment. Does not include artisan and craftsman type operations of a larger scale than home occupations.

    “Grade” means the ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior base of a structure, typically used as the basis for measurement of the height of the structure.

    “Grand opening” means an advertising event for the promotion of a newly opened use, a change in the orientation of a use or reopening of a use, following a remodeling or major renovation.

    “Grocery store” means a retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store.

    “Ground-mounted” means mounted to a lattice tower, monopole, pole or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting antennae.

    (8)    Definitions “H.”

    “Health/fitness facilities” means fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic clubs including any of the following: indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities.

    “Height” means the height of a structure measured as the vertical distance from finish grade to an imaginary plane located the allowed number of feet above and parallel to the finish grade.

    “Heliport” means a designated, marked area on the ground or the top of a structure where helicopters may land.

    “Home business” means the conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, employing occupants of the dwelling, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property.

    “Hotel or motel” means facilities with guest rooms or suites, provided with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging (less than thirty days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway, and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc.

    “Hydroponic stores” mean establishments that sell equipment for growing plants using mineral nutrient solutions, in water, without soil.

    (9)    Definitions “I.”

    “Illegal building or use” means a building or use that does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this title, and did not lawfully exist on the effective date of applicable provisions of this title.

    “Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities” means establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including:

    (A)   Bowling alleys;

    (B)   Coin-operated amusement arcades;

    (C)   Dance halls, clubs and ballrooms;

    (D)   Electronic game arcades;

    (E)   Ice skating and roller skating;

    (F)    Pool and billiard rooms as primary uses.

    Four or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment, or a premises where fifty percent or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices, are considered an electronic game arcade as described above, three or less machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site.

    “Institutional use” means a nonprofit or quasi-public use (e.g., religious institution, library, public, or private school, hospital, or government-owned or government-operated structure or land used for public purpose).

    “Intensification of use” means a change in the use of a structure or site, where the new use is required to have more off-street parking spaces than the former use; or a change in the operating characteristics of a use (for example, hours of operation), which generate more activity on the site.

    (10)  Definitions “J.”

    “Junior accessory dwelling unit” means a unit that is no more than five hundred square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family structure. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

    (11)  Definitions “K.”

    “Kitchen” means a room or space within a building intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.

    (12)  Definitions “L.”

    “Land use permit” means authority granted by the city to use a specified site for a particular purpose, including conditional use permits, temporary use permits and variances, as established by Chapters 21.32 through 21.50 of this title.

    “Lattice tower” means a structure with three or four steel support legs that supports a variety of antennae.

    “Laundries and dry cleaning plants” means service establishments engaged primarily in high volume laundry and garment services, including: power laundries (family and commercial); garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service; industrial laundries; carpet and upholstery cleaners. Does not include coin‑operated laundries or dry cleaning pick‑up stores without dry cleaning equipment.

    “Legal nonconforming parcel” means a parcel that was legally created prior to the adoption of this title and which does not conform to current code provisions/standards (e.g., access, area or width requirements, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the parcel is located.

    “Legal nonconforming sign” means a sign which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this title, or any amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to all of the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended provision.

    “Legal nonconforming structure” means a structure that was legally constructed prior to the adoption of this title and which does not conform to current code provisions/standards (e.g., open space, distance between structures, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the structure is located.

    “Legal nonconforming use” means a use of a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) or land that was legally established and maintained prior to the adoption of this title and which does not conform to current code provisions governing allowable land uses for the zoning district in which the use is located.

    “Libraries and museums” means public or quasi-public facilities including aquariums, arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums and planetariums, which are generally non-commercial in nature.

    “Living area” means the total area within a dwelling unit designed and intended for occupancy by residents of the unit. Living area does not include closets, pantries, garages, patios, balconies, decks, and similar spaces.

    “Lot or parcel” means a recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances, including this title. Types of lots include the following. See Figure 7-2 (Lot Types).

    (A)   “Corner lot” means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.

    (B)   “Flag lot” means a lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee.

    (C)   “Interior lot” means a lot abutting only one street.

    (D)   “Key lot” means an interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot.

    (E)   “Reverse corner lot” means a corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.

    (F)    “Through lot” means a lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets.

 



FIGURE 7-2

LOT TYPES

 

 

    “Lot area” means gross lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights-of-way. Net lot area is exclusive of easements, including those for utilities or flood control channels, which limit the use of the lot.

    “Lot depth” means the average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line. See Figure 7-3 (Lot Features). The director shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration.

    “Lot frontage” means the boundary of a lot adjacent to a public street right-of-way.

    “Lot line or property line” means any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows (see Figure 7-3 (Lot Features)):

    (A)   “Front lot line” means on an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with the shortest frontage. (If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the director.) On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line.

    (B)   “Interior lot line” means any lot line not abutting a street.

    (C)   “Rear lot line” means a property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line.

    (D)   “Side lot line” means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

    “Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. See Figure 7-3 (Lot Features). The director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape.

 

 

 



FIGURE 7-3

LOT FEATURES

 

 

    “Lumber and wood product manufacturing” means manufacturing, processing and sales uses involving the milling of forest products to produce rough and finished lumber and other wood materials for use in other manufacturing, craft or construction processes. Includes the following processes and products:

    (A)   Containers, pallets and skids;

    (B)   Milling operations;

    (C)   Trusses and structural beams;

    (D)   Turning and shaping of wood products;

    (E)   Wholesaling of basic wood products;

    (F)    Wood product assembly;

    Craft-type shops are included in “handcraft industries and small-scale manufacturing.” Other wood and cabinet shops are included under “furniture and fixture manufacturing.” The indoor retail sale of building materials, construction tools and equipment is included under “building material stores.”

    (13)  Definitions “M.”

    “Medical services—Clinics, offices and laboratories” means facilities primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical and other personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals, including:

    (A)   Health management organizations (HMOs);

    (B)   Medical and dental laboratories;

    (C)   Medical, dental and psychiatric offices;

    (D)   Out‑patient care facilities;

    (E)   Other allied health services.

    Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under “offices.”

    “Medical services—Extended care” means residential facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a primary use with in-patient beds, such as: board and care homes; convalescent and rest homes; extended care facilities; skilled nursing facilities. Long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are included under “residential care homes.”

    “Medical services—Hospitals” means hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses and emergency heliports.

    “Metal products fabrication—Machine and welding shops” means establishments engaged primarily in the assembly of metal parts, including the following uses that produce metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates and similar products.

    (A)   Blacksmith and welding shops;

    (B)   Sheet metal shops;

    (C)   Machine shops and boiler shops.

    “Mixed-use project” means a project which combines both commercial and residential uses, where the residential component is typically located above the commercial.

    “Mobile home” means a trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight feet in width and forty feet in length, with or without a permanent foundation and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory‑built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of “single-family dwellings.”

    “Mobile home and recreational vehicle sales” means retail establishments selling and/or renting the following new or used vehicles and products:

    (A)   Boats;

    (B)   Campers/camper shells;

    (C)   Golf carts;

    (D)   Jet skis;

    (E)   Mobile homes;

    (F)    Motor homes;

    (G)   Motorcycles;

    (H)   Snowmobiles;

    (I)    Travel/recreational trailers;

    (J)    Other recreational vehicles.

    May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include parts/accessory sales separate from a vehicle dealership or bicycle and moped sales.

    “Mobile home park” means any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two or more mobile homes used for residential purposes, or on which two or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes used for residential purposes.

    “Monopole” means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennae and related equipment.

    “Mortuaries and funeral homes” means funeral homes and parlors, where deceased are prepared for burial or cremation, and funeral services may be conducted.

    “Mounted” means attached or supported.

    “Multi-family dwellings” means a building or a portion of a building used and/or designed as residences for three or more families living independently of each other. Includes: triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one ownership with three or four dwelling units, respectively, in the same structure) and apartments (five or more units under one ownership in a single building); townhouse developments (three or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located over another unit) and senior citizen multi-family housing.

    “Multi-tenant commercial center” means a commercial development containing a mixture of uses, including retail stores, restaurants, entertainment facilities and offices.

    (14)  Definitions “N.”

    “Negative declaration” means a statement describing the reasoning that a proposed action will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

    “Nightclubs and bars” means any bar, cocktail lounge, discotheque or similar establishment which provides live entertainment (music and/or dancing, comedy, etc.) in conjunction with alcoholic beverage sales, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include beer brewing as part of a microbrewery.

    (15)  Definitions “O.”

    “Occupancy” means all or a portion of a structure occupied by one tenant.

    “Offices.” This title distinguishes between the following types of office facilities. These do not include medical offices or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the primary use. Incidental offices that are customarily accessory to another use are allowed as part of an approved primary use.

    (A)   “Administrative/business” means establishments providing direct services to consumers, such as insurance agencies, real estate offices, utility company offices, etc.

    (B)   “Government” means city, and other local, state and federal government agency or service facilities. Includes post offices, but not bulk mailing distribution centers, which are under “vehicle and freight terminals.”

    (C)   “Production” means office-type facilities occupied by businesses engaged in the production of intellectual property. These uses include:

    (i)     Advertising agencies;

    (ii)    Architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services;

    (iii)   Computer software production and programming services;

    (iv)   Educational, scientific and research;

    (v)    Organizations;

    (vi)   Media postproduction services;

    (vii)  Photography and commercial art studio;

    (viii) Writers’ and artists’ offices;

    (D)   “Professional” means professional offices including:

    (i)     Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;

    (ii)    Attorneys;

    (iii)   Counseling services;

    (iv)   Court reporting services;

    (v)    Data processing services;

    (vi)   Detective agencies and similar services;

    (vii)  Employment, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services;

    (viii) Literary and talent agencies;

    (ix)   Management and public relations services.

    (E)   “Temporary” means a mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as a temporary office facility. Temporary offices may include: construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard; a temporary on‑site real estate office for a development project or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction.

    (F)    “Temporary real estate” means the temporary use of a dwelling unit within a residential development project as a sales office for the units on the same site, which is converted to residential use at the conclusion of its office use.

    “Off-site” means an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, but is not located on the same site as the primary use.

    “On-site” means an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, which is located on the same site as the primary use.

    “Open fence” means a fence that is at least eighty percent open.

    “Outdoor commercial recreation” means facilities for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation where a fee is charged for use, including:

    (A)   Amphitheaters;

    (B)   Amusement and theme parks;

    (C)   Health and athletic club outdoor facilities;

    (D)   Miniature golf courses;

    (E)   Skateboard parks;

    (F)    Stadiums and coliseums;

    (G)   Swim and tennis clubs;

    (H)   Tennis courts;

    (I)    Water slides;

    (J)    Zoos.

    May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and restaurants, video game arcades, etc. Does not include parks and playgrounds, which are separately defined.

    (16)  Definitions “P.”

    “Paper product manufacturing” means the manufacture of paper and paperboard, from both raw and recycled materials, and their conversion into products including paper bags, boxes, envelopes, wallpaper, etc.

    “Parking lots and garages” means service establishments in the business of storing operative cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles and other motor vehicles for clients. Includes both day use and long‑term public and commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when accessory to a primary use. (All primary uses are considered to include any customer or public use off-street parking required by the title.) Includes sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing. Does not include dismantling yards (classified in “recycling facilities—scrap and dismantling yards”).

    “Parks and playgrounds” means public parks, play lots, playgrounds and athletic fields for non-commercial neighborhood or community use, including tennis courts. If privately-owned, the same facilities are included under the definition of “private residential recreation facilities.”

    “Passageway” means a path that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit.

    “Pawn shops” means indoor retail establishments that accept personal property as collateral for loans, and offer the property for sale to the public.

    “Pedestrian orientation” means any physical structure or place with design qualities and elements that contribute to an active, inviting and pleasant place for pedestrians including but not limited to:

    (A)   Street furniture;

    (B)   Design amenities related to the street level such as awnings, paseos, arcades;

    (C)   Visibility into buildings at the street level;

    (D)   Highly articulated façades at the street level with interesting uses of material, color, and architectural detailing;

    (E)   Continuity of the sidewalk with a minimum of intrusions into pedestrian right-of-way;

    (F)    Continuity of building façades along the street with few interruptions in the progression of buildings and stores;

    (G)   Signage oriented and scaled to the pedestrian rather than the motorist; and

    (H)   Landscaping.

    “Pedestrian-oriented use” means a use which is intended to encourage walk-in customers and which generally does not limit the number of customers by requiring appointments or otherwise excluding the general public. A pedestrian-oriented use provides spontaneous draw from sidewalk and street due to intense and surprising visual interest, high customer turnover and intense social interaction.

    “Permitted use” means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.

    “Person” means any individual, firm, co‑partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.

    “Personal communication services” means a digital wireless communication technology that has the capacity for multiple communication services and provides a system in which calls are routed to individuals rather than places, regardless of location.

    “Personal services” mean establishments providing nonmedical services as a primary use, including:

    (A)   Barber and beauty shops;

    (B)   Clothing rental;

    (C)   Dry cleaning pick‑up stores with limited equipment;

    (D)   Home electronics and small appliance repair;

    (E)   Laundromats;

    (F)    Psychic readers;

    (G)   Shoe repair shops;

    (H)   Spas and hot tubs; and

    (I)    Tanning salons.

    These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.

    “Pharmacy” means a retail store where a licensed pharmacist prepares prescription medicines for sale, which may also sell over-the-counter medicines, personal care products and other miscellaneous products.

    “Planning commission” means the city of Fountain Valley planning commission, appointed by the Fountain Valley city council in compliance with Government Code Section 65101, referred to throughout this title as the “commission.”

    “Plant nurseries and garden supply stores” means commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover or outdoors. Includes stores selling these products, nursery stock, lawn and garden supplies and commercial scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under “General retail stores.” Home greenhouses are included under “residential accessory uses and structures.”

    “Plastics and rubber product manufacturing” means the manufacture of rubber products including: tires; rubber footwear; mechanical rubber goods; heels and soles; flooring; and other rubber products from natural, synthetic or reclaimed rubber. Also includes establishments engaged primarily in manufacturing tires. Also includes: establishments engaged in molding primary plastics for other manufacturers, and manufacturing miscellaneous finished plastics products; fiberglass manufacturing, and fiberglass application services. Establishments engaged primarily in recapping and retreading automobile tires are classified in “Vehicle services—Major repair/body work.”

    “Primary structure” means a structure that accommodates the primary use of the site.

    “Primary use.” The main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours during which activities occur.

    “Primary zoning district” means the zoning district applied to a site by the zoning map, to which an overlay zoning district may also be applied.

    “Printing and publishing.” Establishments engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset or electrostatic (xerographic) copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade such as bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals; establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices. “Quick printing” services are included in the definition of “business support services.”

    “Private residential recreation facilities” means privately-owned, non-commercial outdoor recreation facilities provided for members or project/neighborhood residents, including swim and tennis clubs, park and sport court facilities. Does not include golf courses/country clubs, which are separately defined.

    “Private wireless communication facility” means a wireless communication facility that has not been granted a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).

    “Property line” means the recorded boundary of a parcel of land.

    “Proposed project” means a proposed new structure, new addition to an existing structure, or area of other new site development; these do not include the alteration of any portion of an existing structure other than an addition.

    “Public right-of-way” means an area of land not on a lot that is dedicated for public use to accommodate a transportation system and necessary public utility infrastructure (e.g., water lines, sewer lines, power lines and gas lines).

    “Public safety facilities” means facilities operated by public agencies including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.

    “Public utility facilities” means fixed‑base structures and facilities serving as junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091:

    (A)   Corporation and maintenance yards;

    (B)   Electrical substations and switching stations;

    (C)   Natural gas regulating and distribution facilities;

    (D)   Public water system wells, treatment plants and storage;

    (E)   Telephone switching facilities;

    (F)    Wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields.

    These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in “offices”), or equipment and material storage yards.

    “Public wireless communication facility” means a wireless communication facility that has been granted a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).

    (17)  Definitions “Q.” No specialized terms beginning with the letter “Q” are used at this time.

    (18)  Definitions “R.”

    “Radiofrequency radiation” means electromagnetic radiation in the portion of the spectrum from three kilohertz to three hundred gigahertz.

    “Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:

    (A)   It contains less than three hundred twenty square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms;

    (B)   It contains four hundred square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;

    (C)   It is built on a single chassis; and

    (D)   It is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit.

    “Recycling facilities.” This land use type includes a variety of facilities involved with the collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials.

    (A)   “Collection facility” means a center where the public may donate, redeem or sell recyclable materials, which may include the following, where allowed by the applicable zoning district:

    (i)     Reverse vending machine(s);

    (ii)    Small collection facilities which occupy an area of three hundred fifty square feet or less and may include:

    a.     A mobile unit,

    b.     Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty square feet, and

    c.     Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures.

    (iii)   Large collection facilities which occupy an area of more than three hundred fifty square feet and/or include permanent structures.

    (B)   “Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes or other containers.

    (C)   “Processing facility” means a structure or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, cleaning, compacting, crushing, flattening, grinding, mechanical sorting, remanufacturing and shredding. Processing facilities include the following types, both of which are included under the definition of “scrap and dismantling yards,” below:

    (i)     Light processing facility occupies an area of under forty-five thousand square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and averages two outbound truck shipments each day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers; and

    (ii)    A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

    (D)   “Recycling facility” means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A “certified” recycling or processing facility is certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on a residentially, commercially or industrially designated site used solely for the recycling of material generated on the site.

    (E)   “Recycling or recyclable material” means reusable domestic containers and other materials which can be reconstituted, remanufactured, or reused in an altered form, including glass, metals, paper and plastic. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials.

    (F)    “Reverse vending machine” means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value, as determined by state law. These vending machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other containers.

    A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container.

    “Religious facilities” means facilities operated by religious organizations for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, etc. and religious schools; and accessory uses on the same site, such as living quarters for ministers and staff, and child day care facilities where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the religious facility itself. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, such as full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially related operations (such as a recreational camp) are classified according to their respective activities.

    “Research and development (R&D)” means indoor facilities for scientific research, and the de-sign, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, that are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include com-puter software companies, soils and other materials testing laboratories, or medical laboratories.

    “Residential accessory uses and structures” means any use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to, a residence and does not change the character of the residential use. These uses include the following detached accessory structures, and other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property:

    (A)   Garages;

    (B)   Gazebos;

    (C)   Greenhouses;

    (D)   Spas and hot tubs;

    (E)   Storage sheds;

    (F)    Studios;

    (G)   Swimming pools;

    (H)   Tennis and other on-site sport courts;

    (I)    Workshops.

    Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other personal property, accessory to a residential use. Does not include home satellite dish and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts.

    “Residential care homes” means facilities providing residential social and personal care for children, the elderly, and people with limited ability for self‑care, but where medical care is not a major element. Includes: children’s homes; board and care homes; transitional houses; rehabilitation centers; self‑help group homes. Note: Convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of “Medical service—Extended care.”

    “Residential district or zone” means any of the residential zoning districts established by Section 21.04.020 (Zoning districts established) of this title.

    “Restaurant” means a retail business selling food and beverages prepared on the site, for on- or off-premises consumption. These include eating establishments where customers are served from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premises consumption, and establishments where most customers are served food at tables for on-premises consumption, but may include providing food for take-out. Also includes coffee houses. For permitting purposes, the city categorizes restaurants as:

    “Restaurant, large format” means establishments with fifty-one seats or more.

    “Restaurant, small format” means establishments with fifty seats or less.

    “Restaurant—Outdoor dining” means a restaurant or other eating establishment where tables and seating are provided and food and/or beverages are served in outdoor areas, which front a street, and have at least one side open. For purposes of parking calculations, these do not include interior courtyard areas.

    “Review authority” means the individual or official city body (the community development director, planning commission or city council) identified by this title as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Chapter 4 (Development Code Administration).

    “Roof-mounted” means mounted above the eave line of a structure.

    (19)  Definitions “S.”

    “Schools” means public and private educational institutions, including:

    (A)   Boarding schools;

    (B)   Business, secretarial and vocational schools;

    (C)   Community colleges, colleges and universities;

    (D)   Elementary, middle and junior high schools;

    (E)   Establishments providing courses by mail;

    (F)    High schools;

    (G)   Military academies;

    (H)   Professional schools (law, medicine, etc.);

    (I)    Seminaries/religious ministry training facilities;

    Also includes specialized schools offering instruction in the following:

    (J)    Art;

    (K)   Ballet and other dance;

    (L)   Computers and electronics;

    (M)  Drama;

    (N)   Driver education;

    (O)   Language;

    (P)    Music.

    Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications and management. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities.

    “Secondary residential unit” see Accessory dwelling unit.

    “Secretary of the commission” means the director shall serve as the secretary of the commission.

    “Senior citizen” means an adult fifty-five years or older.

    “Service station” means a retail business selling gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels, which may also provide services which are incidental to fuel services. These secondary services may include vehicle engine maintenance and repair, towing and trailer rental services. Does not include the storage or repair of wrecked or abandoned vehicles, vehicle painting, body or fender work or the rental of vehicle storage or parking spaces.

    “Setback” means the distance by which a structure, parking area or other development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or development feature, or street centerline. Setbacks from private streets are measured from the edge of the easement. Figure 7-4 (Setbacks) shows the location of front, side, street side, rear and interior setbacks.



FIGURE 7-4

SETBACKS

    “Shopping center” means primarily retail commercial sites with two or more separate businesses sharing common pedestrian and parking areas. A small-scale shopping center: is fifty-five thousand square feet or less in gross floor area; is on a site less than five acres in net area; has the majority of its parking located between the public streets and its buildings, and no parking underground or within a parking structure.

    “Single-family dwellings” means buildings designed for and occupied exclusively by one family. Also includes factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the uniform building code (U.B.C.), and mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations. May include the rental of rooms within a dwelling also occupied by the property owner or a primary tenant.

    “Single room occupancy (SRO) hotel” means a residential hotel that contains six or more SRO units designed for long-term occupancy by a single person in compliance with Section 21.10.050(b).

    “Single room occupancy (SRO) unit” means a living unit within a SRO residential hotel consistent with Section 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code which has a minimum area of one hundred fifty square feet and is limited to persons of low and very-low income only.

    “Site” means a parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use.

    “Site coverage” means the percentage of total site area occupied by structures and paving for vehicle use. Structure/building coverage includes the primary structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, etc.) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs, etc.). Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall. Pavement coverage includes areas necessary for the ingress, egress, outdoor parking and circulation of motor vehicles. See Figure 7-5 (Site coverage).

 



FIGURE 7-5

SITE COVERAGE

 

    “Specialized sporting goods store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sales of a specialized line of sporting goods and equipment for a single sporting activity, including but not limited to, baseball, football, basketball, soccer, tennis, golf, bicycles, lacrosse, dance, or other sports; does not include retail establishments selling a variety of goods and equipment for multiple sports.

    “Stand” means a structure for the display and sale of products with no space for customers within the structure itself.

    “Stealth facility” means a communications facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally integrated into a structure. Also referred to as “concealed antenna.”

    “Stone and cut stone product manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments engaged primarily in cutting, shaping, and finishing marble, granite, slate, and other stone for building and miscellaneous uses. Also includes establishments engaged primarily in buying or selling partly finished monuments and tombstones.

    “Storage—Outdoor” means the storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use.

    “Storage—Personal storage facility (mini-storage)” means a structure or group of structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand.

    “Street.” A public thoroughfare accepted by the city, which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined in this subsection.

    “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires attachment to the ground or attachment to something located on the ground. For the purposes of this title, the term “structure” includes “buildings.”

    “Structure-mounted” means mounted to the side of a structure (e.g., a billboard, church steeple, freestanding sign, etc.).

    “Structural clay and pottery product manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments engaged primarily in producing brick and structural clay products, including pipe, china plumbing fixtures, and vitreous china articles, fine earthenware and porcelain products. Artist/craftsman uses are included in “cottage industries,” “handcraft industries and small scale manufacturing,” “home businesses.”

    “Studios for art, dance, music, photography, etc.” means small scale facilities, typically accommodating one group of students at a time, in no more than one instructional space. Larger facilities are included under the definition of “schools—specialized education and training.” These studios include facilities for: individual and group instruction and training in the arts, production rehearsal, music recording, photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; and physical fitness activities such as martial arts training studios, yoga, gymnastics instruction, aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment.

    “Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized Orange County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes the following, as defined in Civil Code Section 1315: a condominium project; a community apartment project; or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative.

    “Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act” means Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions.

    “Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an on-site or off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community (California Government Code Section 65582(g)). As used in this definition, “target population” means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people. Supportive housing shall be considered a residential use of property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

    (20)  Definitions “T.”

    “Tandem parking” means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another.

    “Tattoo establishments” mean premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes, inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use.

    “Telecommunications facilities” means public, commercial and private electromagnetic and photo electrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network and wireless communications, including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, commercial satellite dish antennas and equipment buildings. Does not include telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections.

    “Temporary outdoor retail sales” means the sale of merchandise outdoors on a temporary basis when conducted in conjunction with an existing retail business.

    “Temporary structure” means a structure without any foundation or footings, and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

    “Temporary use” means a use of land that is designed, operated and occupies a site for a limited period of time.

    “Textile and leather product manufacturing” means manufacturing establishments engaged in performing any of the following operations:

    (A)   Coating, waterproofing or otherwise treating fabric;

    (B)   Dying and finishing fiber, yarn, fabric and knit apparel;

    (C)   Manufacture of knit apparel and other finished products from yarn;

    (D)   Manufacture of felt goods, lace goods, non-woven fabrics and miscellaneous textiles;

    (E)   Manufacturing of woven fabric, carpets and rugs from yarn;

    (F)    Preparation of fiber and subsequent manufacturing of yarn, threads, braids, twine cordage;

    (G)   Upholstery manufacturing.

    “Theaters and auditoriums” means indoor facilities for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including:

    (A)   Civic theaters and facilities for “live” theater and concerts;

    (B)   Exhibition and convention halls;

    (C)   Motion picture theaters;

    (D)   Public and semi-public auditoriums;

    (E)   Similar public assembly uses.

    Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events.

    “Transit stations and terminals” means passenger stations for vehicular and rail mass transit systems; also terminal facilities providing maintenance and service for the vehicles operated in the transit system. Includes buses, taxis, railway, etc.

    “Transitional housing” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance (California Government Code Section 65582(j)). Transitional housing shall be considered a residential use of property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

    (21)  Definitions “U.”

    “Use” means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.

    “Utility facilities” means fixed-base structures and facilities serving as junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091:

    (A)   Corporation and maintenance yards;

    (B)   Electrical substations and switching stations;

    (C)   Natural gas regulating and distribution facilities;

    (D)   Public water system wells, treatment plants and storage;

    (E)   Telephone switching facilities;

    (F)    Wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields.

    These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in “offices”), or equipment and material storage yards.

    “Utility infrastructure” means pipelines for water, natural gas and sewage collection and disposal; and facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include offices or service centers or distribution substations.

    (22)  Definitions “V.”

    “Variance” means a discretionary entitlement that may waive or relax the development standards of this title.

    “Vehicle and freight terminals” means this land use consists of transportation establishments furnishing services incidental to air, motor freight and rail transportation including:

    (A)   Freight forwarding services;

    (B)   Freight terminal facilities;

    (C)   Joint terminal and service facilities;

    (D)   Packing, crating, inspection and weighing services;

    (E)   Postal service bulk mailing distribution centers;

    (F)    Transportation arrangement services;

    (G)   Trucking facilities, including transfer and storage.

    “Vehicle services” means the repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (including self-service and attended car washes), or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes the following categories:

    (A)   “Major repair/body work” means repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles. These establishments provide towing, collision repair, other body work and painting services; and also include tire recapping establishments.

    (B)   “Maintenance/minor repair” means minor facilities specialize in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (e.g., muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube, etc.).

    Does not include automobile parking, repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site; automobile service stations, which are separately defined; or automobile dismantling yards, which are included under “recycling—scrap and dismantling yards.”

    “Veterinarians, animal hospitals, kennels, boarding” means office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Kennels and boarding operations are commercial facilities for the keeping, boarding or maintaining of four or more dogs four months of age or older, or four or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops.

    (23)  Definitions “W.”

    “Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution.” These facilities include:

    (A)   “Warehousing” means facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include: warehouse, storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public; warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution; or terminal facilities for handling freight.

    (B)   “Wholesaling and distribution” means establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as:

    (i)     Agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants;

    (ii)    Assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products;

    (iii)   Merchant wholesalers;

    (iv)   Stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment.

    “Wireless telecommunication(s) facilities,” “wireless communication(s) facility,” “wireless facility,” or “facility” means any device or system for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic signals, including, but not limited to, radio waves and microwaves for cellular technology, personal communication services, mobile services, paging systems and related technologies. Facilities include towers, utility poles, transmitters, microwave dishes, antennas and parabolic antennas, small cells, macro and micro cells, DAS, DCU, and all other types of equipment used in transmitting or receiving signals; antenna structures, associated buildings, base stations, emergency power systems or cabinets which house support equipment; and other accessory development.

    (24)  Definitions “X.” No specialized terms beginning with the letter “X” are used at this time.

    (25)  Definitions “Y.”

    “Yard” means an area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this title. See Figure 7-4 (Setbacks).

    (A)   “Front yard” means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback.

    (B)   “Rear yard” means an area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback.

    (C)   “Side yard” means an area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and the required setback.

    (26)  Definitions “Z.”

    “Zero lot line” means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides rests directly on a lot line.

    “Zoning district” means any of the residential, commercial, public, or overlay districts established by Chapters 21.04 through 21.14 of this title, within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.). (Ord. 1555 § 5, 2020; Ord. 1548 § 7, 2019; Ord. 1536 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1527 §§ 9—16, 2017; Ord. 1523 § 8, 2017; Ord. 1514 §§ 5, 6, 2016; Ord. 1510 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1497 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1463 § 5, 2011; Ord. 1460 § 5, 2011; Ord. 1456 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1428 § 5, 2009; Ord. 1385 § 4, 2006; Ord. 1308 § 5, 2000)

