
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    City Seal

1.12    Appeals

1.16    General Penalties

1.20    Administrative Citations

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.040    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.050    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.060    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

1.01.070    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.080    Constitutionality.

1.01.090    References to prior code.

1.01.100    Severability.

1.01.010 Adoption.
There is adopted the “Gardena Municipal Code 1993,” as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 1994)

1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.
This code shall be known as the “Gardena Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Gardena Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Gardena Municipal Code.” Further reference may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Gardena Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 1472 § 2, 1994)

1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Gardena Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Gardena, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 1472 § 3, 1994)

1.01.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 1472 § 4, 1994)

1.01.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 1472 § 5, 1994)

1.01.060 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 1470, passed July 27, 1993. The following ordinance, passed subsequent to Ordinance 1470, but prior to adoption of this code, is adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance 1471 adopted November 23, 1993. (Ord. 1472 § 6, 1994)

1.01.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 1472 § 7, 1994)

1.01.080 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 1472 § 8, 1994)

1.01.090 References to prior code.
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 1472 § 9, 1994)

1.01.100 Severability.
If any provision or clause of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other ordinance provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1472 § 10, 1994)

Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.04.010    Scope.

1.04.020    Definitions.

1.04.030    Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.

1.04.040    Tenure of officers preserved.

1.04.050    Effect of headings.

1.04.060    Meaning of section and subsection.

1.04.070    Reference to acts or omissions within the city.

1.04.080    Acts by deputies.

1.04.090    Writing.

1.04.100    References to ordinances – Application to amendments.

1.04.110    Service of notices.

1.04.120    Proof of notice.

1.04.130    Statute of limitations.

1.04.010 Scope.
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise specify, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. (Prior code § 1-3.01)

1.04.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this code, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and terms are defined as follows:

“Calendar year” means from January 1st through December 31st of any given year.

“City” means the city of Gardena.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Gardena.

“County” means the county of Los Angeles.

“Fiscal year” means from July 1st of any given year through June 30th of the following year.

Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.

“May” is permissive.

“Month” means a calendar month unless otherwise expressed.

Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.

“Oath” includes affirmation.

Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the city, unless otherwise specified.

“Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.

“Person” includes any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, public corporation, political subdivision, city (excepting the city of Gardena), the county of Los Angeles, any district in the county of Los Angeles, the state of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this code expressly provides otherwise.

“Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

“Property” includes both real and personal property.

“Quarterly,” when used to designate a period of time, means the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months.

“Real property” includes land, tenements and hereditaments.

“Shall” is mandatory.

“State” means the state of California.

“Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use or such other public property so designated in any law of the state.

“Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present tense. (Prior code § 1-3.13)

1.04.030 Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments. (Prior code § 1-3.02)

1.04.040 Tenure of officers preserved.
All persons who, at the time this code takes effect, hold office under any of the ordinances repealed by this code, which offices are continued by this code, shall continue to hold them according to their former tenure. (Prior code § 1-3.03)

1.04.050 Effect of headings.
Title, chapter, article and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section of this code. (Prior code § 1-3.04)

1.04.060 Meaning of section and subsection.
“Section” means a section of this code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned. “Subsection” means a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned. (Prior code § 1-3.05)

1.04.070 Reference to acts or omissions within the city.
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution of the state of California or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (Prior code § 1-3.06)

1.04.080 Acts by deputies.
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. (Prior code § 1-3.07)

1.04.090 Writing.
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. (Prior code § 1-3.08)

1.04.100 References to ordinances – Application to amendments.
Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such ordinance of the city unless otherwise specifically provided. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinances of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (Prior code § 1-3.09)

1.04.110 Service of notices.
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the Post Office. (Prior code § 1-3.10)

1.04.120 Proof of notice.
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 1-3.11)

1.04.130 Statute of limitations.
When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation. (Prior code § 1-3.12)

Chapter 1.08
CITY SEAL
Sections:

1.08.010    Adoption of official seal.

1.08.020    Abandonment of former seals.

1.08.030    Facsimiles unlawful.

1.08.040    Custody.

1.08.050    Permit required to display seal privately.

1.08.060    Display of seal on public property.

1.08.070    Use of city seal or letterhead in advertising prohibited.

1.08.010 Adoption of official seal.
Pursuant to the authority so to do as contemplated by law, the council approves and adopts as and for the corporate seal of the city the following seal, with lettering, form, arrangement and designs as set forth and shown thereon and therein, as follows:

    Editor’s Note: Because of the size and/or complexity of the graphic set out in this section, it has been removed from the code. This graphic can be found on file in the clerk’s office.

(Prior code § 2-6.01)

1.08.020 Abandonment of former seals.
All forms of corporate seals adopted, established, or used by or for the city prior to October 26, 1954, shall be and the same are abandoned and nullified for use. The only form of corporate seal for use by or for the city after October 26, 1954, shall be the form of seal set forth in Section 1.08.010. (Prior code § 2-6.02)

1.08.030 Facsimiles unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to make or use the seal of the city, or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction of such seal, or make or use any seal or any design which is an imitation of such seal, or of the design thereof, or which may be mistaken for the seal of the city, or the design thereof, for any purpose other than for city purposes or for the purpose of any board, officer, or department thereof. (Prior code § 2-6.03)

1.08.040 Custody.
The city clerk shall have the official custody of the official seal of the city. (Prior code § 2-6.04)

1.08.050 Permit required to display seal privately.
It is unlawful for any person to display or place, either temporarily or permanently, the official seal of the city on any privately owned motor vehicle or other privately owned vehicle unless by express written permit first had and obtained from the council so to do. In the event any such permit is so granted by the council, it is unlawful for any person to place or display such seal in any manner or at any time contrary to or in violation of the provisions of such permit. (Prior code § 2-6.05)

1.08.060 Display of seal on public property.
Until further order of the council, the city clerk shall designate the particular motor vehicles or other vehicles or items of property belonging to the city on or in connection with which replicas of the official seal of the city shall be used, and when so designated, the officers or employees having immediate charge or control of such vehicles or equipment so designated shall obtain such replicas from the city clerk and affix the same thereto and maintain the same thereon until the further order of the city clerk. (Prior code § 2-6.06)

1.08.070 Use of city seal or letterhead in advertising prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, as said term is defined in Section 1.04.020 of this code, to use the city’s seal or any facsimile of the city letterhead in the advertising of any product, in support of or in opposition to any person seeking an elected office or of any ballot measure or for any purpose whatsoever other than in the official business of the city, its officers and employees. (Prior code § 2-6.07)

Chapter 1.12
APPEALS
Sections:

1.12.010    Right to appeal.

1.12.020    Time within which appeals shall be filed.

1.12.030    Hearings – Notices.

1.12.040    Time limits for judicial reviews of administrative orders or decisions.

1.12.010 Right to appeal.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code as to the finality of a decision, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him pursuant to any provision of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the city pursuant to any provision of this code, may appeal in writing to the council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof. (Ord. 1744 § 1 (part), 2013: prior code § 1-4.01)

1.12.020 Time within which appeals shall be filed.
The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within fourteen days after the receipt of a written notice of such action appealed from, but in no event later than thirty days after the date of such action. (Prior code § 1-4.02)

1.12.030 Hearings – Notices.
The city clerk shall forthwith set such matter for a hearing before the council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be given to the applicant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. At such hearing the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action excepted to should not be approved. The council may continue the hearing from time to time and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (Prior code § 1-4.03)

1.12.040 Time limits for judicial reviews of administrative orders or decisions.
Unless otherwise specified, Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state, pertaining to the time limits for the judicial review of administrative orders or decisions, is incorporated in this section as if fully set forth in this section and shall be applicable to any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, or of any commission, board, officer, or agent of the city, who seeks the judicial review of such decision pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. No further action for declaratory relief may be brought to review an administrative order or decision of the city. (Ord. 1744 § 1 (part), 2013: prior code § 1-4.04)

Chapter 1.16
GENERAL PENALTIES
Sections:

1.16.010    Violations – Misdemeanors – Infractions.

1.16.020    Prohibited acts.

1.16.030    Imposition of penalties.

1.16.040    Determination of punishment.

1.16.050    Place of confinement.

1.16.060    Fees, charges, licenses and taxes made civil debts.

1.16.070    Citation authority/code compliance officer.

1.16.080    Parking citation penalties.

1.16.010 Violations – Misdemeanors – Infractions.
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.

B. Unless otherwise specified, any violation of this code shall be a misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The city attorney, in his sound discretion, may prosecute a violation of this code as an infraction, rather than as a misdemeanor, or reduce or agree to the reduction of a previously filed misdemeanor to an infraction.

C. In addition to the penalties provided by this section, a violation of any provision of this code shall be subject to a civil fine pursuant to the administrative citation provisions of Chapter 1.20. The provisions of this subsection are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city. If the city has already issued a criminal citation for a violation of this code, the chief of police, in his sound discretion, may determine to hold the citation in abeyance and pursue an administrative citation in accordance with Chapter 1.20, in which case a letter shall be sent to the citee. Should the matter be disposed of through the administrative process, no criminal action will then be pursued.

D. Unless otherwise specified, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the city jail or county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

E. Unless otherwise specified, every person convicted of a violation determined to be an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. A fourth violation of the same ordinance within one year may be charged as a misdemeanor.

F. Notwithstanding subsection E of this section, any person convicted of a violation of a local building and safety code determined to be an infraction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation, a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year, and a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation.

G. Except as otherwise provided in Article 1 of Division 17 of the Vehicle Code of the state (Sections 40000.1 et seq.), it is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of any local ordinance adopted pursuant to the Vehicle Code of the state. Except as may otherwise be provided, all violations of the traffic provisions of this code shall constitute infractions. Notwithstanding subsection E of this section, and as provided by Section 42001 of the California Vehicle Code, every person convicted of an infraction for such a violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year, and a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for a subsequent infraction occurring within one year of two or more prior infractions.

H. Notwithstanding subsection E of this section, and as provided for by Section 42001 of the California Vehicle Code, all violations of this code relating to pedestrian violations shall constitute an infraction and every person convicted of a pedestrian violation of this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars.

I. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the fine for parking violations shall be as established by resolution of the city council.

J. In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city. When the violation relates to real property, including the use or condition thereof, the city may recover any nuisance abatement costs and/or administrative fines relating to such violations in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5 as set forth in Chapter 8.64. (Ord. 1744 § 2, 2013: Ord. 1469 § 1, 1993: prior code § 1-2.01)

1.16.020 Prohibited acts.
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Prior code § 1-2.02)

1.16.030 Imposition of penalties.
The provisions of this code which declare certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the punishment described. (Prior code § 1-2.03)

1.16.040 Determination of punishment.
Whenever in this code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the punishment to be inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court authorized to pass sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by this code. (Prior code § 1-2.04)

1.16.050 Place of confinement.
Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the city jail or county jail.

Those certain premises in the police station of the city, located at 1718 West 162 Street, which have heretofore been used and occupied as a city jail in and for the city, shall be the city jail and are particularly described as follows: all that portion of the ground floor of the police station of the city of Gardena, state of California, located at 1718 West 162 Street, which is designed as quarters and accommodations for prisoners, including the cell blocks and quarters of the police department of Gardena, shall be and the same is designated and established as the city jail of, in, and for the city of Gardena, state of California, and such portion of said building is named, designated, fixed and established as the city jail of, in and for the city of Gardena. (Prior code § 1-2.05)

1.16.060 Fees, charges, licenses and taxes made civil debts.
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this code shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. (Prior code § 1-2.06)

1.16.070 Citation authority/code compliance officer.
A. The designation of code compliance officer is created. Such persons shall be public officers whose duties in such capacity shall be limited to the enforcement of municipal code violations.

B. The city manager shall designate which employees shall serve as code compliance officers and shall designate, if desired, any limitations upon the sections of the Gardena Municipal Code to be enforced by such employees.

C. Such persons shall be authorized to make arrests only for the purpose of issuing citations for violations of the municipal code which constitute infractions or misdemeanors.

D. Such persons shall be entitled to carry a shield identifying the individual as a code compliance officer for the city. Such shield may only be used in connection with the officer’s duties in enforcing the municipal code.

E. Persons in the positions of revenue supervisor and business license inspector shall be public officers with all of the powers and duties of a code compliance officer. However, such persons shall be limited to the enforcement of Title 5 of the Gardena Municipal Code.

F. Prior to issuing a citation, the employees designated by the city manager and the individuals designated in this section shall take and successfully complete the training required for peace officers pursuant to Penal Code Section 832, except for that portion of the course relating to training in the use of firearms. (Ord. 1533 § 1, 1998)

1.16.080 Parking citation penalties.
A. Civil Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this code restricting the parking or standing of vehicles shall be assessed a civil penalty. The amounts of such penalties shall be specified on a schedule of civil penalties adopted by council resolution or any other means approved by law.

B. Delinquent Payment Penalty. If any person fails to make timely payment of a parking violation penalty within the time provided in the notice of citation or notice of parking violation, as provided by the California Vehicle Code, or later as may be provided for in this code or other applicable law for accrual of a late payment penalty, a separate delinquency and late payment penalty shall be assessed against that person for the late payment as specified on a schedule of civil penalties adopted by council resolution or any other means approved by law.

C. Administrative Fees, Process Service Fees, Collection Costs Related to Civil Debt Collection and Related Charges. If any person fails to make timely payment of a parking violation penalty within the time provided in the notice of citation or notice of parking violation, as provided by the California Vehicle Code, or later as may be provided for in this code or other applicable law, and further fails to make payment for the delinquency fee as provided for in subsection B of this section, that person shall become liable for and be penalized further in the amount of the actual collection costs in conjunction with the assignment of a parking penalty for collection. That cost shall be added to the penalty and the person shall be liable to the city for both civil penalties and the collection costs including out of pocket administrative costs, civil service of process costs and other direct costs.

D. Each Violation Assessed Separate Civil Penalty. Each person who is assessed a civil penalty under the provisions of this section shall be assessed a separate civil penalty for each violation and shall be liable for the cumulative amount of all such penalties and collection costs.

E. This section shall not bar the use of any other procedure or remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of processing or collecting parking violations. (Ord. 1710 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 1.20
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Sections:

1.20.010    Applicability.

1.20.020    Definitions.

1.20.030    Administrative citation.

1.20.035    Service of administrative citation and notices.

1.20.040    Amount of fines.

1.20.050    Payment of the fine.

1.20.060    Hearing request.

1.20.070    Advance deposit hardship waiver.

1.20.080    Hearing officer.

1.20.090    Hearing procedure.

1.20.100    Hearing officer’s decision.

1.20.110    Right to judicial review.

1.20.120    Failure to pay fines.

1.20.130    Enforcement – Denial of licenses and permits.

1.20.140    Repealed by Ord. 1744.

1.20.010 Applicability.
A. This chapter provides for the imposition of administrative fines to address any violation of this code as well as any failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed by a franchise, land use approval, license, permit, or any other approval or decision of the city. Administrative citations are in addition to all other legal remedies, whether criminal, civil, or administrative, which may be pursued by the city. Each day that a violation continues or there is noncompliance with any condition or requirement constitutes a separate violation which shall be subject to a separate administrative fine.

B. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, in the case of continuing violations which do not create an immediate danger to health and safety, an administrative citation shall not be issued until there has been a failure to comply with at least one notice of violation to the responsible party which sets forth the offense, the necessary remedy, and provides for a reasonable time period in which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation. Except for violations described in subsection D of this section, no notice of violation shall be required for a repeat violation of the same offense within a twelve-month period.

C. An administrative citation may be immediately issued and a fine immediately imposed for the violation of a building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural, health and safety, or zoning requirement if the violation exists as a result of, or to facilitate, the illegal cultivation of cannabis. However, a reasonable period of time for correction or remedy of the violation prior to imposition of an administrative fine shall be allowed if all the following are true:

1. A tenant is in possession of the property that is the subject of the administrative action; and

2. The rental property owner or agent can provide evidence that the rental or lease agreement prohibits the cultivation of cannabis; and

3. The rental property owner or agent did not know the tenant was illegally cultivating cannabis and no complaint, property inspection, or other information caused the rental property owner or agent to have actual notice of the illegal cannabis cultivation.

D. In the case of a continuing violation pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues which do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, an administrative citation shall not be issued until there has been a failure to comply with at least one notice of violation to the responsible party which sets forth the offense, the necessary remedy and provides for a reasonable time period in which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation.

E. Use of this administrative citation procedure shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 1802 § 1, 2019: Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless otherwise stated:

“City manager” means the city manager of the city or his or her designee.

“Enforcement officer” means any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this code and to issue administrative citations for a violation.

“Finance director” or “director” means the finance director of the city or his or her designee.

“Notice of violation” means a notice which sets forth the violation and a description thereof, the remedy required, and the time period in which to remedy the violation.

“Responsible party” means a person who is the owner or occupant of real property, or authorized agent of the owner or occupant of real property, or the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who permits, maintains, causes, or contributes to the cause of a violation of this code or a failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed by a franchise, land use approval, license, permit, or any other approval or decision of the city. For purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible party.

A. Except as provided in Section 1.20.010C, in the case of a continuing violation, when an owner of property is not the occupant of the property, such owner shall not be considered a responsible party unless the city has mailed at least one notice of violation to the owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor, pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 1.20.035.

B. In the case of a noncontinuing violation, when an owner of property is not the occupant of the property, such owner shall not be considered a responsible party unless the city has previously made the owner aware of the same violation within the last twelve months. The owner shall be made aware of such violation in writing, mailed to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 1.20.035.

“Violation” means any violation of any provision of this code, any code adopted by reference by this code, or any failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed on any franchise, land use approval, license, permit or any other approval or decision of the city. (Ord. 1802 § 2, 2019: Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.030 Administrative citation.
A. Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this code determines that a violation has occurred, or there has been a failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed by a franchise, land use approval, license, permit, or any other approval or decision of the city, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person or other responsible party.

B. Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

1. The date of the violation;

2. The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

3. The section of the code violated and a description of the violation;

4. The amount of the fine for the violation;

5. A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which, and the place to which, the fine shall be paid;

6. An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation described in the administrative citation with notice that payment of the fine does not excuse the requirement to remedy a continuing violation;

7. A description of the administrative citation hearing review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation may be obtained;

8. A notice that each violation relating to real property also constitutes a nuisance and that collection of any unpaid fines or nuisance abatement costs may be enforced as an assessment or lien against the real property where the violation occurred;

9. The date of the citation;

10. The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer; and

11. A place for the person receiving the citation to sign and date the citation; however, a citation need not be signed to be valid. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.035 Service of administrative citation and notices.
A. An administrative citation may be issued by an enforcement officer to the responsible party for violation(s) of the municipal code, including any code adopted by reference, in the following manner:

1. Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible party and attempt to obtain the signature of the responsible party on the administrative citation. If the responsible party refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the enforcement officer shall so indicate on the signature line. The failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. Service shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of personal delivery.

2. Service by Mail. As an alternative to personal service, the administrative citation may be mailed to the responsible party by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return service receipt. Simultaneously, the citation shall be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. Notice to a property owner who is not an occupant of real property that is the subject of the violation shall be mailed to the owner’s address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor. Service shall be deemed to have been completed five days after deposit in the mail.

3. Service by Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible party personally or by certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible party has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. A photograph of the administrative citation posted on the property shall be taken as proof of service. Service shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of posting.

B. Unless otherwise specified, service of any other notice, decision or writing required pursuant to this chapter shall be accomplished in the manner specified in subsection A of this section.

C. Failure to receive any notice or citation or other documents specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013)

1.20.040 Amount of fines.
A. The amounts of the fines for municipal code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council.

B. The schedule of fines may specify increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person.

C. The schedule of fines may specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.050 Payment of the fine.
A. The fine shall be paid to the city within thirty days from the date of the administrative citation.

B. Payment of an administrative fine does not relieve a responsible party from remedying an ongoing violation.

C. Where there is more than one responsible party, each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount of the fine, plus any interest and penalties that may be owed. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.060 Hearing request.
A. Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation or that he or she is a responsible party by filing a written request for an appeal hearing with the city clerk’s office within ten days from the date of service of the administrative citation.

B. Any appeal shall be accompanied by the deposit of any monies due to city pursuant to the administrative citation or a written statement that the appellant has applied for an advance deposit hardship waiver pursuant to Section 1.20.070.

C. The request shall state the grounds for contesting the administrative citation.

D. Appellant shall be provided at least ten days’ notice of the time and place set for the hearing which shall be not more than sixty days from the date of filing the appeal.

E. Any additional material submitted to the hearing officer in support of the administrative determination shall be served on the appellant at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

F. Failure to timely request a hearing shall render the administrative citation final and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.070 Advance deposit hardship waiver.
A. Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.20.060B may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver to be determined by the finance director.

B. The request shall be filed in writing with the city clerk’s office no later than the date of the appeal.

C. The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described in Section 1.20.060B shall be stayed unless or until the finance director makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

D. The finance director may waive the requirement of an advance deposit set forth in Section 1.20.060B and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party provides a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the director the person’s actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

E. If the finance director determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the city within ten days of the date of that decision or thirty days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later. However, in no event may the appeal hearing take place until the deposit is remitted.

F. The finance director shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for its determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver within thirty days of application and the written determination of the director shall be served upon the person within five days thereafter.

G. The written determination shall be final. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.080 Hearing officer.
A. The city manager shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. The city manager may sit as the hearing officer, unless to do so violates the requirements of due process.

B. The employment, performance, evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the outcome of the decision or the amount of any monies due to the city upheld by the hearing officer. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.090 Hearing procedure.
A. No hearing shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.20.060 or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.20.070.

B. A hearing shall be set for a date that is not less ten days and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing is filed.

C. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. Appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses.

D. The failure of appellant to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

E. The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

F. The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.100 Hearing officer’s decision.
A. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify, or cancel the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

B. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city.

C. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine.

D. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be reduced or canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly provide a refund of the amount, together with interest at the average rate earned on the city’s portfolio for the period of time that the fine amount was held by the city.

E. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision including the reasons therefor within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall be served upon the appellant within five days after the decision is rendered.

F. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996)

1.20.110 Right to judicial review.
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review by filing an appeal with the superior court of Los Angeles County within twenty days after service of the hearing officer’s decision in accordance with the provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996. Formerly 1.20.130)

1.20.120 Failure to pay fines.
A. Any person who fails to pay to the city any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or before the date that fine is due, according to the administrative citation, hearing officer’s decision, or court order if timely appealed, shall also be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges, including a late payment fee and interest, set forth in the schedule of fines. In no event shall the total due for an infraction exceed the amount set forth in Section 1.16.010E.

B. The failure of any person to pay any fine on or before the date that fine is due, according to the administrative citation, hearing officer’s decision, or court order if timely appealed, may result in the city pursuing any and all legal and equitable remedies to collect the civil fines, including but not limited to those remedies set forth herein. In addition to the fine, the city will be entitled to recover its collection costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees, according to proof and shall be entitled to interest on the unpaid fine in an amount allowed by law pursuant to Civil Code Section 3289(b). (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996. Formerly 1.20.110)

1.20.130 Enforcement – Denial of licenses and permits.
A. Denial of Licenses and Permits. In addition to any other means provided by law, the city may collect any past due administrative citation fine, late payment charge, costs, finally determined taxes or fees by declining to issue or renew any license, permit, zoning variance or other permission required and applied for by the responsible party under any chapter of Titles 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13, 15, 17 and 18 of the City of Gardena Municipal Code until the responsible party pays such fine, charge, costs, finally determined taxes and fees.

B. Procedure to Deny Licenses and Permits.

1. When the enforcement officer becomes aware that a responsible party has failed to pay such fine, charge, costs, finally determined tax or fees within the time prescribed in the administrative citation, the hearing officer’s written decision, or in any order of a court of competent jurisdiction, whichever is applicable, the enforcement officer shall notify the departments responsible for issuing the above-described licenses and permits that said responsible party has a delinquent debt, and that no licenses or permits may be issued to the responsible party until the debt has been fully satisfied.

2. At or prior to the time when a responsible party applies for a license or permit, or for a renewal of such license or permit, the department that is responsible for issuing the license or permit shall notify the responsible party that he or she is ineligible for such license or permit issuance or renewal due to the outstanding debt. The notice shall inform the responsible party that he or she may request a description of the outstanding debt from the administrative services department, and shall inform the responsible party of his or her right to appeal the denial of the license or permit under this section. If notice is provided by mail, it shall be sufficient to mail the notice to the last address the responsible party provided to the issuing department. The date of notice shall be the date the notice was deposited in the mail, if served by first class mail; the date of delivery, if served by personal service; or the date of service if served by any other manner.

3. Upon the responsible party’s request, the administrative services department shall provide the responsible party with a written description of his or her outstanding debt.

4. For purposes of this subsection C, “responsible party” shall include any attorney, agent or representative of a responsible party. The applicable department shall have the right to deny the issuance or renewal of a license or permit if the department reasonably believes that the attorney, agent or representative is seeking the issuance or renewal of a license or permit on behalf of the party responsible for the outstanding debt to the city. In such case, the applicable department shall send written notice of ineligibility to both the responsible party and his or her attorney, agent or representative.

C. Request for Appeal. The appeal provisions of this subsection C shall specifically apply to the denial of a license or permit, notwithstanding any provision of Chapter 1.12 to the contrary.

A responsible party shall have ten business days from the date of notice to appeal the department’s denial by requesting a hearing by the city manager. Requests for an appeal hearing shall be made in writing to the city manager’s office. A request for hearing shall include:

1. The full name, address and telephone number of the responsible party/appellant;

2. A written statement signed by the responsible party/appellant setting forth facts, law or other information relevant to establishing a defense to the department’s denial of the license or permit;

3. A copy of the notice provided to the responsible party/appellant by the license/permit issuing department under subsection (B)(2) of this section;

4. Any documentary evidence that supports the responsible party/appellant’s appeal, including receipts demonstrating payment of the alleged debt; and

5. Payment of the applicable appeal fee in an amount as may be set by city council resolution.

D. Appeal Procedure. Upon receipt of a timely and proper request for a hearing, the city manager shall assign a hearing date no later than fifteen business days after the date of request. The hearing shall not be continued without the consent of the responsible party/appellant. The city manager shall determine whether or not the responsible party/appellant is ineligible for a license/permit pursuant to this section. The hearing shall comply with the following provisions:

1. The city manager shall abide by any prior determination that a debt exists and the scope of review shall be limited to: (a) whether the debt has been satisfied and (b) whether the responsible party/appellant was properly notified that a debt exists pursuant to this chapter, whether by administrative citation, written decision of the hearing officer, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, whichever is applicable. The responsible party/appellant shall not be entitled to raise any defenses related to his or her liability for the underlying debt.

2. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.

3. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall issue a final order that the responsible party/appellant is either eligible or ineligible for issuance or renewal of the license/permit. If the responsible party/appellant is found to be ineligible, his or her license/permit may not be issued or renewed prior to the payment of the outstanding debt. The city manager shall issue an order no more than fifteen business days after the conclusion of the hearing, which shall be served upon the responsible party/appellant within five days after the decision is rendered. The decision of the city manager, or his designee, shall be final.

E. Optional Issuance by City Department. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, a city department may, but shall not be required to, issue an initial or renewal license or permit to a responsible party if the director of the issuing department or other appropriate city department or agency determines that:

1. The responsible party has entered into an agreement with a court of competent jurisdiction, the administrative services department, or other appropriate city department or agency, for the payment of all debts owed and the responsible party is in compliance with the agreement; or

2. The responsible party is contesting liability for or the amount of the debt in a pending administrative or judicial proceeding; or

3. The responsible party has filed a petition in bankruptcy and the debts owed are dischargeable in bankruptcy.

F. Existing License/Permit to Remain in Effect Pending Appeal. When the holder of a license or permit is notified in accordance with subsection B of this section that such license or permit will not be renewed unless an outstanding debt is paid, and provided that the license or permit at issue is still valid and current at the time a request for appeal is timely filed with the city manager’s office, the license or permit shall remain in effect during the pendency of the appeal process described in subsection D of this section. When a license or permit is found to be eligible for renewal, through the appeal process, it shall remain in effect until the renewal is issued. When a license or permit is found to be ineligible for renewal, through the appeal process, it shall expire at such time as the license or permit holder has exhausted or failed to exhaust the appeal procedures described in subsection D of this section.

No provision of this subsection shall be construed to keep in effect or extend the life of a license or permit that has expired, been terminated or otherwise been rendered invalid prior to the date that a request for appeal is filed with the city manager’s office. Further, no provision of this subsection shall be construed to grant any new license or permit rights to a responsible party that does not have a valid and current license or permit prior to the date that a request for appeal is filed with the city manager’s office. (Ord. 1744 § 3 (part), 2013: Ord. 1656 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1504 § 1 (part), 1996. Formerly 1.20.120)

 

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

2.02    Term Limits – City Council Members

2.03    Term Limits – Mayor

2.04    City Council

2.08    Redevelopment Agency

2.12    City Manager

2.16    City Attorney

2.20    Director of Finance

2.24    Elections

2.26    Lobbyists

2.28    Officers’ Bonds

2.32    Gardena Housing Commission

2.36    Human Services Commission

2.40    Planning and Environmental Quality Commission

2.44    Recreation and Parks Commission

2.46    Senior Citizens Commission

2.48    Gardena Youth Commission

2.52    Police Reserve Corps

2.56    Civil Defense

2.58    Alternative Bid Procedures for Public Works Projects

2.60    Purchasing System

2.62    Investments of City Funds

2.64    Personnel System

Chapter 2.02
TERM LIMITS – CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
Sections:

2.02.010    Definitions.

2.02.020    Term limits established.

2.02.030    Effective date.

2.02.010 Definitions.
The terms utilized in this chapter shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Consecutive” means immediately following, without a break in service.

B. “Term” or “term of office” means the four-year period of time for which a council member is elected or appointed as provided by law, as the same may be extended or shortened upon a change of election date(s) as provided by law. (Measure E (part), adopted March 2, 1999)

2.02.020 Term limits established.
A. No person shall serve more than three consecutive terms of office as a city council member; provided, however, that such person shall be eligible to hold such office after a break in service of twenty-four months. For purposes of this section, a person serving for at least two years of a term shall be considered to have served a full term of office.

B. For purposes of this chapter, the office of member of the city council is considered to be separate and distinct from the office of mayor. (Measure E (part), adopted March 2, 1999)

2.02.030 Effective date.
The term limits established by this chapter shall be applicable to all terms of office for members of the city council measured from and commencing with the terms of members of the city council elected at the March 2, 1999, general municipal election. (Measure E (part), adopted March 2, 1999)

Chapter 2.03
TERM LIMITS – MAYOR
Sections:

2.03.010    Definitions.

2.03.020    Term limits established.

2.03.030    Effective date.

2.03.010 Definitions.
The terms utilized in this chapter shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Consecutive” means immediately following, without a break in service.

B. “Term” or “term of office” means the four-year period of time for which the mayor is elected or appointed as provided by law, as the same may be extended or shortened upon a change of election date(s) as provided by law. (Measures D and G (part), adopted March 2, 1999)

2.03.020 Term limits established.
A. Commencing with the mayoral election in the year 2001, no person shall serve more than three consecutive terms of office as mayor provided, however, that such person shall be eligible to hold such office after a break in service of twenty-four months. For purposes of this section, a person serving at least two years of a term shall be considered to have served a full term of office.

B. For purposes of this chapter, the office of mayor is considered to be separate and distinct from the office of member of the city council. (Measure G (part), adopted March 2, 1999)

2.03.030 Effective date.
The term limits established by this chapter shall be applicable to all terms of office for mayor measured from and commencing with the term of the Mayor elected at the March, 2001, general municipal election. (Measure G (part), adopted March 2, 1999)

Chapter 2.04
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.04.010    Meetings – Location.

2.04.020    Meetings – Time – Adjourned meetings.

2.04.030    Meetings – Agenda.

2.04.040    Meetings – Duties of presiding officer.

2.04.050    Meetings – Rights of presiding officer.

2.04.060    Meetings – Open to the public.

2.04.070    Meetings – Order of business.

2.04.080    Meetings – Rules.

2.04.090    Passage of ordinances.

2.04.100    Manner of addressing the council.

2.04.110    Order.

2.04.120    Addressing the council after a motion is made.

2.04.130    Enforcement of order.

2.04.140    Quorum.

2.04.150    Council vacancies – Procedure for filling – Term of appointments.

2.04.160    Approval of minutes.

2.04.170    Compensation of mayor and council.

2.04.010 Meetings – Location.
All official meetings of the council shall be held in the main room of the City Hall, which room is designated as the council chamber of the city, or at such other place as a majority of the city council may designate in its order of adjournment of any regular meeting or its call and notice of a special meeting. (Ord. 1496 § 1, 1996: prior code § 2-3.01)

2.04.020 Meetings – Time – Adjourned meetings.
A. Regular meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at such time as established by resolution of the city council. The council may adjourn any such regular meeting to a certain date which shall be specified in the order of adjournment, and, when so adjourned, such adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes.

B. Such adjourned meeting may likewise be adjourned, and, when so adjourned, shall be a regular meeting for all purposes. In the event any order of adjournment of a regular meeting fails to state the hour at which such adjourned meeting shall be held, such adjourned meeting may be validly held on the date specified in the order of adjournment if held at seven thirty p.m. Special and adjourned regular meetings of the council may be held on Saturdays, and Saturdays, or any part thereof, are deemed not to be holidays for the purposes of holding adjourned regular or special meetings of the council.

C. Members of the council in actual attendance shall be recorded present regardless of their answer or failure to answer the roll call.

D. In the absence of all the members of the council from any regular meeting or adjourned regular meeting, the city clerk may declare such meeting postponed and adjourned to a stated day and hour and shall thereupon deliver, or cause to be delivered, personally to each member of the council a written notice of such adjournment at least three hours before the time to which such regular or adjourned regular meeting has been adjourned. (Ord. 1576 § 1, 1999: prior code § 2-3.02)

2.04.030 Meetings – Agenda.
Prior to each council meeting every city official, board, commission, or other municipal body having any report, communication, or other matter for submission to the council shall notify the city clerk of that fact in advance of the meeting, whereupon the city clerk shall arrange for such items to be placed upon the agenda. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 1999: prior code § 2-3.03)

2.04.040 Meetings – Duties of presiding officer.
The presiding officer shall preserve order at all regular and special meetings of the council. He shall state every question coming before the council, announce the decision of the council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. (Prior code § 2-3.04)

2.04.050 Meetings – Rights of presiding officer.
The mayor, mayor pro tempore, or such other member of the council as may be presiding may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are imposed by this chapter on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a councilman by reason of his acting as the presiding officer. (Prior code § 2-3.05)

2.04.060 Meetings – Open to the public.
All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. (Ord. 1576 § 3, 1999: prior code § 2-3.06)

2.04.070 Meetings – Order of business.
A. Subject to review by the city attorney as to the legal requirements, the order of business for all council meetings shall be determined by adopted resolutions of the council.

B. The presiding officer of the council may alter the adopted order of business of any meeting of the council for good cause and where no other member of the city’s legislative body or the public will be unduly prejudiced by such alteration. (Prior code § 2-3.07)

2.04.080 Meetings – Rules.
The following rules shall govern the meetings of the council and its transaction of business:

A. Oral Communications. Any person may address the council on any matter concerning the city’s business or on any matter over which the city has control; provided, however, preference shall be given to those who may have notified the presiding officer in advance of their desire to speak. There shall be a three minute limit on all speakers. This time limit shall not apply to public hearing items where the property interests of the speaker are affected. Except as provided in this section, no person shall be permitted to address the council unless authorized by a four-fifths vote of all its members.

B. Acquiring the Floor. Every member of the council desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.

C. Interruptions. A member once recognized shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it shall be to call him to order. He shall cease speaking until the question of order shall be determined, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed.

D. Privilege of Closing Debate. The councilman moving the adoption of an ordinance, motion, or resolution or a majority of the council shall have the privilege of closing the debate.

E. Motions. No motion shall be put until it is seconded. When seconded it shall be stated by the mayor or presiding officer before debate. Upon request of the chair or any councilman, every motion shall be reduced to writing. After a motion is stated by the chair, it shall be deemed in the possession of the council, but it may be withdrawn at any time before decision or amendment by the councilman originating such motion or the second thereto. No motion shall be withdrawn by the original maker without the consent of the second.

F. Motions Under Debate. When a motion is under debate, the only motions in order shall be:

1. To adjourn;

2. To table until later in the meeting;

3. To postpone to a certain day;

4. To postpone indefinitely;

5. To adjourn to a certain day;

6. To refer; or

7. To amend.

All such motions shall have precedence in the order herein arranged, the first four to be decided without debate.

G. Amendments. An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an amendment relating to a different subject entirely shall not be in order. A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order but to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.

H. Motion to Reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session or at a recessed or adjourned session thereof. Such motion shall be made by one of the prevailing side but may be seconded by any member and may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the floor. It shall be debatable. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent any member of the council from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council.

I. Remarks of Councilmember. A councilmember may request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the council entered in the minutes. If the council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes.

J. Synopsis of Debates. The city clerk may be directed by the presiding officer, with the consent of the council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming regularly before the council.

K. Adjournment. A motion to adjourn the council shall always be in order except:

1. When a member is in possession of the floor;

2. While the ayes and nays are being called;

3. When the members are voting; or

4. When adjournment was the last preceding motion.

L. Amendment Motion to Adjourn. A motion simply to adjourn cannot be amended, but a motion to adjourn to a given time may be and shall be open to debate.

M. Suspension of Rules. The rules may be suspended by the unanimous vote of the councilmen present and may be amended by a majority vote of the members elect in the same manner as ordinances are amended.

N. Robert’s Rules. Upon questions arising not covered by this section, Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern unless a majority of the council shall deem otherwise. The majority of the council may at any time adopt additional rules for a certain meeting, or a certain purpose only, providing no conflict is raised with the rules created in this chapter. (Ord. 1576 § 4, 1999; prior code § 2-3.08)

2.04.090 Passage of ordinances.
Ordinances may be introduced by reading the title only. Except in urgency cases, copies of all ordinances shall be sent in advance of their introduction to each member of the council and to the city manager. When submitted for final passage, all ordinances shall be read in full unless the reading thereof is dispensed with by unanimous consent of the council members present. (Ord. 1576 § 5, 1999: prior code § 2-3.09)

2.04.100 Manner of addressing the council.
Each person addressing the council shall stand and give his/her name in an audible tone of voice and provide his/her address either audibly and/or in writing for the records. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to any members thereof. No person, other than the council, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the presiding officer. (Ord. 1576 § 6, 1999: prior code § 2-3.10)

2.04.110 Order.
Order shall be maintained while the council is in session. No person shall disrupt, disturb or otherwise impede the meeting whether by words or action. Any person who so disrupts, disturbs, or impedes a meeting may be ejected and shall not be allowed to return without permission granted by a majority of the city council. (Ord. 1744 § 4 (part), 2013: prior code § 2-3.11)

2.04.120 Addressing the council after a motion is made.
After a motion is made by the council, no person shall address the council without first securing the permission of the entire council so to do. (Prior code § 2-3.12)

2.04.130 Enforcement of order.
The chief of police, or such members of the police department as he may designate, shall be sergeant at arms of the council meetings. He shall carry out all orders and instructions given him by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order in the council chamber. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of any police officer present to remove any person who disrupts, disturbs, or impedes a council meeting and place such person under arrest. (Ord. 1744 § 4 (part), 2013: prior code § 2-3.13)

2.04.140 Quorum.
In the event a quorum should not be present at any meeting of the council and there is important business to be transacted or disposed of without delay, any two members of the council may cause a written notice of those facts to be served personally upon the absent members, together with a request for their immediate attendance. Thereupon it shall be the duty of such absent members to attend the meeting at once, unless prevented by sickness or death in the immediate family. (Prior code § 2-3.14)

2.04.150 Council vacancies – Procedure for filling – Term of appointments.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36512 of the California Government Code, a person appointed to fill a vacancy on the council shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010: prior code § 2-3.14.2)

2.04.160 Approval of minutes.
As soon as possible after each council meeting the city clerk shall send copies of the minutes of such meeting to each member of the council at his residence. Thereafter the reading of such minutes at any following meeting may be dispensed with, and they may be approved without any further proceeding. Their approval shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer, attested by the city clerk. (Ord. 1576 § 7, 1999: prior code § 2-3.15)

2.04.170 Compensation of mayor and council.
Pursuant to Section 36516 of the Government Code of the state, each member of the council, including the mayor, shall receive as compensation a salary of six hundred and fifty dollars ($650.00) per month.

Pursuant to Section 36516.1 of said Government Code, the mayor shall receive as compensation an additional three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month.

Any amounts paid to the mayor or members of the council for reimbursements pursuant to Section 36514.5 of said Government Code or for retirement and health and welfare benefits shall not be included in determining salary pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2002; prior code § 2-3.16)

Chapter 2.08
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Sections:

2.08.010    Need for agency declared.

2.08.020    Agency established.

2.08.030    City council designated as agency – Compensation.

2.08.040    Designation of council found to serve public interest.

2.08.010 Need for agency declared.
It is hereby found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (part), 2003)

2.08.020 Agency established.
The redevelopment agency is hereby established pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 33101, to be known as the “Redevelopment Agency of the City of Gardena.” (Ord. 1643 § 1 (part), 2003)

2.08.030 City council designated as agency – Compensation.
Pursuant to the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 33200, the city council hereby declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city. Redevelopment agency members shall receive compensation as authorized under the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (part), 2003)

2.08.040 Designation of council found to serve public interest.
The city council hereby finds and determines that the designation of the city council as the redevelopment agency of the city will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (part), 2003)

Chapter 2.12
CITY MANAGER
Sections:

2.12.010    Office created.

2.12.020    Appointment.

2.12.030    Eligibility.

2.12.040    Compensation.

2.12.050    Bond.

2.12.060    Duties and responsibilities.

2.12.070    Acting city manager.

2.12.080    Council interference prohibited.

2.12.090    Duties confined to administrative service.

2.12.100    Removal.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 498, 1252 and 1364.

2.12.010 Office created.
The city shall have a city manager form of government. The position of city manager is created, and the city manager shall have the powers vested in the position by the Government Code of the state and all other applicable laws. (Prior code § 2-1.01)

2.12.020 Appointment.
The city manager shall be appointed by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. (Prior code § 2-1.02)

2.12.030 Eligibility.
No person elected as councilman of the city, subsequent to such election shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until two years have elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the council. (Prior code § 2-1.03)

2.12.040 Compensation.
The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the council from time to time shall determine and fix by resolution and such compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate.

The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under the direction of the council. Reimbursement shall only be made however, when an itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented and approved by the council. (Prior code § 2-1.04)

2.12.050 Bond.
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond for the faithful performance of his duties in such sum as may be determined by the council. The premium for such bond shall be paid by the city. (Prior code § 2-1.05)

2.12.060 Duties and responsibilities.
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of the council. He or she shall be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the power to:

A. See that all laws and ordinances are properly enforced within the city;

B. Appoint, discipline and dismiss all department heads and all subordinate officers and employees of the city, except the city clerk, city treasurer, and city attorney; transfer employees from one department to another; and consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under his or her jurisdiction;

C. Exercise control over all departments and divisions of the city government and over all the appointive offices and employees thereof;

D. Attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the council, except when his or her removal is under consideration by the council;

E. Recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient;

F. Keep the council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city;

G. Prepare and submit to the council the annual budget;

H. Prepare and recommend to the council a salary plan;

I. Purchase all supplies for all departments or divisions of the city; no expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the council except upon a report of approval of the city manager;

J. Make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department thereof and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation running to the city;

K. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to the services maintained by public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits, licenses and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed;

L. Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city;

M. Devote his or her entire working time to the duties and interests of the city; and

N. Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Ord. 1795 § 1, 2018; prior code § 2-1.06)

2.12.070 Acting city manager.
The assistant city manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the council and city clerk, shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. In the event the city manager’s absence or disability extends beyond thirty days, the council may appoint an acting city manager. (Prior code § 2-1.07)

2.12.080 Council interference prohibited.
The council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purposes of inquiry. Neither the council nor any member thereof shall demand the appointment of any person or his removal from office by the city manager, or by any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city, other than by suggestions to the city manager. The council, nor any member thereof, shall not give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. (Prior code § 2-1.08)

2.12.090 Duties confined to administrative service.
There is retained by and to the council the sole power of being the policy making and legislative body for the city and the duties and powers of the city manager are expressly confined to the administrative service of the city. (Prior code § 2-1.09)

2.12.100 Removal.
The council, by a majority vote of all of its members at a regular council meeting, may terminate the employment of the city manager and remove him from office at any time and for any reason, except that the city manager shall not be removed from the office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any municipal election held in the city at which election the mayor or a member of the council is elected. (Prior code § 2-1.10)

Chapter 2.16
CITY ATTORNEY
Sections:

2.16.010    Creation of position and appointment.

2.16.020    Duties and responsibilities.

2.16.030    Compensation.

2.16.040    Removal.

2.16.010 Creation of position and appointment.
There is created, continued and established the position of city attorney who shall be appointed by the council. He or she shall be an attorney at law, admitted to the State Bar of the state of California, and duly licensed to practice law within the state. (Prior code § 2-1.5.01)

2.16.020 Duties and responsibilities.
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council and all other city officers, departments, boards and commissions. In addition to duties which may be prescribed from time to time by the council, the city attorney shall:

A. Draft and prepare all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, leases and any and all legal documents;

B. Attend to all legal matters, litigation and suits in which the city is a party or in which it is directly or indirectly interested;

C. Attend all council meetings, unless excused therefrom by the council;

D. Institute proceedings against municipal officers to compel them to perform a duty enjoined upon them by law;

E. File criminal complaints and prosecute violations of this code; and

F. All other duties and responsibilities as provided for in this code or the laws of the state. (Prior code § 2-1.5.02)

2.16.030 Compensation.
The city attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the council from time to time shall determine and fix by resolution, and such compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate.

The city attorney shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under the direction of the council. Reimbursement shall only be made however, when an itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented and approved by the council. (Prior code § 2-1.5.03)

2.16.040 Removal.
The council, by a majority vote of all of its members at a regular council meeting, may terminate the employment of the city attorney and remove him from office at any time and for any reason, except that the city attorney shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any municipal election held in the city at which election the mayor or a member of the council is elected. (Prior code § 2-1.5.04)

Chapter 2.20
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Sections:

2.20.010    Office created.

2.20.020    Powers and duties.

2.20.030    Transfer of city clerk’s duties.

2.20.040    Bond.

2.20.050    Authority to combine position with other offices.

2.20.010 Office created.
In order to establish a central area for the uniform processing and development of all fiscal and budgetary functions, there is created the office of director of finance for the city. (Prior code § 2-9.01)

2.20.020 Powers and duties.
The director of finance shall be charged with all the finance and accounting duties of the city and shall be subject to all the powers granted and imposed upon the city clerk by the provisions of Article I of Chapter 4 of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title IV of the Government Code of the state and Sections 40802 through 40805 of said Government Code. The director of finance shall perform such other duties as may be delegated from time to time by the council or city manager. (Prior code § 2-9.02)

2.20.030 Transfer of city clerk’s duties.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state, all of the finance and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk under Sections 40802 through 40805 of said Government Code are transferred to the director of finance and the city clerk is relieved of all such duties. (Prior code § 2-9.03)

2.20.040 Bond.
The director of finance shall execute and deposit with the city a fidelity bond as required of the city clerk by Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state. Such bond shall be in the sum of fifty thousand dollars. (Prior code § 2-9.04)

2.20.050 Authority to combine position with other offices.
The position of director of finance may be combined with that of any other office in the city by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 2-9.05)

Chapter 2.24
ELECTIONS
Sections:

Article I. Campaign Financing

2.24.010    Purpose and intent.

2.24.020    Campaign contributions – Limitations – Disclosures.

2.24.025    Officeholder expenses.

2.24.030    Campaign expenditures uncontrolled by candidates or committees.

2.24.040    Suppliers of goods and services – Disclosure of records required.

2.24.050    Enforcement authority.

2.24.060    Penalties.

2.24.070    Rules of construction.

2.24.080    Severability.

Article II. Elections Generally

2.24.100    Date held.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 1022, 1081 and 1136.

Article I. Campaign Financing

2.24.010 Purpose and intent.
Incidental to the high cost of election campaigning is the problem of improper influence, real or potential, exercised by campaign contributors over elected officials.

It is the purpose and intent of the council in enacting this chapter to place realistic and enforceable limits on the amounts which may be contributed for political campaigning in municipal elections; to place realistic and enforceable limits on the amounts individuals may contribute to political campaigns in municipal elections; to insure and promote integrity, honesty, and fairness in the decisions of public policy; to insure that funds and services donated to a candidate or campaign committee are used solely for lawful campaign purposes; to insure a level of discussion of public issues adequate for a viable political campaign and to provide an opportunity for all citizens to become candidates for public office unhindered by a need to meet exorbitant campaign costs; to require a full public disclosure of campaign contributions received, the names and addresses of contributors to such campaigns, and the purpose and amounts of expenditures in political campaigns in municipal elections; and to provide for the full and fair enforcement of all the provisions of this chapter.

In seeking to establish such realistic limitations on campaign costs, it is the intent of the council to promote a broader and more open participation by all citizens in the electoral process, and it is in no way intended that such limitations should act to deprive or restrict any citizen in the exercise of his rights guaranteed under the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution.

The council finds, in this regard, that municipal elections constitute municipal affairs and that the reasonable regulation thereof as set forth in this chapter is permitted by Section 22808 of the Elections Code of the state. Further, pursuant to Section 81013 of the Government Code of the state, it is determined that the Political Reform Act of 1974 shall apply to local elections and that the additional requirements imposed by this chapter do not preclude any person from complying with said Act. (Prior code § 4-16.01)

2.24.020 Campaign contributions – Limitations – Disclosures.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

1. “Contribution” means a payment, a loan, an extension of credit, a forgiveness of a loan, a payment of a loan by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a payment, except to the extent that full and adequate consideration is received, unless it is clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is not made for political purposes. An expenditure made at the behest of a candidate, committee, or elected officer is a contribution to the candidate, committee, or elected officer, unless full and adequate consideration is received for making the expenditure.

The term “contribution” includes the purchase of tickets for events such as dinners, luncheons, rallies, and similar fund-raising events; the granting of discounts or rebates not extended to the public generally or the granting of discounts or rebates by television and radio stations and newspapers not extended on an equal basis to all candidates for the same office; and the payment of compensation by any person for the personal services or expenses of any other person if such services are rendered or expenses incurred on behalf of a candidate or committee without the payment of full and adequate consideration.

The term “contribution” further includes any transfer of anything of value received by a committee from another committee.

The term “contribution” does not include amounts received pursuant to an enforceable promise to the extent such amounts have been previously reported as a contribution. However, the fact that such amounts have been received shall be indicated in the appropriate campaign statement.

Notwithstanding the foregoing definition of “contribution,” the term does not include volunteer personal services or payments made by any individual for his own travel expenses if such payments are made voluntarily without any understanding or agreement that they shall be directly or indirectly repaid to him.

A loan or extension of credit shall be considered a contribution from the maker and guarantor of the loan and shall be subject to the contribution limitations of this chapter except that such limitations shall not apply to loans or extensions of credit made to the candidate by a commercial lending institution in the lender’s regular course of business on terms available to members of the general public for which the candidate is personally liable.

2. “Election campaign” shall commence at the time a statement of intention to be a candidate is filed with the California Fair Political Practices Commission. A copy of the statement shall be filed with the city clerk at the time it is filed with the commission and all limitations on contributions shall apply from that date.

3. Person Defined. For the purpose of this section, “person” shall mean an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, committee, or any other organization or group of persons acting in concert.

B. Limitation on Contributions by Persons.

1. For all election campaign accounts for elections through and including the March, 1999 election, no person shall make, and no candidate for elective office in the city, or campaign treasurer, shall solicit or accept any contribution or loan which would cause the total amount contributed or loaned by that person to that candidate, including contributions or loans to all committees controlled by that candidate, with respect to a single election to exceed five hundred dollars. For all election campaign accounts for elections commencing with the March, 2001 election, no person shall make, and no candidate for elective office in the city, or campaign treasurer, shall solicit or accept any contribution or loan which would cause the total amount contributed or loaned by that person to that candidate, including contributions or loans to all committees controlled by that candidate, with respect to a single election to exceed one thousand dollars.

2. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a candidate’s contribution of his or her personal funds to his or her own campaign contribution account.

C. Anonymous Contributions by Individuals. No person shall make and no candidate or committee shall solicit or accept, any anonymous contribution which will cause the total amount of anonymous contributions by such person with respect to a single election to be fifty dollars or more.

Any anonymous contribution of fifty dollars or more shall not be kept by the intended recipient but instead shall be promptly paid to the treasurer of the city for deposit in the General Fund of the city to be used for the purpose of defraying the costs of elections borne by the city and shall not be used to benefit any candidate or committee.

D. Total Anonymous Contributions. Total anonymous contributions to a candidate or committee which exceed in the aggregate five hundred dollars with respect to a single election shall not be used by the candidate or the committee of the candidate for whom they were intended. Total anonymous contributions exceeding five hundred dollars shall be placed in the General Fund of the city within one business day after the reporting date, and shall be earmarked and used for the purpose of defraying the costs of elections borne by the city, and shall not be used to benefit any candidate or committee.

E. Contributions Made on Behalf of Another. No person shall make a contribution on behalf of another, or while acting as the intermediary or agent of another, without disclosing to the recipient of the contribution both the person’s, intermediary’s, or agent’s own full name and street address, occupation and the name of the person’s, intermediary’s or agent’s employer, if any, or the person’s, intermediary’s or agent’s principal place of business if the person, intermediary, or agent is self-employed; the recipient of the contribution shall also be made aware of the full name and street address and occupation and the name of the employer, if any, or principal place of business, if self-employed, of the actual contributor.

F. Assumed Name Contributions. No contribution shall be made, directly or indirectly, by any person or combination of persons acting jointly in a name other than the name by which they are identified for legal purposes, nor in the name of another person or combination of persons. No person shall make a contribution in his or its name of anything belonging to another person or received from another person on the condition that it be used as a contribution. Upon discovery by a candidate, or his campaign treasurer or committee, that a contribution has been received in violation of this subsection, the amount received in violation of this subsection shall be promptly paid from available campaign funds to the treasurer of the city for deposit in the General Fund of the city, and shall be earmarked to be used for the purpose of defraying the costs of elections borne by the city, and shall not be used to benefit any candidate or committee.

G. Disclosure. The full name, complete mailing address, and occupation, if any, of any person who has made a campaign contribution of one hundred dollars or more shall be reported by the candidate, or treasurer if made to a committee on the campaign disclosure statement filed with city clerk.

H. Contributions by City Contractors.

1. No person who contracts with the city, either for the rendition of personal services or for the furnishing of any material, supplies, or equipment to the city, or for selling any land or building to the city, directly or indirectly, shall make any contribution to a candidate or committee at any time between the commencement of negotiations for and during (1) the completion of the performance under, or (2) the termination of negotiations for such contract or the furnishing of material, supplies, equipment, land, or building, whichever occurs later.

2. No candidate, agent for a candidate, committee, or agent for a committee shall knowingly solicit any contribution from any person prohibited by subdivision (1) of this subsection from making such a contribution.

3. This subsection shall not apply to persons contracting with the city whose contracts do not require the approval of the city council.

I. Fund-raising Events. In the event a candidate or committee desires to have a campaign fund-raising event of any kind directly connected with a campaign for public office, then in that connection the candidate or committee shall file a statement showing the gross income from such event, and the costs of the event shall be deducted from the gross receipts, and the net figure shall apply to the sums which by this chapter are permitted to be expended.

J. Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the same enforcement provisions set forth in Sections 91000 through 91014 of the Government Code of the state, which sections are incorporated by reference. (Ord. 1593 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1581 § 2, 1999; prior code § 4-16.02)

2.24.025 Officeholder expenses.
A. No person shall make, and no officeholder or treasurer shall solicit or accept any contribution or loan which would cause the total amount contributed or loaned by that person to that officeholder, including contributions and loans to all committees controlled by that officeholder, with respect to a single term of office, to exceed five hundred dollars. This amount is in addition to the one thousand dollars allowed per election pursuant to Section 2.24.020(B).

B. Contributions may be made, solicited and accepted pursuant to this section from the time an officeholder is sworn in through and including the date that the officeholder leaves office.

C. Any contributions received pursuant to this section shall be kept in a separate fund within the officeholder’s campaign account until such time as state law is amended by statute or court decision to allow or require separate officeholder accounts, in which case this section shall be deemed to require separate officeholder accounts.

D. Any funds received pursuant to this section may be used for any purpose authorized by the State Political Reform Act for campaign funds, with the exception that such funds may not be used as campaign funds for any future city election or to repay campaign debts of any prior city election, including the election for which the officeholder currently holds office.

E. Any funds which have been contributed pursuant to this section which remain in the account the day after the officeholder leaves office may be used for any purpose for which surplus campaign funds may be used under the State Political Reform Act, with the exception that such funds may not be used to repay the campaign debts of any prior city election, including the election for which the officeholder currently holds office.

F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an officeholder’s contribution of his or her personal funds to his or her own officeholder fund.

G. The definitions contained within Section 2.24.020(A) and the provisions of Section 2.24.020, subsections C through J, shall apply to officeholder contributions as well as to campaign contributions and the term “candidate” used in such sections shall mean “officeholder” for purposes of this Section 2.24.025. (Ord. 1581 § 3, 1999)

2.24.030 Campaign expenditures uncontrolled by candidates or committees.
Persons or organizations not subject to the control of a candidate but who make expenditures for or against a candidate shall indicate clearly on any material published, displayed, or broadcast that it was not authorized by a candidate when such expenditures in whole or in part would have been covered by the provisions of this chapter if they were subject to the control of a candidate. Such persons or organizations shall comply with all the filing requirements imposed on candidates and committees by this chapter. (Prior code § 4-16.03)

2.24.040 Suppliers of goods and services – Disclosure of records required.
No person who supplies goods or services, or both goods and services, to a candidate or committee for use in connection with the campaign of the candidate or for or against a measure shall refuse knowingly to divulge or disclose to the enforcement authority his record of any expenditures made by the candidate or committee in payment for such goods or services, or both. (Prior code § 4-16.04)

2.24.050 Enforcement authority.
For the purposes of this chapter, “enforcement authority” means the district attorney of the county and/or the Attorney General of the state for all civil and criminal enforcement. (Prior code § 4-16.05)

2.24.060 Penalties.
All penalties prescribed by the Political Reform Act of 1974 shall apply to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-16.06)

2.24.070 Rules of construction.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed liberally in order to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-16.07)

2.24.080 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the chapter and applicability of such provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Prior code § 4-16.08)

Article II. Elections Generally

2.24.100 Date held.
Pursuant to the California Elections Code, the city council hereby changes the city’s general municipal election from the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March of odd-numbered years to the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March1 of even-numbered years, with the first such municipal election being held in March 2020. Said election shall be consolidated with the statewide primary election conducted by Los Angeles County upon the county’s approval. (Ord. 1782 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1491 § 1, 1995)

1
Code reviser’s note: The words “in March” have been added for clarity per the direction of the city.


Chapter 2.26
LOBBYISTS
Sections:

2.26.010    Definitions.

2.26.020    Registration required.

2.26.030    Fees.

2.26.040    Registration statement – Contents.

2.26.050    Registration amendment.

2.26.060    Termination.

2.26.070    Exemptions.

2.26.080    Gift prohibitions.

2.26.090    General prohibitions.

2.26.100    Disclosure before legislative body.

2.26.110    Duties of the city clerk.

2.26.120    Enforcement.

2.26.130    Applicability of other laws.

2.26.010 Definitions.
Unless otherwise apparent from the context, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“City official” means any elected or appointed city officer, member, employee or consultant (who qualifies as a public official within the meaning of the Political Reform Act) of the city who, as part of his or her official duties, participates in the consideration of any official action other than in a purely clerical, secretarial or ministerial capacity.

“Lobbyist” means any person who is employed, contracts or otherwise receives compensation or other economic consideration, other than reimbursement for reasonable travel expenses, to communicate directly or through agents, employees or subcontractors with any city official for the purpose of influencing official action.

“Person” means an individual, proprietorship, firm, syndicate, committee, labor organization, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, limited liability company, corporation, business trust, or any other organization or group of persons acting in concert.

“Responsible person” means the partner, owner, or officer who is responsible for filing statements on behalf of the lobbyist when a lobbyist is other than a natural person. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.020 Registration required.
A. Every lobbyist shall register by filing a registration statement with the city clerk no later than ten days after becoming a city lobbyist.

B. Unless a notice of termination is filed pursuant to Section 2.26.060, each lobbyist shall be required to renew its registration on an annual basis on or before April 1st of each year, except that lobbyists that file their initial registration within thirty days of April 1st shall not be required to file a renewal until April 1st of the following year. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.030 Fees.
Each lobbyist required to file a registration statement and a renewal statement under this chapter shall be charged a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.040 Registration statement – Contents.
The registration statement shall contain the following:

A. If the filer is an individual, the full name, business address and telephone number of the filer and the name and address of the filer’s employer, if any;

B. If the filer is a person other than an individual, the full name, business address and telephone number of: the filer; of each person who will be providing lobbying services on behalf of the lobbyist; and of the responsible person;

C. The name and address of each current client for whom lobbying is or will be performed and the official action the client is being employed to influence on behalf of that client;

D. A statement signed by each individual, responsible person, and person named pursuant to subsection B of this section as a person who will provide lobbying services that the person has read and understands the prohibitions contained in Sections 2.26.080 and 2.26.090. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.050 Registration amendment.
A. If any changes occur in any of the information contained in a registration or renewal statement, an amended registration statement shall be filed with the city clerk by the tenth day of the month following the month in which the change occurred.

B. If the change includes the addition of the name of a client, then the amended registration statement must be filed prior to the lobbyist engaging in lobbying services as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.060 Termination.
Lobbyists which cease all activity which required registration shall file a notice of termination within twenty days after such cessation. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.070 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to:

A. Any public official acting in his or her official capacity, and any government employee acting within the scope of his or her employment;

B. Any newspaper or other periodical of general circulation, book publisher, radio, television or cable station (including any individual who owns, publishes, or is employed by any such newspaper or periodical, radio, television or cable station) which in the ordinary course of business publishes news items, editorials, or other comments, or paid advertisement, which directly or indirectly urge action upon official actions;

C. A person when representing a bona fide religious institution or society solely for the purpose of protecting the public’s right to practice the doctrines of such institution or society;

D. A person when representing a duly organized not-for-profit charitable, religious, civic, patriotic, or community service organization;

E. A person whose activity is limited to meeting with city staff or appearing at public hearings on behalf of an application for a permit or license to provide translation services or to present architectural or engineering plans or drawings. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.080 Gift prohibitions.
No lobbyist shall make to a city official and no city official shall knowingly receive from a registered lobbyist a gift or gifts aggregating more than fifty dollars in any calendar month. No lobbyist shall act as an agent or intermediary in the making of any such gift or arrange for the making of any such gift by any other person. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.090 General prohibitions.
No lobbyist shall do any of the following:

A. Do anything with the purpose of placing any city official under personal obligation of the lobbyist;

B. Deceive or attempt to deceive any city official with regard to any material fact pertinent to any pending or proposed official action;

C. Cause or influence the introduction of any matter for consideration by the city as official action for the purpose of thereafter being employed to influence the occurrence or nonoccurrence of such official action;

D. Attempt to create a fictitious appearance of public favor or disfavor of any proposed official action or to cause any communication to be sent to any city official in the name of any fictitious person or in the name of any real person without the consent of such person;

E. Represent, either directly or indirectly, that the lobbyist can control the official action of any city official;

F. Accept or agree to accept any payment in any way contingent upon success by the lobbyist. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.100 Disclosure before legislative body.
A lobbyist, whenever appearing at a public meeting before the city council, planning commission, or any other legislative body of the city for the purpose of influencing official action, shall publicly disclose the following:

A. His or her identity as a lobbyist;

B. The name of his employer;

C. The name of the client;

D. The subject for which he or she is performing lobbying activity. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.110 Duties of the city clerk.
A. The information provided in registration statements filed pursuant to this chapter shall be compiled by the city clerk and shall be forwarded to the city council and city manager within ten days of receipt.

B. In May of each year, the city clerk shall file an annual report with the city council, compiling the information filed by lobbyists who have reregistered in accordance with this chapter.

C. All statements filed by the city clerk under this chapter shall be preserved by the city clerk for a period of five years from the date of filing. Such reports and statements shall constitute part of the public records of the city clerk’s office and shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.120 Enforcement.
The city attorney may institute such legal action at such time as he or she deems necessary to prosecute, enjoin, or redress a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

2.26.130 Applicability of other laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall exempt any lobbyist from or excuse such lobbyist’s noncompliance with applicable provisions of any other laws of the state or any other jurisdiction. (Ord. 1726 § 1 (part), 2011)

Chapter 2.28
OFFICERS’ BONDS
Sections:

2.28.010    City clerk and city treasurer to be bonded.

2.28.020    Bonds for other officials.

2.28.030    Successors in office.

2.28.040    Master bond.

2.28.050    Temporary appointments.

2.28.060    Duty of city clerk to bond incumbents.

2.28.070    Premium payments.

2.28.010 City clerk and city treasurer to be bonded.
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state, the city clerk and the city treasurer, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall each execute a bond. The penal sum of such respective bonds shall be as follows:

A. The official bond of the city clerk shall be in the penal sum or amount of ten thousand dollars.

B. The official bond of the city treasurer shall be in the penal sum or amount of two hundred thousand dollars. (Prior code § 2-5.01)

2.28.020 Bonds for other officials.
The council may by resolution from time to time determine the amounts of the official bonds of any and all other officers, agents and employees of the city. Subject to any changes which may be made by the council by resolution, all bonds posted by any agent, officer, or employee of the city prior to April 19, 1948, are approved and continued in their present amounts. (Prior code § 2-5.02)

2.28.030 Successors in office.
The successor to the office of city clerk or city treasurer shall execute a bond before entering the duties of his office as required by the provisions of Section 2.28.010. (Prior code § 2-5.03)

2.28.040 Master bond.
When deemed expedient by the council, a master official bond may be used with a schedule attached containing the names of the officers, agents, or employees required to give an official bond and the amount for which such person is bonded. (Prior code § 2-5.04)

2.28.050 Temporary appointments.
In the event a vacancy occurs in any office, agency, or employee-relationship wherein an official bond is required, any person temporarily appointed to fill such vacancy during the making of a permanent appointment thereto shall furnish an official bond in the same penalty as is prescribed for the office, agency, or position to which he is so temporarily assigned, but in such case his status as such temporary or acting officer, agent, or employee shall be shown in such bond. (Prior code § 2-5.05)

2.28.060 Duty of city clerk to bond incumbents.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to take note of any change in any incumbencies of any of the offices, agencies, or employment for which bonds are required by the council and to see that the new incumbent, whether upon a permanent or temporary basis, furnishes the bond required by the council. (Prior code § 2-5.06)

2.28.070 Premium payments.
The premium or charge for all official bonds of all officers, agents, or employees of the city required to give such bond shall be paid by the city. (Prior code § 2-5.07)

Chapter 2.32
GARDENA HOUSING COMMISSION
Sections:

2.32.010    Created.

2.32.020    Membership.

2.32.030    Terms.

2.32.040    Vacancies.

2.32.050    Organization and meetings.

2.32.060    Functions.

2.32.070    Ex officio member.

2.32.080    Compensation.

2.32.010 Created.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Council by Section 34291 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, there is created the Gardena housing commission. (Prior code § 12-2.01)

2.32.020 Membership.
The Gardena housing commission shall consist of five members. Each councilmember shall nominate one member who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to ratification by the council. All members shall be residents of the city, and at least two members shall be tenants of property owned or operated by the Gardena housing authority. One such tenant member shall be over sixty-two years of age if the authority has tenants over such age. (Prior code § 12-2.02)

2.32.030 Terms.
A. The term of office for each member of the housing commission shall be for a period of two years after the date of appointment or coterminus with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who nominated the commissioner, whichever occurs first.

B. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and such appointments may be terminated by a majority vote of the membership of the council.

C. All members shall serve until their respective successors are appointed.

D. Commissioners may be reappointed. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 1998: prior code § 12-2.03)

2.32.040 Vacancies.
A. If a vacancy shall occur on the Gardena housing commission, the vacancy shall be filled by nomination by the member of the council having the right of nomination and shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.

B. If a tenant member ceases to be a tenant of the Gardena housing authority leaving less than two tenant members on the commission, he shall be disqualified as a member, and another tenant shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term. (Prior code § 12-2.04)

2.32.050 Organization and meetings.
The Gardena housing commission shall develop its own bylaws which shall set forth the organization of the commission. The commission shall hold at least one meeting each year within thirty days after the anniversary date of the first meeting of the commission. The commission may meet more often as desired by the commission or as requested by the council. (Prior code § 12-2.05)

2.32.060 Functions.
The functions of the Gardena housing commission shall be to review and make recommendations on all matters to come before the Gardena housing authority prior to authority action, except emergency matters and matters which the commission, by resolution, excludes from its review. (Prior code § 12-2.06)

2.32.070 Ex officio member.
To aid and assist the Gardena housing commission in its deliberations, the executive director of the Gardena housing authority, or his designated representative, shall serve as an ex officio member of the commission and shall have no voting power. (Prior code § 12-2.07)

2.32.080 Compensation.
Members of the Gardena housing commission shall receive no compensation. However, the members shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred in the performance of their duties. (Prior code § 12-2.08)

Chapter 2.36
HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
Sections:

2.36.010    Created.

2.36.020    Purpose.

2.36.030    Membership.

2.36.040    Terms.

2.36.050    Forfeiture of office.

2.36.055    Quorum.

2.36.060    Organization.

2.36.065    Meetings.

2.36.070    Powers and duties.

2.36.080    Additional duties.

2.36.090    Ex officio member.

2.36.100    Secretary and minutes.

2.36.110    Compensation.

2.36.010 Created.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the council, there is created a human services commission consisting of five members. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.01)

2.36.020 Purpose.
The human services commission shall be responsible for the development and utilization of human services within the city for the betterment of the community. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.02)

2.36.030 Membership.
The human services commission shall consist of five members. The mayor and each councilmember shall have the right to nominate one member from the citizens at large, and such nominations shall be honored by ratification and confirmation by a majority vote of the membership of the council. Membership eligibility is established as follows:

Each appointee shall be a resident and a registered elector of the city for a period of one year immediately preceding appointment.

The composition of the commission shall reflect the ethnic makeup of the city as nearly as is possible.

Officials of the city shall not be eligible for appointment as members, except as may be provided in this chapter for ex officio officers. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.03)

2.36.040 Terms.
A. The term of office for each human services commissioner shall be two years after the date of appointment or coterminus with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who nominated the commissioner, whichever occurs first. Commissioners may be reappointed.

B. Each commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and any commissioner may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the membership of the Council.

C. All commissioners shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

D. If a vacancy shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled by nomination by the member of the council having the right of nomination and shall be for the remainder of the current unexpired term. (Ord. 1670 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1548 § 2, 1998; prior code § 11-4.04)

2.36.050 Forfeiture of office.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any human services commissioner (excepting nonvoting members) who absents himself from any three consecutive regular meetings of the human services commission or who is absent from a total of six regular meetings of the commission in any twelve month period shall thereby automatically forfeit his position or office as a member of the commission and the name of such person shall be automatically removed from the membership of the commission immediately after the adjournment of any such third consecutive regular meeting or of any such six regular meetings in any such twelve month period, as the case may be, at which such commissioner has not appeared.

The secretary of the commission shall thereupon promptly notify the council of such fact, whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by appointment as set forth in Section 2.36.030. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.05)

2.36.055 Quorum.
Three voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum of the commission for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1670 § 1, 2005)

2.36.060 Organization.
The human services commission shall develop its own bylaws which shall set forth the organization of the commission. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.06)

2.36.065 Meetings.
The Human Services Commission shall meet regularly once per month at a time and place in the city to be determined by the commission. Meetings falling upon legal holidays of the city shall not be scheduled. (Ord. 1670 § 3, 2005)

2.36.070 Powers and duties.
The human services commission shall have the following duties:

A. To advise the council on all matters relating to social conditions within the city;

B. To assess and report to the council the social needs of the citizenry;

C. To advise the department of recreation and human services on policy and program direction for meeting such needs and making appropriate recommendations to the council in this regard;

D. To assist the council and the department of recreation and human services in developing and marshalling the human services necessary to accomplish the duties set forth in this section; and

E. To help generate citizen participation and input with respect to those issues affecting the community which have a social or human dimension. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.07)

2.36.080 Additional duties.
The human services commission shall not be limited to those duties specifically set forth in this chapter but shall do all things necessary to identify the role and responsibility of the city in relation to social conditions, needs and aspirations within the city and to assist in the assumption of such role and the discharge of such responsibility by the city. In so doing, the commission shall work with and seek the cooperation of individuals and public and private entities in bringing to bear the human services of the community for such purposes.

Upon a request from the commission, city staff personnel may provide the commission with official information relating to commission responsibilities, which information is readily available and not exempt from disclosure pursuant to the Public Records Act of the state and the rulings of the city attorney. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.08)

2.36.090 Ex officio member.
To aid and assist the human services commission in its deliberations, the director of recreation and human services, or his designated representative, shall serve as an ex officio member of the commission and shall have no voting power. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.09)

2.36.100 Secretary and minutes.
A. The director of recreation and human services, or his designee, shall serve as secretary to the human services commission and to any of its committees, and accurate minutes of the activities of the commission shall be maintained by the secretary. Minutes shall include the following subject matter:

1. The time and place of each meeting of the commission;

2. The names of the commissioners present;

3. All official acts of the commission;

4. The votes given by the commissioners, except when the action is unanimous; and

5. A summary of all proceedings before the commission.

B. All minutes shall be reduced to writing and shall be presented to the commission at the earliest reasonable time for approval, amendment, or correction. The minutes, or true copies thereof, shall be open to public inspection. Copies of the minutes shall be furnished to the council, members of the commission, and any other public official requiring them. (Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.10)

2.36.110 Compensation.
Members of the Human Services Commission shall be compensated in an amount as established by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 1670 § 4, 2005; Ord. 1574 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 11-4.11)

Chapter 2.40
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY COMMISSION
Sections:

2.40.010    Created.

2.40.020    Membership.

2.40.030    Terms.

2.40.040    Forfeiture of office.

2.40.050    Powers and duties – Quorum.

2.40.060    Levy of taxes for expenses.

2.40.070    Financial powers.

2.40.080    Rulemaking powers.

2.40.090    Time and place of meetings.

2.40.100    Notification of pending matters.

2.40.110    Extension and continuation.

2.40.115    Ex officio member.

2.40.120    Compensation.

2.40.130    Secretary and minutes.

2.40.010 Created.
A planning commission, which shall be known and referred to as the “planning and environmental quality commission,” of, in, and for the city, is created and established pursuant to the provisions of that certain act of the Legislature of the state which is designated and referred to in Section 65000 of the Government Code of the state as the “Planning and Zoning Law” (Title 7, as reflected in Sections 65000 through 65912, inclusive, of the Government Code of the state), as amended to date, and as the same may hereafter be amended. (Prior code § 10-1.01)

2.40.020 Membership.
A. The planning and environmental quality commission shall consist of five members who shall be designated respectively as commissioner Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. The mayor and each councilmember shall have the right to nominate a commissioner from the citizens at large, and such nominations shall be honored by ratification and confirmation by a majority vote of the membership of the council. Each appointee shall be:

1. A resident of the city for the period of one year immediately preceding appointment; and

2. A registered elector of the city for the period of one year immediately preceding appointment.

B. Officials of the city shall not be eligible to appointment as commissioners, except as may be provided in this chapter for ex officio officers. (Prior code § 10-1.02)

2.40.030 Terms.
A. The term of office for each planning and environmental quality commissioner serving on said commission as of September 9, 1976, the effective date of Ordinance No. 1040, shall expire or shall have been deemed to have expired at midnight on the date immediately preceding the two-year anniversary date of said appointment, or at midnight on the date of the expiration of the tenure or term of the member of the council who nominated the commissioner, whichever date occurs first.

B. The term of office for each planning and environmental quality commissioner appointed after September 9, 1976, shall be two years after the date of appointment or coterminus with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who nominated the commissioner, whichever occurs first. Commissioners may be reappointed.

C. Each commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and any commissioner may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the membership of the Council.

D. All commissioners shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

E. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of office of a commissioner, the vacancy shall be filled by nomination by the member of the council having the right of nomination and shall be for the term set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 1670 § 5, 2005; Ord. 1548 § 3, 1998; prior code § 10-1.03)

2.40.040 Forfeiture of office.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any planning and environmental quality commissioner (excepting nonvoting members) who absents himself or herself from any three consecutive regular meetings of the planning and environmental quality commission or who is absent from a total of six regular meetings of the commission in any twelve-month period shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position or office as a member of the commission and the name of such person shall be automatically removed from the membership of the commission immediately after the adjournment of any such third consecutive regular meeting or of any such six regular meetings in any such twelve-month period, as the case may be, at which such commissioner has not appeared.

The secretary of the commission shall thereupon promptly notify the council of such fact, whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by appointment as set forth in Section 2.40.020. (Prior code § 10-1.04)

2.40.050 Powers and duties – Quorum.
A. The planning and environmental quality commission and the members thereof shall respectively have and exercise each and all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges and authorities of city planning commissions and of members of such commissions, as set forth, provided for and contemplated in and under the provisions of the state planning and zoning law and under the provisions of Title 18, as the same now exist and may hereafter be amended, and shall perform the duties, acts and functions of such city planning commissions and members thereof, respectively, as indicated therein.

B. The commission is designated as and shall serve as, the advisory agency for the city under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state (Sections 66410 et seq. of the Government Code of the state).

C. The commission shall review and recommend actions on a proposed general plan, proposed specific plan or amendments thereto and shall perform the functions of the city’s planning agency and board of zoning adjustment, under the provisions of the state Planning and Zoning law (California Government Code Section 65000 et seq.).

D. Three of the voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum of the commission for the transaction of business.

E. The planning and environmental quality commission shall make all environmental decisions required by CEQA or other environmental laws relating to actions for which the commission is the final decision making body, absent an appeal to the city council. (Ord. 1738 § 58, 2012; Ord. 1545 § 1, 1998; prior code § 10-1.05)

2.40.060 Levy of taxes for expenses.
The council, in making its annual tax levy and as a part thereof, may levy and collect a tax not to exceed in any fiscal year the sum of two mills on the dollar of assessed valuation for the purpose of defraying the lawful expenses incurred by the planning and environmental quality commission in carrying out the purposes of the Planning and Zoning Law of the state. (Prior code § 10-1.06)

2.40.070 Financial powers.
The planning and environmental quality commission shall have no power or authority to bind or obligate the city, or any officer or department thereof, for any money, debt, undertaking, or obligation of any kind in excess of the appropriation which the council may have made for the purposes of the commission in any fiscal year. (Prior code § 10-1.08)

2.40.080 Rulemaking powers.
Except as otherwise provided in this code or applicable laws, the planning and environmental quality commission is empowered to adopt rules to regulate the transaction of business before it. (Prior code § 10-1.09)

2.40.090 Time and place of meetings.
Regular meetings of the planning and environmental quality commission shall be held in the Council Chamber of the City Hall, unless a council meeting is scheduled, on the first and third Tuesdays of each month beginning at seven p.m. Meetings falling upon legal holidays of the city shall not be scheduled. (Prior code § 10-1.10)

2.40.100 Notification of pending matters.
The city clerk is authorized and instructed to notify the planning and environmental quality commission of any matters which may be pending before the council and to forward to the commission from time to time any and all documents, proceedings and instruments which may be so pending and which matters, documents, proceedings, and instruments, according to law, are required to be submitted to the commission prior to final action thereon by the council. (Prior code § 10-1.11)

2.40.110 Extension and continuation.
Wherever in any part of this code the words “planning commission” are used, they shall mean the planning and environmental quality commission. (Prior code § 10-1.12)

2.40.115 Ex officio member.
To aid and assist the commission in its deliberations, the community development director, or that director’s designated representative, shall serve as an ex officio member of the commission and shall have no voting power. (Ord. 1670 § 6, 2005)

2.40.120 Compensation.
Members of the Planning and Environmental Quality Commission shall be compensated in an amount as established by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 1670 § 7, 2005; prior code § 10-1.14)

2.40.130 Secretary and minutes.
The community development director, or a designee thereof, shall serve as secretary to the planning and environmental quality commission and shall take and maintain minutes of the meetings of the commission. (Prior code § 10-1.15)

Chapter 2.44
RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION
Sections:

2.44.010    Created.

2.44.020    Membership.

2.44.030    Terms.

2.44.040    Forfeiture of office.

2.44.045    Organization.

2.44.050    Powers and duties.

2.44.055    Quorum.

2.44.060    Recommendations to the council.

2.44.070    Recreation and human services director – Duties.

2.44.080    Ex officio member.

2.44.090    Compensation.

2.44.100    Secretary and minutes.

2.44.110    Meetings.

    Prior history: Prior code Sections 11-1.01 – 11-1.14.

2.44.010 Created.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the council, there is created a recreation and parks commission consisting of five members. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.020 Membership.
A. The recreation and parks commission shall consist of five members. The mayor and each councilmember shall have the right to nominate a commissioner from the citizens at large and such nominations shall be honored by ratification and confirmation by a majority vote of the membership of the council. Each appointee shall be:

1. A resident of the city for the period of one year immediately preceding appointment; and

2. A registered elector of the city for the period of one year immediately preceding appointment.

B. Officials of the city shall not be eligible to appointment as commissioners, except as may be provided in this chapter for ex officio officers. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.030 Terms.
A. The term of office for each recreation and parks commissioner shall be two years after the date of appointment or coterminous with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who nominated the commissioner, whichever occurs first. Commissioners may be reappointed.

B. Each commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, and any commissioner may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the membership of the Council.

C. All commissioners shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

D. If a vacancy shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled by nomination by the member of the council having the right of nomination and shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1670 § 8, 2005; Ord. 1548 § 4, 1998; Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.040 Forfeiture of office.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any recreation and parks commissioner (excepting nonvoting members) who absents himself or herself from any three consecutive regular meetings of the recreation and parks commission or who is absent from a total of six regular meetings of the commission in any twelve month period shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position or office as a member of the commission and the name of such person shall be automatically removed from the membership of the commission immediately after the adjournment of any such third consecutive regular meeting or of any such six regular meetings in any such twelve month period, as the case may be, at which such commissioner has not appeared. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.045 Organization.
The Recreation and Parks Commission shall develop its own bylaws, which shall set forth the organization of the commission. (Ord. 1670 § 9, 2005)

2.44.050 Powers and duties.
The recreation and parks commission may recommend to the council and the planning and environmental quality commission the acquisition of lands for recreation and park purposes. In addition, the commission shall have the following powers and duties:

A. To consider, advise, or recommend to the council the needs of the city pertaining to the acquisition, development and use of facilities, buildings, and structures for recreation and park purposes;

B. To review the proposed annual capital outlay budget for recreation and park purposes and make recommendations to the council concerning its adoption;

C. To prepare annually, prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, a program of public improvements and land acquisitions which it deems necessary or desirable to be undertaken during the forthcoming ten year period;

D. To promote public interest in and understanding of the recreation and park program and regulations relating thereto. It may consult and confer with public officials and agencies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with the citizens generally with relation to the effects of such program;

E. To have such other powers and duties as the council may, by ordinance or resolution, confer upon it. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.055 Quorum.
Three voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum of the commission for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1670 § 10, 2005)

2.44.060 Recommendations to the council.
Prior to taking final action on the adoption of any ordinance or resolution relating to any of the matters contained in Section 2.44.050, the council shall submit the same to the recreation and parks commission for its recommendations thereon unless such action was in the first instance recommended to the council. The commission shall make its recommendations relative thereto within thirty days after such submission or such extension thereof as may be granted by the council. Should the commission fail to make such recommendations within the time so limited, it shall be deemed to have approved the same. Whenever the commission shall make a recommendation relative to any of the foregoing matters, the council shall take final action. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.070 Recreation and human services director – Duties.
The recreation and human services director shall manage and supervise the public recreation of the city within or without its corporate limits; shall aid, promote and supervise all public functions of a public recreational nature or character; shall, subject to the recommendation and approval of the council, have supervision and control of all equipment, apparatus, buildings, portions of buildings, parks and playgrounds devoted to public recreation; and shall issue permits for the use of playgrounds and other public recreation areas, equipment, and facilities. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.080 Ex officio member.
To aid and assist the recreation and parks commission in its deliberations, the recreation and human services director, or his designated representative, shall serve as an ex officio member of said commission and shall have no voting power. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.090 Compensation.
The members of the recreation and parks commission shall be compensated in an amount as established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.100 Secretary and minutes.
A. The recreation and human services director, or his designee, shall be the secretary to the recreation and parks commission and shall maintain accurate minutes of the activities of the commission. Minutes shall include the following subject matters;

1. The time and place of each meeting of the commission;

2. The names of the commissioners present;

3. All official acts of the commission;

4. The votes given by commissioners, except when the action is unanimous; and

5. A summary of all proceedings before the commission.

B. All minutes shall be reduced to writing and shall be presented to the commission at the earliest reasonable time for approval, amendment, or correction. The minutes, or true copies thereof, shall be open to public inspection. Copies of the minutes shall be furnished to the council, members of the commission and any other public official requiring them. (Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

2.44.110 Meetings.
The Recreation and Parks Commission shall meet regularly once per month at a time and place in the city to be determined by the commission. Meetings falling upon legal holidays of the city shall not be scheduled. (Ord. 1670 § 11, 2005; Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1994)

Chapter 2.46
SENIOR CITIZENS COMMISSION
Sections:

2.46.010    Created.

2.46.020    Membership.

2.46.030    Terms.

2.46.040    Forfeiture of office.

2.46.045    Organization.

2.46.050    Powers and duties.

2.46.055    Quorum.

2.46.060    Ex officio member.

2.46.065    Meetings.

2.46.070    Secretary and minutes.

2.46.080    Compensation.

2.46.010 Created.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the council, there is created a senior citizens commission consisting of five members. (Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

2.46.020 Membership.
A. The senior citizens commission shall consist of five members. The mayor and each council member shall have the right to nominate one member from the citizens at large and such nominations shall be honored by ratification and confirmation by a majority vote of the membership of the council.

B. Membership eligibility is established as follows:

1. Each appointee shall be a resident and a registered elector of the city for a period of one year immediately preceding appointment.

2. Each appointee shall be at least fifty years of age.

3. Officials of the city shall not be eligible for appointment as members, except as may be provided in this chapter for ex officio members. (Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

2.46.030 Terms.
A. The term of office for each senior citizens commissioner shall be two years after the date of appointment or coterminous with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who nominated the commissioner, whichever occurs first. Commissioners may be reappointed.

B. Each commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, and any commissioner may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the membership of the Council.

C. All commissioners shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

D. If a vacancy shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled by the member of the council having the right of nomination and shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1670 § 12, 2005; Ord. 1548 § 5, 1998; Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

2.46.040 Forfeiture of office.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any senior citizens commissioner (excepting nonvoting members) who absents himself or herself from any three consecutive regular meetings of the senior citizens commission or who is absent from a total of six regular meetings of the commission in any twelve month period shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position or office as a member of the commission and the name of such person shall be automatically removed from the membership of the commission immediately after the adjournment of any such third consecutive regular meeting or of any such six regular meetings in any such twelve month period, as the case may be, at which such commissioner has not appeared. (Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

2.46.045 Organization.
The Senior Citizens Commission shall develop its own bylaws, which shall set forth the organization of the commission. (Ord. 1670 § 13, 2005)

2.46.050 Powers and duties.
The Gardena senior citizens commission shall advise the council on all matters relating to the senior citizens of the city and shall assist the council in meeting the needs of such citizens. In addition, it shall coordinate its activities with those of the affiliated committee on aging. (Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

2.46.055 Quorum.
Three voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum of the commission for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1670 § 14, 2005)

2.46.060 Ex officio member.
To aid and assist the Gardena senior citizens commission, the director of recreation and human services, or his designee, shall serve as an ex officio member of the commission and shall have no voting power. (Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

2.46.065 Meetings.
The Senior Citizens Commission shall meet regularly once per month at a time and place in the city to be determined by the commission. Meetings falling upon legal holidays of the city shall not be scheduled. (Ord. 1670 § 15, 2005)

2.46.070 Secretary and minutes.
A. The director of recreation and human services, or his designee, shall be the secretary to the senior citizens commission and shall maintain accurate minutes of the activities of the commission. Minutes shall include the following subject matters;

1. The time and place of each meeting of the commission;

2. The names of the commissioners present;

3. All official acts of the commission;

4. The votes given by commissioners, except when the action is unanimous; and

5. A summary of all proceedings before the commission.

B. All minutes shall be reduced to writing and shall be presented to the commission at the earliest reasonable time for approval, amendment, or correction. The minutes, or true copies thereof, shall be open to public inspection. Copies of the minutes shall be furnished to the council, members of the commission and any other public official requiring them. (Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

2.46.080 Compensation.
The members of the senior citizens commission shall be compensated in an amount established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1477 § 2 (part), 1994)

Chapter 2.48
GARDENA YOUTH COMMISSION
Sections:

2.48.010    Created.

2.48.020    Membership.

2.48.030    Terms.

2.48.040    Forfeiture of office.

2.48.050    Organization.

2.48.055    Quorum.

2.48.060    Powers and duties.

2.48.065    Meetings.

2.48.070    Ex officio member.

2.48.080    Secretary and minutes.

2.48.090    Compensation.

2.48.010 Created.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the council, there is created a Gardena youth commission consisting of ten members. (Prior code § 11-5.01)

2.48.020 Membership.
A. The Gardena youth commission shall consist of ten members. The mayor and each city council person shall have the right to nominate one member from the citizens at large. Such nominations shall be honored by ratification and confirmation by a majority vote of the membership of the council. The remaining five members shall be nominated by majority vote of the council appointed commissioners. Such nominations shall be ratified and confirmed by city council.

B. Membership eligibility is hereby established as follows:

1. Each appointee shall be between fourteen and eighteen years of age, and either be a resident of the city for a period of one year immediately preceding appointment, or have a Gardena mailing address and be a full-time student of either Gardena High School or Serra High School.

2. The composition of the commission shall reflect the ethnic make-up of the city as nearly as possible.

3. Officials of the city shall not be eligible for appointment as members, except as may be provided in this chapter for ex officio officers. (Prior code § 11-5.02)

2.48.030 Terms.
A. Council Appointees.

1. The term of office for each youth commissioner shall be two years after the date of appointment or coterminous with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who nominated the commissioner, whichever occurs first. Commissioners may be reappointed.

2. Each commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, and any commissioner may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the membership of the Council.

3. All commissioners shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

4. If a vacancy shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled by the member of the council having the right of nomination and shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.

B. Noncouncil Appointees.

1. The term of office for each youth commissioner shall be for two years from date of ratification.

2. Each commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, and any commissioner may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the membership of the Council.

3. All commissioners shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

4. If a vacancy shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled by nomination of, and ratification by, the youth commission and city council, respectively and shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1670 § 16, 2005; Ord. 1548 § 6, 1998; prior code § 11-5.03)

2.48.040 Forfeiture of office.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any youth commissioner who absents himself or herself from any three consecutive regular meetings of the Gardena youth commission or who is absent from a total of six regular meetings of the commission in any twelve-month period shall automatically forfeit his or her position or office as a member of the commission and the name of such person shall be automatically removed from the membership of the commission immediately after the adjournment of any such third consecutive regular meeting or of any such six regular meetings in any such twelve-month period, as the case may be, at which such commissioner has not appeared.

The secretary of the commission shall promptly notify the council and youth commission regarding forfeiture of their appointee, whereupon the vacancy shall be filled by appointment as set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 11-5.04)

2.48.050 Organization.
The Gardena youth commission shall develop its own bylaws which shall set forth the organization of the commission. (Prior code § 11-5.05)

2.48.055 Quorum.
Six (6) voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum of the commission for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1670 § 17, 2005)

2.48.060 Powers and duties.
The Gardena youth commission shall advise the council on all matters relating to the youth of the city and shall assist the council in meeting the needs of such youth. (Prior code § 11-5.06)

2.48.065 Meetings.
The Gardena Youth Commission shall meet regularly once per month at a time and place in the city to be determined by the commission. Meetings falling upon legal holidays of the city shall not be scheduled. (Ord. 1670 § 18, 2005)

2.48.070 Ex officio member.
To aid and assist the Gardena youth commission, the director of recreation and human services, or his designee, shall serve as an ex officio member of the commission and shall have no voting power. (Prior code § 11-5.07)

2.48.080 Secretary and minutes.
A. The director of recreation and human services, or his designee, shall serve as secretary to the Gardena youth commission and to any of its committees and accurate minutes of the activities of the commission shall be maintained by the secretary. Minutes shall include the following subject matter:

1. The time and place of each meeting of the commission;

2. The names of the commissioners present;

3. All official acts of the commission;

4. The votes given by the commissioners, except when the action is unanimous; and

5. A summary of all proceedings before the commission.

B. All minutes shall be reduced to writing and shall be presented to the commission at the earliest reasonable time for approval, amendment, or correction. The minutes, or true copies thereof, shall be open to public inspection. Copies of the minutes shall be furnished to the council, members of the commission and any other public official requiring them. (Prior code § 11-5.08)

2.48.090 Compensation.
Members of the Gardena Youth Commission shall be compensated in an amount as established by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 1670 § 19, 2005; prior code § 11-5.09)

Chapter 2.52
POLICE RESERVE CORPS
Sections:

2.52.010    Establishment.

2.52.020    Functions of the corps.

2.52.030    Training.

2.52.040    Membership.

2.52.050    Eligibility for membership.

2.52.060    Rules and regulations.

2.52.070    Termination of membership.

2.52.080    Identification cards and badges.

2.52.090    Firearms.

2.52.100    Authority of members.

2.52.110    Complement of corps.

2.52.120    Uniforms and insignia.

2.52.130    Disaster and Workmen’s Compensation benefits.

2.52.140    Impersonation of members.

2.52.010 Establishment.
There is established in and for the city a police reserve corps. Such corps is so established as a voluntary organization composed of persons to be appointed by the chief of police (referred to in this chapter as “chief”).

Each and all of such persons so appointed and composing the corps shall serve gratuitously. The chief shall have complete authority and control over the corps. The chief may appoint as members of the corps any persons whom he deems to be qualified and he may reject any application for membership. (Prior code § 3-4.01)

2.52.020 Functions of the corps.
The corps shall function as a unit of the police department in the program and activities of the disaster council of the city and shall also function to assist regular police officers of the city in law enforcement and the maintenance of peace and order in all cases where, in the opinion of the chief, it is impracticable to furnish adequate police protection solely by means of the regular police officers of the city. (Prior code § 3-4.02)

2.52.030 Training.
The chief shall provide for the training of candidates for membership in the corps and for the further training of members of the corps in all fields of police activity and for that purpose may assign such members to any of the various police duties of the police department. (Prior code § 3-4.03)

2.52.040 Membership.
Membership of the police reserve corps shall be open to both men and women. (Prior code § 3-4.04)

2.52.050 Eligibility for membership.
No person shall become a member of the corps until he has taken the training and is able to meet all other requirements prescribed by the chief for such membership. When so qualified and when selected by the chief, such member shall then be sworn in by the chief, or his duly authorized representative, as a member of the corps and shall take and file with the city clerk the required loyalty oath. (Prior code § 3-4.05)

2.52.060 Rules and regulations.
In order to effectuate the purposes of the corps, the chief may by order establish rules and regulations to govern the corps, including the fixing of specific duties of its members and providing for the maintenance of discipline.

The chief may change such orders from time to time. (Prior code § 3-4.06)

2.52.070 Termination of membership.
The membership of any person in the corps may be terminated by the chief at any time and any member of the corps may resign from the corps at any time upon notifying the chief of police in writing of his resignation. (Prior code § 3-4.07)

2.52.080 Identification cards and badges.
When a selected and designated person has been duly sworn in and has subscribed and filed the required loyalty oath, an identification card, badge, and cap piece and such other insignia or evidence of identification as the chief may prescribe, shall be issued to such person who shall thereupon be a member of the corps and shall carry the same at all times. At the termination of his service, such member shall surrender to the chief of police all such cards and identification which have been issued to him. (Prior code § 3-4.08)

2.52.090 Firearms.
No member of the corps shall carry any firearm until he has qualified. All members of the corps when on duty shall carry the regulation police baton unless otherwise instructed by the chief. (Prior code § 3-4.09)

2.52.100 Authority of members.
A member of the corps when on duty as assigned by the chief, or his duly authorized representative, shall have the authority to direct traffic in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the city and of the state, and shall have the same general powers of arrest as any regular member of the police department, subject, however, to any limitation which the chief, or his duly authorized representative, may impose. (Prior code § 3-4.10)

2.52.110 Complement of corps.
The chief may order, diminish, or expand the membership of the corps at any time as in his discretion may be required. (Prior code § 3-4.11)

2.52.120 Uniforms and insignia.
The uniform for members of the corps shall be similar to the uniform worn by members of the regular police department, with an identifying insignia to be prescribed by the chief. Sidearms shall be carried in the regulation police Sam Browne belt and holster. The uniform, badge, and cap piece may be worn and the gun and baton carried, only while on duty as assigned by the chief. (Prior code § 3-4.12)

2.52.130 Disaster and Workmen’s Compensation benefits.
The members of the corps, as such, shall not be in or under the Civil Service System of the city, nor as such members of the corps shall they be in or under the State Employees’ Retirement Act or system membership of the city; but each and all of the members of the corps, as such members, shall be entitled to receive and shall have the right to receive, full protection and benefits provided for disaster service workers and civilian defense workers as contemplated and set forth in and under the provisions of Division 4, Chapter 10, Article I, Part I of the Labor Code of the state, as amended, relating to disaster service workers and civilian defense workers, and as contemplated under the provisions of Section 3212 of the Labor Code of the state.

Members of the police reserve corps shall receive Workmen’s Compensation benefits as provided by law and shall be covered by false arrest insurance paid for by the city. In addition thereto, the city shall pay membership fees in the Peace Officers’ Association for each member of the police reserve corps.

In the event of an injury suffered while in the service of the city, a police reserve officer shall be compensated for the first seven days of disability if not provided for under Workmen’s Compensation and in an amount to be determined by the council pursuant to recommendations by the chief of police and the city manager. (Ord. 1726 § 27 (part), 2011; prior code § 3-4.13)

2.52.140 Impersonation of members.
It is unlawful for any person (other than a regular police officer of the city) who is not a member of the corps:

A. To wear, carry, or display any identification card, badge, cap piece, uniform, or insignia of the corps; or

B. In any manner to represent himself to be connected with the corps. (Prior code § 3-4.14)

Chapter 2.56
CIVIL DEFENSE
Sections:

2.56.010    Purpose of chapter.

2.56.020    Definitions.

2.56.030    Civil defense and disaster council – Membership.

2.56.040    Civil defense and disaster council – Powers and duties.

2.56.050    Director and assistant director of emergency services.

2.56.060    Director and assistant director of emergency services – Powers and duties.

2.56.070    Civil defense and emergency organization.

2.56.080    Emergency plan.

2.56.090    Expenditures.

2.56.100    Violation – Penalty.

2.56.110    Repeal of conflicting provisions.

2.56.120    Severability.

2.56.010 Purpose of chapter.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency and to provide for the coordination of the civil defense and emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditure made in connection with such civil defense and emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Prior code § 3-2.01)

2.56.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Civil defense” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injuries and damages resulting from disasters. “Civil defense” does not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to, any condition relating to a labor controversy.

“Emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or the threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Prior code § 3-2.02)

2.56.030 Civil defense and disaster council – Membership.
The city civil defense and disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

A. The mayor, who shall be chairman;

B. The director of emergency services, who shall be vice chairman;

C. The assistant director of emergency services, appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city council, who shall act as director in the absence or disability of the director;

D. The civil defense coordinator, appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city council, who, under the supervision of the director and assistant director, shall develop civil defense and emergency service plans, organize the civil defense and emergency service program of the city and have such other duties as may be assigned by the director;

E. Such deputy directors and chiefs of city emergency services as are provided for in the current civil defense and emergency service operations plan of the city and as confirmed by the director; and

F. Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official group or organization civil defense and emergency service responsibility as may be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1726 § 27 (part), 2011; prior code § 3-2.03)

2.56.040 Civil defense and disaster council – Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the civil defense and disaster council and it is empowered, to review and recommend for adoption by the city council civil defense and emergency services and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The civil defense and disaster council shall meet upon the call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman. (Prior code § 3-2.04)

2.56.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services.
A. There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

B. There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 1726 § 27 (part), 2011; prior code § 3-2.05)

2.56.060 Director and assistant director of emergency services – Powers and duties.
A. The director of emergency services is empowered to:

1. Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency, if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

2. Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the local available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3. Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4. Direct cooperation between and the coordination of the services and staff of the emergency organization of the city and resolve questions of authority and responsibility which may arise between them;

5. Represent the city in all dealings with public and private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; and

6. In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this section, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor of the state or the director of the State Office Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is hereby empowered:

a. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

b. To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and to bind the city for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c. To require the emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state laws for registered disaster service volunteers,

d. To requisition the necessary personnel or materials of any city department or agency, and

e. To execute all of his ordinary powers as city manager of the city, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted pursuant thereto by the city council and all powers conferred upon him by any statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority.

B. The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office which shall take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency period. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

C. The assistant director of emergency services, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of the emergency services chiefs, shall develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 1738 § 59, 2012; prior code § 3-2.06)

2.56.070 Civil defense and emergency organization.
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of subsection A6c of Section 2.56.060, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such disaster, shall constitute the civil defense and emergency organization of the city. (Prior code § 3-2.07)

2.56.080 Emergency plan.
The city civil defense and disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 3-2.08)

2.56.090 Expenditures.
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Prior code § 3-2.09)

2.56.100 Violation – Penalty.
It is a misdemeanor for any person, during an emergency, to:

A. Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; or

C. Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 1744 § 5, 2013: prior code § 3-2.10)

2.56.110 Repeal of conflicting provisions.
It is the intent of the city council in enacting this chapter that it shall be considered a revision and continuation of the provisions repealed by this chapter and the status of volunteers shall not be affected by such repeal; nor shall plans and agreements, rules and regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to such repealed provisions be affected by such repeal until amended, modified, or superseded as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 3-2.11)

2.56.120 Severability.
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the other chapter provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause, or application, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Prior code § 3-2.12)

Chapter 2.58
ALTERNATIVE BID PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
Sections:

2.58.010    Purpose.

2.58.020    Alternative bid procedures – Dollar limitations.

2.58.030    City manager authority.

2.58.040    List of contractors.

2.58.050    Informal bidding procedure.

2.58.060    Notice inviting formal bids.

2.58.070    Awarding formal bids.

2.58.080    Emergencies.

2.58.010 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to establish regulations to apply to all public contracts, as defined in Public Contracts Code Section 22002, in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Public Contracts Code Section 22000 et seq.) and the procedures established thereunder by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (“Commission”). (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

2.58.020 Alternative bid procedures – Dollar limitations.*
A. Public projects of sixty thousand dollars or less may be performed by employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.

B. Public projects of two hundred thousand dollars or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 2.58.050.

C. Public projects of more than two hundred thousand dollars shall be let to contract by the formal bidding procedures. The city council shall adopt plans, specifications and working details for all public projects exceeding this amount.

D. The amounts set forth herein shall be adjusted when amended by Public Contract Code Section 22032 or by the Commission. (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

*    Code reviser’s note: Effective January 1, 2019, the rates in this section have been updated pursuant to amendments to Public Contract Code Section 22032.

2.58.030 City manager authority.
The city manager shall have authority to approve public projects of up to one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars, which amount shall be modified if the amounts set forth in Section 2.58.020 are modified by statute or the Commission. (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

2.58.040 List of contractors.
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22034(a) and any criteria promulgated from time to time by the Commission. Such list will be maintained by the city manager. (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

2.58.050 Informal bidding procedure.
The following apply to informal bids for public projects:

A. Notice Inviting Informal Bids.

1. Required Noticing. When a public contract is to be bid pursuant to the procedures in this section, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all construction trade journals specified by the Commission in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22036.

2. Optional Noticing. Notification may be also provided to the contractors on the list created pursuant to Section 2.58.040 for the category of work being bid, and to any additional contractors and/or construction trade journals.

3. Exception. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

B. Mailing Notices. All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due.

C. Description of Project. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

D. Authority to Award Contracts. The city manager is authorized to award a contract if the lowest bid received is one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars or less.

E. Bids Exceeding One Hundred Seventy-Five Thousand Dollars. If all bids received pursuant to the informal process are in excess of one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars, the city council may adopt a resolution by a four-fifths vote to award the contract at one hundred eighty-seven thousand five hundred dollars or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the city’s cost estimate was reasonable. Otherwise, the project shall be rebid pursuant to formal bidding procedures. (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

2.58.060 Notice inviting formal bids.
The following rules apply to notices for bids for public projects pursuant to the formal bidding process:

A. Contents of Notice. Notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project.

B. Publication of Notice. The notice shall be published at least fourteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or otherwise comply with the requirements of Public Contracts Code Section 22037.

C. Electronic Transmission of Notice. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed to all construction trade journals as required by the Commission as specified in Public Contract Code Section 22036. The notice shall be sent at least fifteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids.

D. The city may provide additional notice as it deems proper. (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

2.58.070 Awarding formal bids.
The following rules apply to awarding formal bids for public projects:

A. Rejecting Formal Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented, if the city, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by employees of the city, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the city’s intention to reject the bid and shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the hearing at which the city intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city shall have the option of either of the following:

1. Abandoning the project or readvertising for bids in the manner described by this chapter.

2. By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the city council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by city employees, may have the project done by force account without further complying with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Lowest Bidder. If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city may accept the one it chooses.

C. No Bids. If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the city by force account or negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter. (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

2.58.080 Emergencies.
A. In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the city council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two.

B. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the city shall comply with Chapter 2.5 of Part 3 of Division 2 of the Public Contracting Code (commencing with Section 22050).

C. The city council’s authority under this section may be exercised by the city manager during a declared emergency. (Ord. 1743 § 1 (part), 2013)

Chapter 2.60
PURCHASING SYSTEM
Sections:

2.60.010    Adoption of purchasing system.

2.60.020    Purchasing officer – Powers and duties.

2.60.030    Exemptions from centralized purchasing.

2.60.040    Estimates of requirements.

2.60.050    Repealed by Ord. 1681.

2.60.060    Application of procedures.

2.60.070    Purchases.

2.60.080    Encumbrance of funds.

2.60.090    Formal contract procedure.

2.60.095    Small business credit.

2.60.100    Open market procedure.

2.60.110    Inspections and testing.

2.60.120    Surplus supplies and equipment.

2.60.130    Professional services and specialized services.

2.60.140    Cooperative purchasing.

2.60.150    Policy on rejection of lowest bids.

2.60.160    Special opportunity purchases.

2.60.170    Emergencies.

2.60.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, to secure for the city supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. (Prior code § 2-8.01)

2.60.020 Purchasing officer – Powers and duties.
The position of purchasing officer is created. The city manager or an appointee of the city manager shall be the purchasing officer.

The purchasing officer shall have the authority to:

A. Purchase or contract for the supplies, services and equipment required by the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in this code or adopted by the council;

B. Negotiate and recommend the execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services, and equipment;

C. Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment at the least expense to the city;

D. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

E. Prepare and recommend to the council rules governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city;

F. Prepare and recommend to the council revisions and amendments to the purchasing policy;

G. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

H. Prescribe and maintain such procedures and forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

I. Supervise the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications;

J. Supervise the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city use;

K. Maintain a Bidders’ List, Vendors’ Catalog File and records of all purchases made for the city; and

L. Establish wherever feasible marketing outreach and procurement procedures that ensure local vendors are included as sources for all purchases and are given an opportunity to do business with the city. (Ord. 1686 §§ 1, 2, 2006; prior code § 2-8.03)

2.60.030 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
The purchasing officer may authorize in writing any department to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services and equipment independently of the purchasing department; provided, however, the purchasing officer shall require that such purchases or contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter. (Ord. 1686 § 3, 2006; prior code § 2-8.04)

2.60.040 Estimates of requirements.
All operating departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing officer shall prescribe. (Ord. 1686 § 4, 2006; prior code § 2-8.05)

2.60.060 Application of procedures.
The procedures set forth in this chapter apply to purchases of supplies, services and equipment and are adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 54202. In addition, the procedures apply to the sale of personal property. Except for the credit set forth in Section 2.60.095, nothing in this chapter shall apply to contracts for public projects as defined in Public Contract Code Section 20161. The purchasing officer shall adopt regulations for the implementation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1686 § 6, 2006; prior code § 2-8.07)

2.60.070 Purchases.
Purchases of supplies, services and equipment may be made by check request, purchase order, written contract, or other means as determined by the purchasing officer consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1686 § 7, 2006; prior code § 2-8.08)

2.60.080 Encumbrance of funds.
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services, or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. (Prior code § 2-8.09)

2.60.090 Formal contract procedure.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases and contracts for supplies, services and equipment, and the sale of personal property, of estimated value greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be by formal bid process and by written contract with the lowest or highest responsible bidder, as the case may be, pursuant to the following procedure:

A. Notices Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold and shall state where bid information and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids.

1. Published Notices. Notices inviting bids shall be published at least ten business days before the date of the opening of the bids. Such notices shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city, or, if there is none, they shall be posted in at least three public places for posting public notices.

2. Bidders’ List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the Bidders’ List or who have requested their names to be added thereto. The purchasing officer shall annually review the Bidders’ List and the city’s business license records, and shall make appropriate efforts to update the Bidders’ List to include businesses located in the city.

3. Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall, on the City’s official website, cable television bulletin board and other appropriate electronic media.

B. Bidders’ Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidders’ security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security; provided, however, a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of the award of the contract has been mailed unless the city is responsible for the delay. The council, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, may award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidders’ security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

C. Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Such bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening.

D. Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the council may reject any and all bids presented and re-advertise for bids.

E. Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the council to the lowest responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

F. Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the council may accept the bid it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening.

G. Performance Bonds. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract in such amount as the purchasing officer shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 1686 § 8, 2006; prior code § 2-8.10)

2.60.095 Small business credit.
A. In determining the lowest responsible bidder for any city contract that is for two hundred fifty thousand dollars or less and where responsibility and quality are equal, a credit of five percent of the bid submitted by the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications shall be given to a bidder that (1) qualifies as a small business as defined in this section, (2) meets the small business subcontracting participation goal established by resolution of the city council, or (3) is a disabled veteran business enterprise.

B. At two-year intervals commencing on July 1, 2012, the two hundred fifty thousand dollar total cost limit shall be adjusted upward or downward by the city manager to reflect the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange Country Area over the previous two years. The amount shall be rounded off to the nearest one thousand dollar figure.

C. No credit shall be given pursuant to this section where legal constraints on the expenditure of funds prohibit the giving of such a credit.

D. As used in this section, “small business” means a business entity that has for at least the twelve months prior to submittal of its bid (1) held a current business license issued by the city; and (2) maintained its principal business office within the city’s geographic boundaries, and that either employs fewer than one hundred employees or has average annual gross receipts of ten million dollars or less over the previous three years.

E. As used in this section, “disabled veteran business enterprise” means a disabled veteran business enterprise as defined in Military and Veterans Code Section 999(g) as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1717 § 1, 2010: Ord. 1686 § 9, 2006)

2.60.100 Open market procedure.
Except as otherwise required under federal or state law, purchases of supplies, equipment and contractual services and the sale of personal property of an estimated value of fifty thousand dollars or less may be made in the open market by the purchasing officer. Purchases greater than thirty thousand dollars shall be approved by the city council. The purchasing officer shall attempt to obtain information relating to prices and availability of such supplies, equipment or services from different sources prior to making the purchase. Whenever possible, local vendors shall be included as sources. (Ord. 1780 § 1, 2017: Ord. 1686 § 10, 2006; Ord. 1493 § 1, 1996: prior code § 2-8.11)

2.60.110 Inspections and testing.
The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered and contractual services performed to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Prior code § 2-8.12)

2.60.120 Surplus supplies and equipment.
All department heads shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. If such an item is still serviceable, the purchasing officer shall first make an attempt to relocate the item for continued use in other departments. If such item has become unsuitable for city use, the purchasing officer shall have the authority to sell, exchange, or otherwise dispose of all supplies and equipment, provided the item sold or disposed of does not have a current salvage value of more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). The purchasing officer is charged with the responsibility to secure the highest value possible in the disposal of city goods. Such sales shall be made pursuant to Sections 2.60.090 or 2.60.100 where applicable. (Ord. 1686 § 11, 2006; prior code § 2-8.13)

2.60.130 Professional services and specialized services.
Contracts for specialized services and professional services by persons, firms, companies, or corporations shall be made subject to either the formal contract procedure or the open market procedure, except that there shall be no requirement to solicit bids. (Prior code § 2-8.14)

2.60.140 Cooperative purchasing.
Where purchases are to be made in concert with other governmental agencies, formal bid requirements as set forth in this chapter shall be waived and the purchasing officer shall be authorized to procure materials, supplies and services in cooperation with other governmental or public entities. (Prior code § 2-8.15)

2.60.150 Policy on rejection of lowest bids.
The council, upon the recommendation of the purchasing officer, may find and determine that a certain type, make, brand, special service, supply, or piece or make of equipment is the most economical for use by the city even though a bid on similar merchandise or equipment is lower at initial cost. Since these economical factors could make considerable long-range cost savings, the council’s decision shall be final and conclusive. The council, after making such a determination, may authorize the purchasing officer to dispense with bids and purchase such equipment. (Prior code § 2-8.16)

2.60.160 Special opportunity purchases.
Special opportunity purchases may be made by the purchasing officer where the purchasing officer finds that there is a current need for the purchase and that the proposed purchase is either below the current market price, will result in monetary savings to the city, or will result in savings in time of delivery or time of installation. (Ord. 1686 § 12, 2006; prior code § 2-8.17)

2.60.170 Emergencies.
In the event of an emergency, the provisions in this chapter may be dispensed with and purchases made by the most advantageous method available. The purchasing officer shall be responsible for documenting such purchases and, whenever such purchase is in response to a disaster situation, the purchasing officer shall seek reimbursement from the appropriate state and or federal agencies. (Ord. 1686 § 13, 2006; prior code § 2-8.18)

Chapter 2.62
INVESTMENTS OF CITY FUNDS
Sections:

2.62.010    Investment of surplus funds.

2.62.010 Investment of surplus funds.
A. The city’s surplus funds shall be invested in accordance with the city’s investment policy as adopted by resolution of the city.

B. No surplus city funds shall be invested in any repurchase agreement, reverse repurchase agreements, derivatives or noncollateralized corporate notes. (Ord. 1793 § 2, 2018: Ord. 1486 §§ 2, 3, 1995. Formerly 2.62.020)

Chapter 2.64
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Sections:

2.64.010    Adoption of personnel system.

2.64.020    Personnel officer – Powers and duties.

2.64.030    Adoption of rules.

2.64.040    Political activities.

2.64.050    Discrimination.

2.64.060    Refusal to testify before Grand Jury.

2.64.070    Right to contract for special services.

2.64.080    Appropriation of funds.

2.64.010 Adoption of personnel system.
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and the most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive tests; and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, a personnel system is adopted. (Prior code § 2-7.01)

2.64.020 Personnel officer – Powers and duties.
There is created the position of personnel officer. The personnel officer shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the council. The duties of the personnel officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. If such duties are not combined with those of any other office or position, the personnel officer shall have had training or experience in personnel administration. The personnel officer shall have the following powers and duties:

A. Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the council;

B. Prepare and recommend to the council revisions and amendments to the personnel rules. The city attorney shall approve the legality of such revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the council;

C. Under the direction of the council, prepare a position classification plan, including class specifications and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval of the council; and

D. Under the direction of the council, prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the competitive service. The plan and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval by the council. (Prior code § 2-7.02)

2.64.030 Adoption of rules.
Personnel rules, prepared by the personnel officer subject to the provisions of this chapter and to revision by the council, shall be adopted and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the council. The rules shall establish specific procedures and regulations governing the following phases of the personnel system:

A. The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

B. The preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

C. Public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of applications for employment;

D. Preparation and the conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

E. Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists and the making of temporary and emergency appointments;

F. Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;

G. Transfer, promotion, demotion, and reinstatement of employees in the competitive service;

H. Separation of employees from the city service through layoff, suspension and dismissal;

I. Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and training;

J. Suitable provisions for orderly and equitable presentations to the council by employees relating to general conditions of employment; and

K. Content, maintenance and use of personnel records and forms. (Prior code § 2-7.06)

2.64.040 Political activities.
All officers and employees of the city shall be prohibited from engaging in political activities during working hours. Subject to rules and regulations of the city, no person shall engage in political activities on the premises of the local agency, i.e., City Hall, police department, fire stations, and related areas.

No officer or employee of the city shall be permitted to solicit or receive political funds or contributions or promote the passage or defeat of a ballot measure during his working hours. This shall apply to any measure which would affect the rate of pay, hours of work, retirement, civil service, or other working conditions of officers or employees of the city. (Prior code § 2-7.15)

2.64.050 Discrimination.
No person employed by the city, or seeking admission thereto, shall be discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race, sex, age, or religious beliefs or handicapped status. (Prior code § 2-7.16)

2.64.060 Refusal to testify before Grand Jury.
The refusal of any officer or employee of the city to testify under oath before any Grand Jury having jurisdiction over any then pending case or inquiry in which the investigation of governmental bribery or misconduct in public office is involved shall constitute good and sufficient grounds for the immediate discharge of such officer or employee. (Prior code § 2-7.18)

2.64.070 Right to contract for special services.
The council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical services as may be desired in the establishment of operation of the personnel system. The contract may include the delegation to the person or agency so retained of all or a part of the responsibilities and duties imposed in this chapter upon the personnel officer but shall not include the delegation of powers and duties vested in the council. (Prior code § 2-7.19)

2.64.080 Appropriation of funds.
The council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 2-7.20)

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.04    Transfer of Tax Assessment and Collection Duties to County

3.08    Real Property Transfer Tax

3.12    Sales and Use Tax

3.16    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.20    Utility Users’ Tax

3.24    Claims and Demands Against the City

3.28    Capital Outlays Fund

3.32    Criminal Activities Fund

3.36    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

3.40    Worker’s Compensation Self-Insurance Fund

Chapter 3.04
TRANSFER OF TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
Sections:

3.04.010    Taxes to be collected pursuant to Government Code provisions.

3.04.020    Assessment and collection duties to be performed by county.

3.04.010 Taxes to be collected pursuant to Government Code provisions.
The council, deeming it to be for the best interests of the city and determining that the public interest and necessity demand the action herein taken, declares its election and elects to avail itself, and the city elects to avail itself of all of the provisions of Article 1, Chapter 2, Part 2, Division 1, Title 5 of the Government Code of the state relating to the transfer of city tax functions. (Prior code § 8-2.01)

3.04.020 Assessment and collection duties to be performed by county.
All assessments for taxes in and for the city shall be made, and all such taxes collected, by the assessor and tax collector, respectively, of the county, and the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be performed by the assessor and tax collector, respectively, of the county until the city shall, by ordinance, elect not to avail itself of the provisions of said state law for any longer time. (Prior code § 8-2.02)

Chapter 3.08
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Sections:

3.08.010    Title.

3.08.020    Tax imposed.

3.08.030    Payment requirement.

3.08.040    Debt security instruments exempted.

3.08.050    Governmental agencies exempted.

3.08.060    Bankruptcies, receiverships and reorganizations exempted.

3.08.070    Securities and Exchange Commission orders exempted.

3.08.080    Partnerships exempted.

3.08.090    Administration.

3.08.100    Refunds.

3.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax law” of the city. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 8-6.01)

3.08.020 Tax imposed.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars a tax at the rate of twenty seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Prior code § 8-6.02)

3.08.030 Payment requirement.
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 8-6.03)

3.08.040 Debt security instruments exempted.
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 8-6.04)

3.08.050 Governmental agencies exempted.
The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Prior code § 8-6.05)

3.08.060 Bankruptcies, receiverships and reorganizations exempted.
A. Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

1. Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

2. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subsection (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

3. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subsection (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

4. Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected.

B. The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change. (Prior code § 8-6.06)

3.08.070 Securities and Exchange Commission orders exempted.
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

A. The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

B. Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and

C. Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Prior code § 8-6.07)

3.08.080 Partnerships exempted.
A. In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if:

1. Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2. Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B. If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this chapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C. Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (B) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Prior code § 8-6.08)

3.08.090 Administration.
The county recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 8-6.09)

3.08.100 Refunds.
Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 8-6.10)

Chapter 3.12
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.12.010    Short title.

3.12.020    Purpose.

3.12.030    Operative date.

3.12.040    Sales tax.

3.12.050    Use tax.

3.12.060    Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.

3.12.070    Amendments.

3.12.080    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.12.090    Existing sales and use tax ordinances suspended.

3.12.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax law” of the city. (Prior code § 8-3.01)

3.12.020 Purpose.
The council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state;

B. To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as these provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code;

C. To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a one percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; and

D. To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 8-3.02)

3.12.030 Operative date.
This chapter shall become operative April 1, 1956, and prior thereto the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax law; provided, that if the city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to April 1, 1956, this chapter shall not be operative until the first day of first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the State Board of Equalization; and provided, further, that this chapter shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the county. (Prior code § 8-3.03)

3.12.040 Sales tax.
A. 1. For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this chapter.

2. For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

B. 1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes, are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this chapter.

2. Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted.

3. If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provisions of Section 6067 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of the provisions of this section.

4. (Operative January 1, 1984) there shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; and

b. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government.

4. (Operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subsections (7) and (8) of subsection (i) of said Section 7202 as said subsections read on October 1, 1983) there shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

b. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessel for commercial purposes; and

c. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government.

5. (Operative January 1, 1984) there shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in the state; and

c. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government.

5. (Operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subsections (7) and (8) of subsection (i) of said Section 7202 as said subsections read on October 1, 1983) there shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in the state;

c. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes; and

d. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Prior code § 8-3.04)

3.12.050 Use tax.
A. An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of this chapter for the storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

B. 1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this chapter.

2. Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the State; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, nor to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, and 6828 of said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 of this code nor in the definition of that phrase in said Section 6203.

3. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in the state;

c. The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property, or communications, or in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, or in the manufacture, transmission, or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commissions of the state; and

d. The use or consumption of property purchased by operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the city.

4. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state by any city and county, county, or city in the state;

c. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes; and

d. In addition to the exemptions set forth in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Prior code § 8-3.05)

3.12.060 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
A. The provisions of Sections 3.12.040B5 and 3.12.050B4 shall become operative on January 1st of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property, which ratio is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, at which time the provisions of Sections 3.12.040B4 and 3.12.050B3 shall become inoperative.

B. In the event the provisions of Sections 3.12.040B5 and 3.12.050B4 become operative, and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property, which ratio is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of said Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the provisions of Sections 3.12.040B4 and 3.12.050B3 shall become operative on the first day of the month following the month in which such high ratio is adopted, at which time the provisions of Sections 3.12.040B5 and 3.12.050B4 shall become inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which said board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property, which ratio is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by the provisions of said Section 401, at which time the provisions of Sections 3.12.040B5 and 3.12.050B4 shall again become operative, and the provisions of Sections 3.12.040B4 and 3.12.050B3 shall become inoperative. (Prior code § 8-3.05.1)

3.12.070 Amendments.
All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, which amendments relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 8-3.06)

3.12.080 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior code § 8-3.07)

3.12.090 Existing sales and use tax ordinances suspended.
At the time this chapter goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinances 342, 346, 351, 352, 379 and 380 shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force and effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed; provided, however, that it for any reason it is determined that the city is without power to adopt this chapter, or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinances 342, 346, 351, 352, 379 and 380 shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of one percent continuously from and after April 1, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinances 342, 346, 351, 352, 379 and 380 shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of one percent. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city any sales or use tax accrued and owing by reason of the provisions of Ordinances 342, 346, 351, 352, 379 and 380 in force and effect prior to and including March 31, 1956. (Prior code § 8-3.08)

Chapter 3.16
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

3.16.010    Title.

3.16.020    Definitions.

3.16.030    Occupant registration required.

3.16.040    False registration prohibited.

3.16.050    Tax imposed.

3.16.060    Exemptions.

3.16.070    Operator’s duties.

3.16.080    Registration.

3.16.090    Reporting and remitting.

3.16.095    Cessation of business and duty of successors or assignees.

3.16.100    Penalties and interest.

3.16.110    Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by tax administrator.

3.16.120    Records.

3.16.130    Refunds.

3.16.140    Actions to collect.

3.16.145    No enjoining action – Payment of assessed taxes required prior to legal action.

3.16.150    Violations of provisions.

3.16.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax law” of the city. (Prior code § 8-5.01)

3.16.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

“Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and shall include any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure, or portion thereof.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.

“Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

“Tax administrator” means the license collector of the city.

“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient for the period of the first thirty days of occupancy unless there is an agreement in writing entered into prior to commencing occupancy between the operator and occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the provisions of this chapter may be considered. (Measure L § 2, 2002; prior code § 8-5.02)

3.16.030 Occupant registration required.
A. Every operator of any hotel, as defined in Section 3.16.020, or of any other place intended or designed for occupancy by or for a consideration, whether such consideration is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise, shall keep a register wherein he shall require all occupants, guests, roomers or lodgers, including transients, as defined in Section 3.16.020, to inscribe their names upon their procuring lodging or a room or accommodations. Such register shall also show the day of the month and year when such name was inscribed and the room occupied or to be occupied by such occupant, lodger, roomer, guest, or transient in such hotel or other place intended or designed for occupancy by guests for a consideration. Such register shall be kept in a conspicuous place in such hotel or other place, as hereinabove described and shall at all times be open to inspection by the occupants, lodgers, roomers, guests or transients of such hotel or other place intended or designed for occupancy by such guests for a consideration and the chief of police or any regular policeman or police detective.

B. Before furnishing and lodging for hire to any person in any lodginghouse, or before renting any room to any person in any roominghouse, or before furnishing any accommodations to any guest at any hotel, the operator thereof shall require the person to whom such lodgings are furnished, or room is rented, or accommodations furnished to inscribe his name in such register kept for that purpose, as hereinbefore provided and shall set opposite such name the time when such name was so inscribed and the room occupied by such occupant, lodger, roomer, guest or transient. (Prior code § 8-5.02.1)

3.16.040 False registration prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to register at any hotel or at any other place intended or designed for occupancy by guests for a consideration, in the city under the name of any other person or of a fictitious person, or to give, sign, or cause to be signed upon the register of any such hotel or any other place intended or designed for occupancy by guests for a consideration, any assumed, false or fictitious name or any name other than the true and correct name of the person so registering, or so giving, signing or causing his or her name to be signed. (Prior code § 8-5.02.2)

3.16.050 Tax imposed.
A. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall be subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eleven percent (11%) of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city, which shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require such tax to be paid directly to the tax administrator.

B. For purposes of this Section, unless there is an agreement in writing entered into prior to commencing occupancy between the operator and occupant providing for a period of occupancy longer than thirty days, this tax shall be imposed upon, owed by and collected from the transient for the first thirty days of occupancy, regardless of whether the transient continues occupancy beyond thirty days. (Measure L § 1, 2002; prior code § 8-5.03)

3.16.060 Exemptions.
A. No tax shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided for in this chapter;

2. Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business; or

3. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provisions of federal law or international treaty.

B. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Prior code § 8-5.04)

3.16.070 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 8-5.05)

3.16.080 Registration.
On or before November 7, 1964, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting an occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” which shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, set forth the following information:

A. The name of the operator;

B. The address of the hotel;

C. The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

D. A statement as follows: “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this City. This certificate shall not constitute a permit.” (Prior code § 8-5.06)

3.16.090 Reporting and remitting.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 8-5.07)

3.16.095 Cessation of business and duty of successors or assignees.
A. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.

B. If any operator liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this chapter sells out or quits the business, the successors or assigns of such operator shall withhold sufficient funds from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former operator produces either a receipt from the city reflecting full payment or a certificate from the city stating that no amount is due. If the successor or assign fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he or she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld from the purchase price. (Ord. 1716 § 1, 2010)

3.16.100 Penalties and interest.
A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

C. Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty in the amount of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties set forth in subsections A and B of this section.

D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 8-5.08)

3.16.110 Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by tax administrator.
If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax, or any portion thereof, required by the provisions of this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the tax administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter. In the event such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten days after the service or mailing of such notice, make an application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing in the amount assessed. If an application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such an application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is filed. (Prior code § 8-5.09)

3.16.120 Records.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of four years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1716 § 2, 2010: prior code § 8-5.11)

3.16.130 Refunds.
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, such amount may be refunded as provided in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.24 of the Gardena Municipal Code with the added provision that any claim filed thereunder shall be under penalty of perjury.

B. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D. No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

E. It is the intent of the city that the one year written claim requirement established by Section 3.24.010 of the Gardena Municipal Code, which incorporates the California Tort Claims Act by reference, be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the commencement of the one year claims period, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed within ninety (90) days following the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. 1618 § 4, 2001; prior code § 8-5.12)

3.16.140 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 8-5.13)

3.16.145 No enjoining action – Payment of assessed taxes required prior to legal action.
A. No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the city or an officer thereof to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter.

B. Payment of all tax, interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability.

C. No suit or proceeding shall be maintained in any court for recovery of any amount alleged to have been erroneously or illegally determined or collected unless a claim for each refund or credit has been filed pursuant to Section 3.16.130. (Ord. 1716 § 3, 2010)

3.16.150 Violations of provisions.
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this code. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim and who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as aforesaid. (Prior code § 8-5.14)

Chapter 3.20
UTILITY USERS’ TAX
Sections:

3.20.010    Definitions.

3.20.020    Constitutional exemptions.

3.20.030    Communication users’ tax.

3.20.040    Electricity users’ tax.

3.20.050    Gas users’ tax.

3.20.060    Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.

3.20.070    Water users’ tax.

3.20.080    Effect of bundling nontaxable with taxable items.

3.20.090    Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.

3.20.100    Senior citizen/supplemental Social Security exemptions.

3.20.110    Duty to collect and remit – Procedures.

3.20.120    Collection penalties – Service suppliers or self-collectors.

3.20.130    Deficiency determination and assessment – Tax application errors.

3.20.140    Administrative remedy – Nonpaying service users.

3.20.150    Actions to collect.

3.20.160    Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.

3.20.170    Records.

3.20.180    Refunds.

3.20.190    Appeals.

3.20.200    No injunction/writ of mandate.

3.20.210    Remedies cumulative.

3.20.220    Notice of changes to ordinance.

3.20.230    Future amendment to cited statute.

3.20.240    Penalties.

3.20.250    Operative date.

3.20.260    Temporary adjustments to amount to be collected.

3.20.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. “Ancillary telecommunications services” shall mean services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services:

1. “Conference bridging service” means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.

2. “Detailed telecommunications billing service” means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.

3. “Directory assistance” means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information.

4. “Vertical service” means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.

5. “Voice mail service” means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.

B. “Billing address” shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the service user.

C. “City” shall mean the city of Gardena, California.

D. “City manager” shall mean the city manager of the city, or his or her authorized representative.

E. “Communication services” shall mean telecommunication services and ancillary telecommunication services.

F. “Cogenerator” shall mean any corporation or person employing cogeneration (as defined in Section 218.5 of the California Public Utilities Code) for producing power for the generation of electricity for self use or sale to others from a qualified cogeneration facility (as defined in the federal Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and regulations thereunder).

G. “Exempt wholesale generator” shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Federal Power Act (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a) and the regulations thereunder.

H. “Gas” shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel, which may be substituted therefor.

I. “Mobile telecommunications service” shall have the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

J. “Month” shall mean a calendar month.

K. “Municipal organization” shall mean an organization or association created by statute or by voluntary action, whose purpose is to facilitate the development and dissemination of uniform rulings or interpretations regarding the application of utility users’ taxes to communications services in the state of California.

L. “Non-utility service supplier” shall mean:

1. A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include but is not limited to any publicly owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;

2. An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the city;

3. A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within the city; or

4. A water service supplier, distributor, wholesaler, marketer, or broker, which sells or supplies water to users within the city (other than a supplier of water distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city).

M. “Person” shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual; firm; trust; common law trust; estate; partnership of every kind; association; syndicate; society; club; joint stock company; joint venture; limited liability company; corporation (including foreign, domestic, and non-profit); municipal corporation (other than the city); municipal district; cooperative; or receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.

N. “Place of primary use” shall mean the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.

O. “Post-paid telecommunication service” shall mean the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a telecommunication-by-telecommunication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.

P. “Prepaid telecommunication service” shall mean the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of telecommunications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.

Q. “Private telecommunication service” shall mean a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a telecommunications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A telecommunications channel is a physical or virtual path of telecommunications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the telecommunications).

R. “Service address” means any of the following:

1. The location of the service user’s telecommunications equipment from which the telecommunication originates or terminates, regardless of where the telecommunication is billed or paid; or

2. If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications or VoIP service), the “service address” means the location of the service user’s place of primary use; or

3. For prepaid telecommunication service, “service address” means the location associated with the service number.

S. “Service supplier” shall mean any entity or person, including the city, that provides communication, electric, gas or water services to a user of such services within the city. The term shall include any entity or person required to collect, or self-collect under Section 3.20.060 of this chapter, and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of communication, electric, gas or water service suppliers.

T. “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

U. “State” shall mean the state of California.

V. “Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement” shall mean the multi-state agreement commonly known and referred to as the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement, and as it is amended from time to time.

W. “Tax administrator” shall mean the administrative services director of the city, or his or her authorized representative.

X. “Telecommunications services” shall mean the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term “telecommunications services” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over Internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with “telecommunication services.” “Telecommunications services” include, but are not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers call in to pre-recorded or live service).

Y. “VoIP (voice over Internet protocol)” shall mean the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet protocol network.

Z. “800 service” shall mean a “telecommunications service” that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name “800,” “855,” “866,” “877,” and “888” toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission.

AA. “900 service” shall mean an inbound toll “telecommunications service” purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the subscriber’s prerecorded announcement or live service. “900 service” does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the “telecommunications services” to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed under the name “900” service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. (Measure A § 1, 2009: Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.01)

3.20.020 Constitutional exemptions.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon:

1. Any person or service when imposition of such tax upon that person or service would be in violation of a federal or California statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California; and

2. The city.

B. Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new utility service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users’ taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users’ tax.

C. The decision of the tax administrator regarding an exemption may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.20.190 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city manager pursuant to Section 3.20.190 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (Measure A § 2, 2009; Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.02)

3.20.030 Communication users’ tax.
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city who uses intrastate communication services in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of all charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which services are capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, and which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax.

B. “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including but not limited to post-paid telecommunication services, prepaid telecommunication services, and private telecommunication services; provided, that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation (e.g., Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement).

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services.

D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers that are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services that are subject to the tax of subsection A of this section. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this chapter, or increase an existing tax except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2), as it may be amended from time to time.

E. As used in this section, the term “communication services” shall not include “private mobile radio service” (as defined in Part 20.3 of Title 47 Code of Federal Regulations) or “private mobile service” (as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)(3)), which is not interconnected with the public switched network. As used in this section, the term “communications services” shall include, but shall not be limited to charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of communications services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. “Communication services” shall not include digital downloads such as music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products.

F. To facilitate the uniform interpretation and application of similar ordinance provisions in other local jurisdictions in the state, the tax administrator may, prior to issuing and disseminating a sourcing rule or an administrative tax ruling, submit his or her proposed sourcing rule or administrative tax ruling to a municipal organization for review and comment, according to the rules and procedures of that municipal organization, or its successor organization.

G. To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.

H. The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the thirtieth day of the following month. (Measure A § 3, 2009: Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.03)

3.20.040 Electricity users’ tax.
A. There is imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent (5%) of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the service user, which are provided by a service supplier or non-utility service supplier to a service user.

B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

(1) Energy charges;

(2) Distribution or transmission charges;

(3) Metering charges;

(4) Stand-by, reserves, firming, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar charges for supplemental services to an electric service user that produces electricity for self-use and is subject to Section 3.20.060 of this chapter;

(5) Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and,

(6) Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.

D. The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) above.

E. As used in this section, the term ‘using electricity’ shall not be construed to include the mere receiving of such electricity by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale or the use of such electricity in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency.

F. The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.060 of this chapter. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.04)

3.20.050 Gas users’ tax.
A. There is imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the city which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent (5%) of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such gas.

B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

(1) The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;

(2) Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges);

(3) Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction;

(4) Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and,

(5) Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas.

D. The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) above.

E. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed:

(1) Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system;

(2) Charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electricity or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency;

(3) Charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities;

(4) Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California; and

(5) Charges made for gas used by a non-utility supplier to generate electrical energy for its own use or for sale to others provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with Section 3.20.060 of this chapter.

F. The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.060 of this chapter. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator, on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.05)

3.20.060 Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.
A. Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Section 3.20.040 or by Section 3.20.050 of this chapter, which produces gas or electricity for self-use; which receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services, directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter; or which, for any other reason, is not having the full tax collected and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity in the city, including any related supplemental services, shall report said fact to the Tax Administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the payment pattern of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

B. The Tax Administrator may require said service user to identify its non-utility service supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion of the Tax Administrator is excessive, the Tax Administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the primary supplier of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.06)

3.20.070 Water users’ tax.
A. There is imposed a tax upon every person using water in the city which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent (5%) of the charges made for such water.

B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

(1) Water commodity charges (potable and non-potable);

(2) Distribution or transmission charges;

(3) Metering charges;

(4) Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water service; and

(5) Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.

C. As used in this section, the term “charges” may include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services.

D. The Tax Administrator, from time to time, shall survey the water service suppliers in the city to identify the various unbundled billing components of water retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency as a condition of providing such water service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such water service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) above.

E. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed by this section is computed:

(1) Charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system; and

(2) Charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or county or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district.

F. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or its billing agent. The amount collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of the following month, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of the following month. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1503 § 3, 1996; prior code § 8-9.07)

3.20.080 Effect of bundling nontaxable with taxable items.
If any nontaxable charges are bundled with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and nontaxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and nontaxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation of the taxable and nontaxable services. (Measure A § 4, 2009: Ord. 1665 § 1; prior code § 8-9.08)

3.20.090 Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users’ tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter within the city or distributed from a location within the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail; or if there are activities performed in the city on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier’s ability to establish and maintain a market in the city for the provision of services that are subject to a tax under this chapter. (Measure A § 5, 2009: Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.09)

3.20.100 Senior citizen/supplemental Social Security exemptions.
A. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any residential property where an individual qualifies for an exemption under this section.

B. An individual shall be made exempt from the taxes imposed by this chapter if he or she is the head of a household and either or both:

1. Is sixty years old or older; or

2. Receives supplemental Social Security benefits.

C. To qualify for the exemption set forth in subsection B of this section, the individual shall file an application in a form, time and manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator. Applications may be filed at any time.

D. Applications shall be verified by declaration under penalty of perjury and shall contain such information as may be required by the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall review each application and shall certify the service user as exempt if the eligibility requirements of subsection B of this section are met, except that no exemption shall be granted to a service user who is receiving service from a service supplier through a master meter and no exemption shall be granted with respect to any tax imposed by this chapter which is or has been paid by a public agency or where the service user receives funds from a public agency specifically for the payment of such tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator regarding an exemption may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.20.190 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.20.190 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

E. If a service user is certified as exempt, the Tax Administrator shall promptly notify the service user’s service suppliers, stating the name of the service user, the address to which such exempt service is being supplied, the account number, if any, and such other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure. Upon receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall within sixty (60) days discontinue billing service user for taxes imposed by this chapter.

F. Exemptions certified by the Tax Administrator shall continue as long as the facts supporting the qualification for exemption shall exist; provided, however, that the exemption shall automatically terminate with any change in the service address or residence of the exempt individual; and provided further, that such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or residence. Any service user who has been exempted under this section shall notify the Tax Administrator within ten (10) days of any change in fact or circumstance which might disqualify such individual from receiving such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemption provided by this section when the basis for such exemption does not exist or ceases to exist.

G. The Tax Administrator shall have the power and right to demand evidence of continued eligibility of a service user for exemption under the provisions of this section. Such evidence may include, but need not be limited to, copies of business records, letters or statements from the Social Security Administration and state, county, city and private pension administrators or unemployment and welfare agencies, copies of income tax returns, and such other evidence concerning the service user or other members of the service user’s household as may tend to prove or disprove such eligibility. Failure to provide such evidence as is within the control of a service user to so provide, either directly by the service user or by the service user’s consent or the consent of a member of the service user’s household when such evidence is requested of the service user in writing by the Tax Administrator, shall be grounds for the immediate discontinuance of the service user’s eligibility for exemption under the provisions of the section. Evidence provided to the Tax Administrator at the Tax Administrator’s request, or voluntarily provided to the Tax Administrator by the service user without the Tax Administrator’s request, may not be used against such service user as evidence of violation of the provisions of this section. Such evidence may only be used as grounds for termination of the exemption provided by this section.

H. At any time the city voluntarily lowers the tax rate imposed by Section 3.20.260 below five percent, the city may increase the minimum age of the senior citizen exemption to sixty-two years of age. (Ord. 1725 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.10)

3.20.110 Duty to collect and remit – Procedures.
The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:

A. The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 3.20.140 shall apply.

B. The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.

C. Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return with the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date.

The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.11)

3.20.120 Collection penalties – Service suppliers or self-collectors.
A. Taxes collected from a service user, or self-collected by a service user subject to Section 3.20.060 of this chapter, are delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the City’s account on or before the following business day.

B. If a service supplier, or a service user subject to Section 3.20.060 of this chapter, fails to remit any tax collected, on or before the due date, said person shall pay a penalty for such delinquencies at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax that is delinquent in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

C. The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.

D. For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.12)

3.20.130 Deficiency determination and assessment – Tax application errors.
A. The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to collect or self-collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to collect and remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges.

B. The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the City. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the matter. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the City.

C. If the person requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing not later than fourteen (14) days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

D. At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.20.190 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.20.190 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

E. Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth (30th) day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be fifteen percent (15%) on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the City seeking payment of a tax assessed under this Section 3.20.130 shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection (E).

F. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.13)

3.20.140 Administrative remedy – Nonpaying service users.
A. Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the City with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter.

B. In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

C. The Tax Administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that the Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

D. If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1618 § 6, 2001; prior code § 8-9.14)

3.20.150 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this Chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the City as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees.

In the event that a service user or service supplier owing a tax under this chapter files bankruptcy, then such debt to the City shall be deemed an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C). (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005; prior code § 8-9.15)

3.20.160 Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.
A. The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

B. The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office. To the extent that the tax administrator determines that the tax imposed under this chapter shall not be collected in full for any period of time from any particular service supplier or service user, that determination shall be considered an exercise of the tax administrator’s discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 or otherwise. The tax administrator is not authorized to amend the city’s methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the communication users’ tax in full as a result of promulgating administrative rulings or entering into agreements.

C. Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to Section 3.20.060 of this Chapter) so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or, (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office, and are voidable by the Tax Administrator or the City at any time.

D. The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The Tax Administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three (3) years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 3.20.130 of this chapter for all taxes, penalties and interest owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the Tax Administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

E. Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed forty-five (45) days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4%) per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

F. The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.

G. Notwithstanding any provision in this Chapter to the contrary, the Tax Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence. (Measure A § 6, 2009; Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.170 Records.
A. It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the City any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax that such person may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

B. The City may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the City on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the City for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the City to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the City to conduct the inspection.

C. The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The Tax Administrator may request from a person providing transportation or distribution services of gas or electricity to service users within the City, a list of the names, billing and service addresses, quantities of gas or electricity delivered, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the City pursuant to Section 6354(e) of the California Public Utilities Code.

D. If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the City; and, (2) upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the City.

E. If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) on such person for each day following: i) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or, ii) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this Chapter. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.180 Refunds.
A. Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section.

B. The City Manager may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim, under penalty of perjury, to the Tax Administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax, all in accordance Chapter 3.24 of this Code. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

C. The City Manager, with the written approval of the City Attorney, may compromise a claim pursuant to this chapter where the portion of the claim proposed to be released is less than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000); and, with the approval of the City Attorney and the City Council, may compromise such a claim where the portion proposed to be released is equal to or greater than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000).

D. It is the intent of the City that the one year written claim requirement of this section be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the enactment of the one year claims period of this section, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the Tax Administrator as provided in this subsection within ninety (90) days following the effective date of this ordinance.

E. The City Manager, or the City Council where the claim to be released is in excess of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000), shall act upon the refund claim within forty-five (45) days of the initial receipt of the refund claim. Said decision shall be final. If the City Manager/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the forty-five (45) day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Manager/City Council on the forty-fifth (45th) day. The City Manager shall give notice of the action in a form that substantially complies with that set forth in Chapter 3.24 of this Code.

F. The filing of a written claim is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the City pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 3.24 of this Code.

G. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this Chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly return. In the event this ordinance is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes shall be borne by the City.

H. Notwithstanding the claim provisions of subsection (b) of this section, a service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due form a service user (whether due to overpayment or to erroneous or illegal collection of said tax), may refund such amount to the service user, or credit to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the Tax Administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one (1) year from the date of overpayment of erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. The Tax Administrator shall determine the validity of the service user’s claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim.

I. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (b) of this section, in the event that a service supplier, or a service user subject to Section 3.20.060 hereof, remits a tax to City in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this Chapter, said service supplier, or service user subject to Section 3.20.060 hereof, may claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the Tax Administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment of said tax. The Tax Administrator shall determine the validity of the service user’s claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.190 Appeals.
A. The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.20.180 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.20.180 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. [See Government Code Section 935(b).] Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

B. If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.20.180 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator; he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

C. The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the Tax Administrator, the City Manager, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the City’s files, the City Manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If the City Manager fails or refuses to act within the fourteen (14) day period, the decision of the Tax Administrator shall be deemed to have been affirmed by the City Manager on the fourteenth (14th) day.

E. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.200 No injunction/writ of mandate.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the City or against any officer of the City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.210 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.220 Notice of changes to ordinance.
If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice requirements of Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the Tax Administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions, the Tax Administrator, or his or her agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and remitters of the City’s utility users taxes according to the latest payment records of the Tax Administrator. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.230 Future amendment to cited statute.
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time; provided, that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of excluding all or a part of any utility service, or charge therefor, from taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent.

To the extent that the city’s authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this chapter. (Measure A § 7, 2009: Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.240 Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney. (Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.250 Operative date.
The amendments to this chapter shall become effective immediately upon the date that the Measure A ordinance is confirmed and approved by the voters of Gardena at the municipal general election of March 3, 2009. (Measure A § 8, 2009: Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

3.20.260 Temporary adjustments to amount to be collected.
A. The tax rate imposed upon every telephone user, electricity user, gas user, and water user shall be a maximum of five percent, except where any service user or service supplier is made expressly exempt from the utility users’ tax by this chapter. However, beginning on December 1, 1987, the amount to be collected from every telephone user, electricity user, gas user and water user in the city shall be calculated at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such service. The utility users’ tax shall be reviewed annually by the city council, in consultation with the finance committee, and the city council may, by ordinance or resolution, adjust the rate or temporarily suspend all or a portion of the tax, as appropriate to the financial condition of the city. No adjustment to the rate or temporary suspension of the tax shall constitute a decrease in a tax, or an increase in a tax requiring voter approval under California Constitution Article XIIIC (Proposition 218); provided, the city council’s action does not increase the tax beyond the maximum rate or methodology set forth in this voter-approved ordinance, Measure A. To the extent that any aspect of a rate adjustment or temporary tax suspension is found to invoke such a requirement under Proposition 218, the entire city council action shall be deemed null and void ab initio, and there shall be no entitlement to adjustment or suspension for any service user.

B. Effective April 1, 2011, the taxes referenced in subsection A of this section shall all be collected at the rate of five percent. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 2011: Measure A § 9, 2009: Ord. 1665 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 3.24
CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY
Sections:

3.24.010    Claims against the city.

3.24.020    Delegation of claims authority to city manager.

3.24.030    Approval procedures.

3.24.040    Payment following council order.

3.24.050    Examination by finance committee.

3.24.010 Claims against the city.
A. Claims Required. All claims against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the California Tort Claims Act (commencing with Government Code section 900), or another provision of law or agreement between the City and the claimant, shall be presented to the City within the time, and in the manner prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of title 1 of the California Government Code, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter.

B. Form of Claim.

1. Claims for materials and supplies. In the case of materials and supplies, the claim shall be accompanied by a written statement or voucher signed by the person ordering the materials or supplies for which the claim is made, or shall have thereon the requisition or purchase order number, if any, pursuant to which such claim is made.

2. Claims for services provided. In the case of a claim made for payment of services provided pursuant to an agreement or other written authorization of the City, the claim shall conform to the requirements of the agreement and shall reference such agreement by name or number if applicable.

3. Other claims. All other claims shall be made in writing and shall conform to the requirements of section 910 of the California Government Code. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless signed by every member of that class.

C. Action By City. The City shall act upon a claim within 45 days from the date of presentation, unless the parties agree in writing to extend the time period, in accordance with Government Code Section 912.4. If the City fails or refuses to act on a claim within the 45 day time period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected on the 45th day, or the date of any agreed upon extension. This section shall not apply to claims for materials, supplies, or services which are governed by a separate agreement between the parties.

D. Claim Prerequisite To Suit. The filing of a written claim is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. No suit may be filed until this period of time has expired. Any action relating to a claim shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code sections 945.6 and 946.

E. Suit. Any action brought against the City upon any claim shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 – 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950 – 951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 2-4.01)

3.24.020 Delegation of claims authority to city manager.
A. The City Manager or his designee is authorized and directed to perform on behalf of the City, all functions relating to claims against the City, in the manner provided in California Government Code section 900 et seq.

B. The City Manager or his designee is authorized to allow, compromise or settle a claim against the City, if the payment thereof does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars. (Ord. 1751 § 1, 2014: Ord. 1618 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 2-4.02)

3.24.030 Approval procedures.
A. Audit by Director of Finance. The director of finance, or his authorized deputy, after receipt of such claims or demands and before presenting the same to the council, shall audit the same, giving particular attention to:

1. A comparison of the items reflected in such claim or demand as compared with the corresponding items set forth in the requisition, purchase order, or contract;

2. Verification of the receipt of the materials, supplies, or services covered by the claim or demand and that the amounts reflected are due and payable; and

3. The accuracy of the mathematical computations and extensions.

B. Warrants. The director of finance, or his authorized deputy, shall thereupon prepare warrants covering the claims or demands which he finds to be in order after his examination and shall cause such warrants to be numbered and listed on warrant registers prior to presenting the same to the council for its audit and approval.

C. Warrant Registers. A separate warrant register shall be prepared by the director of finance for payroll warrants and another for other warrants.

D. Affidavits. There shall be included in or attached to each such warrant register the affidavit of the director of finance, or his authorized deputy, certifying as to the accuracy of the demands and the availability of funds for payment thereof.

E. Council Audit. Provision shall be made at the bottom of each warrant register sheet for indication of audit by the council and the approval or disapproval by it of any or all warrants listed on such warrant register sheet. Such procedure shall expedite the business of the council and minimize the number of signatures of the councilmen engaged in the audit.

F. Payment. Upon the presentation of such warrant, properly executed and endorsed, the city treasurer shall pay the same out of the funds in the city treasury properly applicable to that purpose.

G. Payroll. In the case of demands covering payrolls incurred for or on behalf of the city, only one demand for each payroll period need be prepared and presented, which demand shall clearly indicate thereon the total amount thereof and the respective items thereof to be charged against the various funds affected thereby. In such case only one warrant, payable to the city treasurer, need be drawn, which warrant so payable, when allowed as set forth in this section, shall be delivered to the city treasurer, or his authorized deputy, and the proceeds thereof shall be used by the city treasurer, or his authorized deputy, in the payment (by treasurer’s checks or warrants) of the respective items to the respective persons indicated as respectively entitled thereto in the payroll demand pursuant to which the same was issued. The city treasurer’s checks or warrant covering the respective items of the payroll demand shall be prepared by the director of finance, or his authorized deputy, as the accounting officer of the city and shall be furnished to the city treasurer, or his authorized deputy, ready for signature, at the time the payroll warrants are delivered to him or his authorized deputy. The director of finance, or his authorized deputy, may prepare more than one demand and warrant in those cases where the division of a payroll may be desirable or indicated from an accounting or administrative standpoint, it being the intention of this section to simplify, rather than complicate, payroll procedure and payment in accordance with good accounting practice. The city treasurer’s payroll checks, when signed by him or his authorized deputy, shall be distributed by the city treasurer, or his authorized deputy, to the respective persons entitled thereto through the finance division of the director of finance office unless in specific instances or emergencies the director of finance shall otherwise direct. The city treasurer’s checks, properly endorsed by the payee thereof, shall be a sufficient receipt or voucher for the disbursement or payment represented by such check. (Ord. 1726 § 2 (part), 2011: prior code § 2-4.03)

3.24.040 Payment following council order.
When any claim or demand is allowed by the council and ordered paid by a resolution adopted by the council, the mayor (or in case of his absence or inability to act, the mayor pro tempore) shall draw a warrant upon the city treasurer for the same as allowed, which warrant shall be countersigned by the director of finance, or his authorized deputy, and shall specify the purpose for which the same is drawn and from which fund payment is to be made. (Ord. 1726 § 2 (part), 2011: prior code § 2-4.04)

3.24.050 Examination by finance committee.
All claims and demands against the city, before final action thereon by the council, shall be examined by the finance committee of the council. (Prior code § 2-4.05)

Chapter 3.28
CAPITAL OUTLAYS FUND
Sections:

3.28.010    Created.

3.28.020    Authority to levy taxes within limitations.

3.28.030    Disbursements.

3.28.040    Capital outlays defined.

3.28.010 Created.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the council to do so under and pursuant to the provisions of that certain act of the Legislature of the state entitled: “An Act to Provide for the Levy and Collection of Taxes and Assessments for the Purpose of Creating a Fund for Capital Outlays by Cities, Counties, Cities and Counties, or Districts” (Statutes 1937, page 1995; Act 8496a, Deerings General Laws of California, 1944 Edition), as amended and as the same may hereafter be amended, the council creates a certain fund in and for the city to be known and designated, and which is established, named and designated as the “capital outlays fund.” (Prior code § 8-1.01)

3.28.020 Authority to levy taxes within limitations.
As authorized in such act of the Legislature, the council at the time of making the regular tax levy for general and special municipal purposes each year hereafter may levy and thereafter collect for the purposes contemplated under such act of the Legislature assessments or taxes for capital outlays which assessments or taxes shall not exceed the limitation upon its right to impose taxes as is now, or may hereafter be, prescribed by the general laws of the state without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the city voting at any general or special election at which such proposition may be submitted. The proceeds of any and all such assessments or taxes levied and collected shall be placed in such fund and the council may, as provided in such act, transfer to such fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand in the city at the end of any fiscal year. (Prior code § 8-1.02)

3.28.030 Disbursements.
As provided in such act under which such fund is created, such fund shall remain inviolate for the making of any capital outlays, and no moneys shall be disbursed therefrom excepting for such a purpose, except as provided in such act. (Prior code § 8-1.03)

3.28.040 Capital outlays defined.
As provided in such act, “capital outlays,” as used in this chapter, shall not be construed to include the construction, acquisition, extensions of, or additions to utilities, other than utilities for the furnishing of a water supply. (Prior code § 8-1.04)

Chapter 3.32
CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES FUND
Sections:

3.32.010    Created.

3.32.020    Deposits and expenditures.

3.32.010 Created.
There is created and established the “criminal activities fund” pursuant to the provisions of Section 11489 of the Health and Safety Code of the state and other applicable federal and state statutes. (Prior code § 8-10.01)

3.32.020 Deposits and expenditures.
All apportionments of moneys received pursuant to Section 11489 of the Health and Safety Code of the state or any forfeiture disbursement made by the federal government shall be deposited in the criminal activities fund and shall be used solely for the investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal activities. (Prior code § 8-10.02)

Chapter 3.36
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Sections:

3.36.010    Created.

3.36.020    Deposits in fund.

3.36.030    Use of fund.

3.36.010 Created.
To comply with the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1 of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Prior code § 8-4.01)

3.36.020 Deposits in fund.
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for the construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into such fund. (Prior code § 8-4.02)

3.36.030 Use of fund.
All moneys in such fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of, Article 5, Chapter 1, Division I of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Prior code § 8-4.03)

Chapter 3.40
WORKER’S COMPENSATION SELF-INSURANCE FUND
Sections:

3.40.010    Purpose.

3.40.020    Creation.

3.40.030    Deposits to the fund.

3.40.040    Disbursements from the fund.

3.40.050    Minimum funding level.

3.40.060    Audits.

3.40.010 Purpose.
The council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To provide for the potential liabilities arising as the result of injuries incurred and occupational illnesses contracted by employees in the course of employment by the city;

B. To provide for the payment of expenses incurred by the city in the administration of a self-insurance coverage of worker’s compensation liability;

C. To provide for the payment of any insurance premiums incurred in providing protection against claims out of, or for accidents in excess of, basic coverages assumed by the fund; and

D. To reimburse the General Fund for the excess costs of retirement benefits occasioned by early retirements resulting from occupational injuries or occupational illnesses. (Prior code § 8-8.01)

3.40.020 Creation.
The city treasurer shall create a fund, to be known as the worker’s compensation self-insurance fund, to fulfill the purposes set forth in Section 3.40.010, which fund shall be kept separate and apart from any other funds of the city, with additions and deletions made thereto solely in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any amounts held by the city treasurer on January 22, 1981, for the purpose of paying worker’s compensation claims to city employees shall be transferred into the worker’s compensation self-insurance fund. The term “fund,” whenever used alone in this chapter, shall refer to the worker’s compensation insurance fund. (Prior code § 8-8.02)

3.40.030 Deposits to the fund.
A. Annually, in the preparation of the fiscal year budget, the city manager shall determine the amount to be transferred to the fund during the course of the fiscal year and shall direct the monthly transfer to the fund of one-twelfth the amount so determined.

B. No deposit shall be required for any period where the city manager’s review shall indicate that the accumulated assets of the fund exceed the accrued actuarial liabilities at the time of the review. (Ord. 1726 § 27 (part), 2011; prior code § 8-8.03)

3.40.040 Disbursements from the fund.
A. Upon the approval of the city manager, the city treasurer shall be authorized to pay out of the fund any and all expenses arising in or out of the administration of a self-funded insurance program for worker’s compensation and to reimburse the General Fund for any excess retirement costs occasioned by the early retirement of employees disabled by industrial injuries or illnesses.

B. Upon the recommendation of the city manager and approval by a majority of the members of the council, the city treasurer shall be authorized to return to the General Fund any amount which shall accumulate in the fund because of favorable actuarial experience in the operation of the fund and/or investments of the fund assets; provided, however, any such return shall not reduce the assets of the fund to an amount less than specified in Section 3.40.050 as the minimum funding level.

C. Upon the recommendation of the city manager and approval by the finance committee of the council, the city treasurer shall be authorized to effect transfers of funds from the worker’s compensation reserve fund to the General Fund for periods of twelve months or less; provided, however, such short-term transfers shall not reduce the assets of the fund below the balance required of the fund to satisfy its obligations during the term of the transfer; and further provided any such transfer shall not extend beyond twelve months, unless it shall be approved by a majority of the members of the council. (Ord. 1726 § 27 (part), 2011; prior code § 8-8.04)

3.40.050 Minimum funding level.
The minimum funding level shall be that amount reasonably expected to be incurred on all claims open and outstanding as of the time of determination and shall be the total of the following calculations:

A. A reserve for all expected costs on all outstanding and unsettled claims determined in accordance with standard actuarial practices;

B. An amount equal to thirty-five percent of the result computed in subsection A of this subsection to provide for latent claims and contingencies; and

C. An amount equal to ten thousand dollars, multiplied by the number of outstanding claims representing injuries to members of the police department and fire department to provide for the additional exposure to loss on safety claims. (Prior code § 8-8.05)

3.40.060 Audits.
An annual independent audit pertaining to the fund established by this chapter and reserve adequacy shall be prepared and presented to the council. (Prior code § 8-8.06)

Title 4
(Reserved)
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses Generally

5.08    Business License Fees

5.10    Grocery Worker Retention Ordinance

5.12    Amusement Devices

5.16    Bingo

5.20    Cable Television and Video Service Franchises

5.24    Card Games

5.28    Charitable and Religious Solicitations

5.32    Entertainment Permits

5.36    Film Production

5.40    Fortunetelling

5.44    Hotels and Motels

5.48    Massage Establishments and Services

5.52    Tobacco Retailers – Permit Procedures

5.60    Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and Junk Dealers

5.64    Peddlers and Street Vendors

5.68    Taxicabs

5.72    Adult-Oriented Business Performers

Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Sections:

5.04.010    Definitions.

5.04.015    Evidence of doing business.

5.04.020    License collector – Duties.

5.04.030    License collector – Powers.

5.04.040    Business license required – Certificate of occupancy.

5.04.050    License fees required.

5.04.060    License fees a debt.

5.04.070    License fees payable in advance.

5.04.080    Preparation and issuance of licenses.

5.04.090    Errors in issuance of licenses.

5.04.100    Licenses not transferable.

5.04.110    Separate business licenses/permits for each business and for each location.

5.04.120    Deposit of license fees collected.

5.04.130    License fees – Due dates, proration and delinquencies.

5.04.140    License fees and terms stringent.

5.04.150    Licenses for hazardous businesses.

5.04.160    Permit procedures.

5.04.180    Posting licenses.

5.04.190    Exhibition of licenses to officials.

5.04.200    Duplicate licenses.

5.04.205    Statements, records, and audits.

5.04.210    Gross revenue statements.

5.04.215    Information confidential.

5.04.220    Refunds and additional fees.

5.04.240    Cancellation of licenses.

5.04.250    Cancellation – Forfeiture of fees.

5.04.260    Apportionment.

5.04.270    Exemptions – Disabled veterans.

5.04.275    Deleted.

5.04.278    Annual/periodic events.

5.04.280    Vehicle tags.

5.04.290    Licensed vehicles – Lingering on streets.

5.04.300    Inspection fees.

5.04.310    Police officers appointed inspectors.

5.04.320    Right of entry powers.

5.04.330    Violation – Conviction not to excuse license fee payment.

5.04.340    Sealing devices in violation of this code.

5.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Amusement arcade” means any place, location or premises where five or more amusement devices are available for public use and operation.

“Amusement device” means any mechanical or electrical machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or for which playtime is sold, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, with or without registering a score, for the purpose of testing the operator’s skill. “Amusement device” includes, but shall not be limited to, video games, pool tables, air hockey, foosball, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, and all similar skill testing devices. “Amusement device” shall not include amusement rides, sound or music devices, vending machines, adult movie arcades, or newspaper or publication vending machines.

“Amusement ride” means any mechanical or electrical machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, provides a ride. “Amusement ride” includes, but is not limited to, hobby horses, rocket ships, miniature autos, animal rides and other similar devices. “Amusement ride” does not include an amusement device.

“Auctioneer” means and includes any person selling or offering for sale any real or personal property at public auction or by public outcry.

“Auction house” means and includes any fixed place of business where any personal property or any real property, or interest therein, is sold or offered for sale by public outcry or public auction.

“Average number of persons employed,” when the annual license is based upon the average number of persons employed, means the average number of persons employed daily in the person’s business for the period of one year and shall be determined by ascertaining the total number of hours of service performed by all employees during the last preceding year and dividing the total number of hours of service thus obtained by the number of hours of service constituting a day’s work, according to the custom bylaws governing such employment, and by again dividing the sum thus obtained by the number of business days in each year. In computing the average number of persons employed, fractions of numbers shall be excluded.

“Bath parlor” means a place where water, mud, steam, Turkish, Russian, Swedish or other baths are given to or administered to human beings.

“Builder” means a person constructing, reconstructing, or erecting a building, dwelling or structure not intended for his own occupancy.

“Business” means and includes all kinds of vocations, trades, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted, used or carried on for the purpose of earning in whole or in part a profit or livelihood whether or not a profit or livelihood actually is earned thereby and regardless of whether paid for in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Business, professions and trades shall include, without being limited thereto, trades and occupations of all and every kind of calling carried on within the city; salesmen, brokers, retailers, wholesalers, vendors, suppliers, peddlers, professions, the renting or supplying of living quarters or board, or both for guests, tenants or occupants. A business need not have a fixed place of business in the city.

“Circus” means and includes any tent or canvas enclosure wherein are exhibited acts or feats of horsemanship, trained animals, clown, acrobatic or trapeze performances, or such other forms of skill or amusement as are commonly given in rings, and combinations of entertainment.

“Commence” means and includes commence, begin, initiate, start, open and establish.

“Conduct” means and includes conduct, transact, maintain, prosecute, practice, operate and carry on.

“Contractor” means any person, except a licensed architect or a registered civil engineer acting solely in his professional capacity, who, in any capacity other than as the employee of another with wages as the sole compensation, undertakes to, or offers to undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or work in connection therewith. “Contractor” includes subcontractor or specialty contractor, but does not include anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating them into, or consuming them in the performance of, the work of the contractor.

“Director” shall mean the community development director or the director’s designee(s).

“Employee,” when used to determine the amount of a license fee based, in whole or in part, upon the number of employees engaged in business, means and include all natural persons engaged, on a full-time or part-time basis, in the operation or conduct of any business, whether an owner, a member of an owner’s family, proprietor, officer, director, partner, manager, operator, trustee, trustor, beneficiaries, associates, solicitors and/or a joint venturer.

“Established business” means and includes only such persons in cases whereby the nature of their respective modes of operation would clearly be classifiable as a “permanent business.” In all other cases such fact shall be required to be proven by the exhibition of a bona fide lease or rental agreement to the premises where such business is to be conducted, such lease or rental agreement to be for a minimum period of six months or more.

“Film Production” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting motion pictures, television shows or programs, still photography, and commercials.

“Food” means and includes all articles and substances used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment by man, whether simple, mixed or compound.

“Gross receipts” means gross income, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, and includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” are all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” are all of the following:

A. Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

B. Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;

C. Any license fee required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

D. Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sales as is refunded either in cash or by credit;

E. Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided, the agent or trustee has furnished the director with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them;

F. Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded;

G. As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker;

H. As to a retail gasoline dealer, that portion of his/her gross receipts derived from the sale of motor vehicle fuel, equal to the motor vehicle fuel tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State;

I. As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him/her from the consumer or purchaser.

“License” means licensing for both revenue and regulation pursuant to the authority of Section 37101 of the Government Code of the state and all other state laws permitting licensing and regulation for revenue and regulation.

“License collector” shall mean that person or persons designated by the community development director to perform the duties set forth in this code.

“Massage parlor” means a place where massage, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments or alcohol or other rubs are given or administered to human beings.

“Peddling” means the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise from house to house and at other than from a fixed place of business.

“Private playgrounds” means places where children are permitted to congregate and play and for which an admission fee is charged, or at which charges are made for participation in any activity, or at which charges are made for the use or participation upon any amusement device by an individual, firm, or corporation.

“Purport to commence” and/or “purport to conduct” means and includes any person who, by the appearance of the premises or by the acts of either such person or the agents, servants or employees of such person, would be in position to so conduct any business within the city.

“Retail manufacturing” means the manufacturing, processing or fabricating of any product, commodity, machine, instrument, tool or other thing and selling any such product at retail only.

“Sale” means and includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. This definition shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

“Show” or “exhibition” means and includes moving picture exhibitions, theatrical performances, races and activities of like nature, whether conducted in the open or at a place of public assemblage for a price of admission.

“Soft drink” means a beverage for human consumption containing less than 3.2 percent of alcohol by volume.

“Solicitor” or “canvasser” means any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for, any goods, wares, merchandise or any article for future delivery, or for any service to be furnished or performed in the future, or for the making, manufacturing, treating or repairing of any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery.

“Sound or music device” means any mechanical or electrical machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for the production or playing of sound or music.

“Subject to special application procedure” means that the applicant for any license to which such words are made applicable, before receiving the license applied for, shall follow the procedure set forth in Section 5.04.160.

“Subject to special permit from the council to be first obtained” means that the license collector is not to issue any license to which such words relate or to which the same may be made applicable unless the council shall have first authorized, by either motion or resolution, the issuance of the particular license so made subject or limited.

“Theater” means a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, the primary function of which is to present such performances, and in which the serving of food or beverage is clearly incidental to such performances. This definition is not intended to supersede the provisions of Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code of the state.

“Vehicle” means every apparatus or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting boxes, trays or receptacles carried by hand and also excepting any apparatus or device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, however, for the purposes of this chapter, a bicycle shall be deemed a vehicle.

“Warehousing” means the consolidation or storage of any goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of eventually moving such goods, wares or merchandise in carload lots or less; and where no processing, fabricating or manufacturing not directly related to warehousing, storage or shipping functions shall be allowed; nor shall any business be allowed to be conducted therefrom.

“Wholesale manufacturing” means the manufacturing, processing, or fabricating of any product, commodity, machine, instrument, tool or other thing and selling any such product at wholesale or to jobbers only.

“Wholesale selling” means the selling of goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale for the purpose of resale in the regular course of business. (Ord. 1726 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1644 § 1, 2003; Measure A §§ 1, 2, 2001; prior code § 6-1.101)

5.04.015 Evidence of doing business.
When any person by any means, including, without limitation, the use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone directories, trade publications, newspapers, advertisements, represents that he/she is in a business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency which license reflects that he/she is in business in the city, such person shall be deemed to be conducting a business in the city. (Measure A § 3, 2001)

5.04.020 License collector – Duties.
The license collector is charged with the duty of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and the enforcement thereof.

When any provisions of this chapter require a special permit from the chief of police to be first obtained, the license collector shall not issue any such license unless the chief of police shall have first issued a statement in writing that he has granted the permit specified by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1726 § 4, 2011: prior code § 6-1.102)

5.04.030 License collector – Powers.
In order to provide for the efficient and equitable administration of this chapter and to afford a means whereby disputes, contests, uncertainties and ambiguities arising under this chapter may be correctly and fairly resolved, the license collector, in addition to all other powers conferred upon him under this chapter, shall have the power:

A. For good cause shown, to extend the time for the filing of any statement required under this chapter for a period of not to exceed sixty days and in such case to waive any penalty that may have accrued on the license fee involved in such case; and

B. (Repealed). (Ord. 1618 § 3, 2001; prior code § 6-1.103)

5.04.040 Business license required – Certificate of occupancy.
A. Business License. It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, or purport to commence or conduct, in the city any business specified, named, designated or referred to in this chapter without first having procured a license from the city so to do, as provided in this chapter, or without complying with the requirements or provisions of this chapter or other laws of the city now existing or which may hereafter be adopted by the council, which laws refer or relate to such business. The commencing or conducting of any such business without having procured such license or without having complied with any and all such requirements or provisions shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each and every day such business is so commenced or conducted.

B. Certificate of Occupancy. It is further unlawful for any person to commence any business within a building without first having obtained a certificate of occupancy from the building official. Prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, an inspection shall be conducted by the building division of the community development department. In order to obtain a certificate of occupancy, every business must be inspected and all inspection fees required by this title must be paid.

C. State Licensees – Taxes. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, no person holding a license issued by the state to carry on any trade, calling, business, profession or occupation shall be required to perform any act as a condition of the issuance of a license by the city under this chapter except the payment of the city license tax.

D. Fees Collected for Revenue Only. All license fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are expressly for revenue only. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 1998; prior code § 6-1.104)

5.04.050 License fees required.
The respective amounts or rates of license fees to be paid to the city by persons commencing or conducting any business subject to a license under this chapter shall be as designated in Chapter 5.08 of this code and such respective amounts or rates of license fees to be paid are respectively designated, fixed and established for the respective businesses to which the same respectively relate.

It is declared to be the intention and purpose of the council in this chapter to require a license from, and the payment of a license fee by, each and every person commencing or conducting any business within the city unless such business shall be expressly exempted from such requirements by the provisions of this chapter or by law. (Prior code § 6-1.105)

5.04.060 License fees a debt.
The amount of any license fee imposed by this chapter, and of any penalty thereon, shall be deemed a debt to the city. Any person commencing or conducting any business without having a license so to do shall be liable to an action by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license fee imposed by this chapter on such business. (Prior code § 6-1.106)

5.04.070 License fees payable in advance.
All license fees shall be paid in advance in lawful money of the United States of America at the office of the license collector. (Prior code § 6-1.107)

5.04.080 Preparation and issuance of licenses.
It shall be the duty of the license collector to prepare and issue the licenses for every person liable to pay a license fee. Each such license shall be issued upon such form as the council may from time to time provide for such purposes. When the required license fee has been paid and all other provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the license collector shall deliver the original license to the licensee named in such license and shall retain at least one copy of such license on file in his office. Each such license shall show the amount of the fee therefor, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the business licensed, and the location or place where such business is to be commenced or conducted. (Prior code § 6-1.108)

5.04.090 Errors in issuance of licenses.
No error or mistake on the part of the person issuing the license or otherwise in the determination or statement of the amount of any license fee shall prevent or prejudice the collection by or for the city of the amount actually due from anyone commencing or conducting any business subject to a license. (Prior code § 6-1.109)

5.04.100 Licenses not transferable.
No license issued shall be transferable; provided, however, when a license is issued authorizing a person to conduct a business at a particular location, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee of one dollar, have the license previously issued amended so as to authorize the conduct of such business from such other location, other than a branch establishment, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 6-1.110)

5.04.110 Separate business licenses/permits for each business and for each location.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Title, a separate license shall be obtained and a separate fee paid for each branch establishment or separate place of business, and for each separate type of business activity which shares a common location, even when conducted under the same ownership.

B. Each license shall authorize the licensee named therein to commence and conduct only that business described in such license and only at the location or place of business which is indicated therein.

C. Any person who operates a separately owned department or concession in a department store or a building, structure or enclosure in which separate department or concessions are operated shall pay a license fee in accordance with the provisions of this Title for the department or concession so operated by the licensee.

D. Any two or more persons are prohibited from jointly taking out one business license to cover a combination of businesses separately owned.

E. For the purposes of this section, a branch establishment or separate place of business is defined to be a different and separate location, or a separate department in any one location, or in the case of vehicles, a different and separate vehicle from that mentioned in any other license held by the same licensee, in or from which the solicitation for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or service is or may be consummated at the same time. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2000; prior code § 6-1.111)

5.04.120 Deposit of license fees collected.
The license collector shall on each business day deposit with the city treasurer the full amount of all license fees, if any, collected during the last preceding business day, taking a receipt therefor. The license collector shall, on or before the second regular meeting of the council in each calendar month, report to the council in writing the amount of license fees and penalties collected or received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter during the preceding calendar month. (Prior code § 6-1.112)

5.04.130 License fees – Due dates, proration and delinquencies.
A. Due Dates. The license fees provided for in this chapter shall be due and payable in advance as follows:

1. Daily licenses, on each day in advance;

2. All license fees shall be due and payable on the first day of January of each year.

B. Proration. In cases where a portion of the annual license period has elapsed prior to an application for a license, the amount of the fee payable shall be apportioned as follows:

1. If an application is made in the first one-half of the calendar year, the entire annual license fee shall be paid; and

2. If an application is made in the second half of the calendar year, one-half of the annual fee shall be paid.

C. Penalties for Delinquencies.

1. Daily License Fees. If such daily license fee provided for in this chapter is unpaid at the end of the day when due and remains unpaid for a period of three business days after the same becomes due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to the same and collected by the license collector. In computing such three day period, the day upon which such license fee becomes due and payable shall be included in the computation, and for every three days’ delinquency thereafter, an additional penalty of ten percent on the original license fee due shall be added in the same manner; provided, however, when such penalty on any daily license amounts to fifty percent of the license fee therefor, no further penalty shall accrue on such license fee.

2. Annual License Fees. If such annual license fee paid under the gross revenue schedules provided for in Chapter 5.08 of this code is unpaid at the end of the day when due and remains unpaid at the end of the second calendar month after the same becomes due and payable under the provisions of this chapter, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to the same and collected by the license collector. All other annual license fees provided for in this chapter paid on a fixed fee basis shall become due and payable on the date of expiration of the license, and, if remaining unpaid at the end of the calendar month after the same becomes due and payable, the penalty provisions of this section shall apply. For each calendar month of delinquency thereafter, an additional penalty of ten percent on the original license fee due shall be added in the same manner as provided in subsection (C)(1) of this section; provided, however, when such penalty on any annual license amounts to fifty percent of the license fee therefor, no further penalty shall accrue on such license fee.

3. New Businesses. In the case of a newly established business for which a daily license fee is prescribed, no fee penalty shall be imposed if the fee shall be paid within three business days after the commencement of the operation; otherwise fee penalties shall be imposed in the same manner as provided for in subsection (C)(1) of this section. In the case of a newly established business for which an annual license fee is prescribed, no fee penalty shall be imposed if the fee shall be paid within thirty days after the commencement of operation; otherwise fee penalties shall be imposed in the same manner as provided for in subsection (C)(2) of this section.

4. Fee Penalties in Addition to Other Penalties. The fee penalties provided for in this subsection shall be in addition to all other fines and/or penalties which may otherwise be levied or assessed under the provisions of this code. Each and every day, or fractional part of a day, such business, trade, calling, profession or occupation is conducted or carried on without such license shall constitute a separate violation of the provisions of this code. No license for any ensuing current or unexpired license period shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making an application therefor, is indebted to the city for any unpaid license fees.

D. State Licensed Contractors. Whenever the issuance of a license to a builder or contractor is made dependent upon the possession and/or exhibition of a valid and then current contractor’s license from the state, the license collector, his assistants and/or deputies shall nevertheless have the right to issue to any applicant for such contractor’s license the license applied for upon payment of the required license fee and upon production by such applicant of evidence satisfactory to the person issuing the license that the necessary state license has actually been bona fidely applied for; provided, however, such city license so issued under such circumstances shall be valid only for a period of thirty days after the issuance thereof unless within such period of thirty days such licensee shall have obtained and exhibited to the license collector, his assistants, or his authorized deputies, the state license so applied for, the application for which was made the basis of the issuance of the license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The failure to obtain and exhibit such state license shall not entitle any person to a refund on any license fee paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-1.113)

5.04.140 License fees and terms stringent.
No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any license than is specified therefor in this chapter. No license shall be granted or issued for any period of time other than the full then current license period provided for such license except in the cases and under the circumstances otherwise authorized by the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-1.114)

5.04.150 Licenses for hazardous businesses.
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this chapter, in those cases where an application is made for a license for a business which, from its general nature or the materials, goods, wares, merchandise or commodities handled or to be handled, constitutes, in the opinion of the license collector, a potential fire hazard or public safety hazard, the license collector may refuse to issue a license for such business until there shall have been filed with him, in writing, from the chief of police, building official, and fire chief statements approving the location indicated therefor. The applicant shall have the right of appeal to the council from any refusal of the license collector to issue any such license under the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 6-1.115)

5.04.160 Permit procedures.
A. Application of Section. No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in any location within the city, a business or occupation for which a permit is required, without first having obtained the required permit in addition to the businesses license. No business license shall be issued for any business for which a permit is required pursuant to this Title until the permit is obtained. The procedures set forth in subsections B through L of this section shall apply to any business or occupation for which permit approval by the community development director or the city council is required, unless a more specific permit application procedure applies.

B. Filing of Application/Fee. The owner of the proposed business shall file a permit application with the community development department which shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The application shall be dated and signed under penalty of perjury.

C. Application Information – General. The permit application shall set forth the following information:

1. The full name of the applicant and a complete statement regarding any and all true and fictitious names used by the applicant within the five years immediately preceding the application;

2. The residence address, business address, and residence and business telephone numbers of the applicant;

3. The name, location and type of the business for which the permit is sought and the present use of such location. If the business is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as shown on the articles of incorporation. If the business is a partnership or corporation, an officer or general partner shall be designated to act as its responsible managing officer;

4. The applicant’s proposed method of operation; and

5. The history of the applicant as to the operation of any similar business or occupation within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application, including, but not limited to, the name and address of such business, whether a permit or license was issued for such business, whether such permit or license was revoked, and if applicable, the reasons therefor.

D. Application Information – Background Check. Where a background check is required, the application shall also include information set forth below. If the owner is a general business, each owner shall apply; if the owner is a corporation, each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the corporation and each officer and director of the corporation shall apply; and if the owner is a partnership, each partner, excluding limited partners, shall apply.

1. The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair, date of birth and place of birth;

2. Fingerprints, thumbprints and photographs of the applicant, to be taken by the Gardena police department;

3. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crimes within the five years preceding the date of the application; and

4. Such other reasonable identification and information as the city may require.

E. Investigation. Upon receipt of a completed application and filing fee, the community development director shall cause an investigation of the proposed business to be conducted by the appropriate departments, and unless specified otherwise, shall cause a state and local background check to be performed as well. Each affected department may make recommendations as to conditions which should be placed upon the business. If a background check is required and a response has not been received by the California Department of Justice prior to the time in which the permit is ready to be issued, a temporary permit may be issued. If the response from the Department of Justice shows a ground for denial, the permit shall be automatically revoked upon written notice of the Director.

F. Permits – Issuance/Denial by Community Development Director.

1. Where the code specifies that the community development director shall issue the permit, the director shall either issue the permit, conditionally issue the permit or deny the permit based upon the responses from the affected departments.

2. Reasons for denying a permit shall include, but not be limited to:

a. The applicant has not complied with the provisions of Title 5 of this code, or any other law of the city pertaining to the operation of the business;

b. The applicant has been convicted of any crime within the previous two years where the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the permit is sought;

c. The applicant has knowingly made one or more material misstatements or omissions in the application;

d. The business, as proposed, would not comply with all the applicable laws, including, but not limited to, all the city’s building, fire, zoning, health and safety regulations; or

e. The business will be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

f. No permit shall be denied on the grounds of a lack of good moral character.

3. Notice of the director’s decision shall be given to the applicant within thirty-five days of receipt of a completed application and shall state the reasons for the decision of a denial or a conditionally approved permit. The notice shall specify that the decision of the director is final absent a timely appeal to the city manager in accordance with subsection J. below.

G. Permits – Issuance/Denial by City Council.

1. When the code specifies that the city council shall issue a permit, the matter shall be scheduled for a hearing before the city council within thirty-five days of the filing of a completed application. The city council may continue the item from time to time.

2. The community development director shall make a written recommendation to the city council based upon the responses from staff.

3. The applicant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the hearing at which the application will be considered, along with the written recommendation of the city staff and all relevant materials at least five calendar days prior to the hearing.

4. The city council may approve the permit, condition the permit if deemed appropriate, or deny the permit on the same grounds set forth in subsection F.2 above.

5. Notice of the city council’s decision shall be given to the applicant within five working days of the decision and shall state the reasons for the decision of a denial or a conditionally approved permit. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6.

H. Renewal of Permits. Where a permit is required under the provisions of this section, such permit shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the license and shall be subject to annual renewal, unless otherwise noted. The renewal application shall be filed with the community development department and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. Renewals shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. However, if there are no changes in operations and if there are no objections or changes in conditions submitted by the affected departments, the renewal application shall be approved by the community development director. If the original permit was granted by the city council, the city council shall be notified of the renewal application and any councilmember may request that the matter by acted upon by the city council. Additionally, if a background check was required for the original application, a new photograph shall be taken each year by the Gardena police department.

I. Revocation of Permits.

1. Grounds. The community development director shall revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section whenever the director discovers that any of the following has occurred regardless of whether the permit was issued by the director or the city council.

a. The permittee is conducting operations in a manner which is contrary to the provision of the Gardena Municipal Code or other applicable law;

b. The permittee is conducting operations in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance;

c. The permittee is conducting operations in a manner which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the City or its inhabitants;

d. Any ground exists which would have constituted grounds for denial of the original application.

2. Notice. The community development director shall give notice to the permitted of the violation(s) involved and set forth a period of time for the correction of the violation(s) if correction is possible. If the director finds that the violation(s) continue without correction, or if correction is not possible, then the director shall issue a notice of revocation which shall contain a statement of the violation(s). The director shall serve the notice of revocation on the permitted, as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and conclusive in the absence of a timely appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in subsection J. below. If the permit is being revoked due to an immediate danger to the public health and safety, the notice shall set forth the danger and provide that an appeal will not stay the revocation.

J. Appeals.

1. Permits Issued By Community Development Director – Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relating to permits in which the community development director has initial authority to act on the permit may, within ten consecutive calendar days from the date of the notice, file a written appeal with the city manager.

2. Permits Issued By City Council – Any person who is aggrieved by a determination of the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relating to permits in which the city council has initial authority to act on the permit may, within ten consecutive calendar days from the date of the notice, file a written appeal with the city clerk for a hearing before the city council.

3. The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as all relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent.

4. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, City staff and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as they may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

5. Based upon the submission of such evidence, the review of the city’s files and inspection of the business, if appropriate, the City Manager or the City Council shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying, or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken and if appropriate, specifying the time period in which corrective actions must be taken. The notice shall be given within five working days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6.

6. A timely appeal shall stay the order from which the appeal is being taken, unless the notice provides that a permit has been revoked or other order made due to an immediate danger to the public health and safety.

7. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.

K. Reapplication. No person shall apply for a permit which has been revoked or denied for a minimum of one year from the date that the denial or revocation is final.

L. Notice – Manner of Giving. Notices required pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be given by personal service, or by deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the name and address of the owner as shown on the permit application.

M. Display of Permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be prominently displayed at the business.

N. Zoning Approvals. In addition to permits granted pursuant to this section, there may also be separate land use approvals which must be obtained pursuant to Title 18 of this Code. It is incumbent upon the applicant to determine whether any land use approvals are required. (Ord. 1738 § 63 (part), 2012; Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1511 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1498 § 14, 1996; prior code § 6-1.116)

5.04.180 Posting licenses.
Every person having a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and commencing or conducting the business mentioned in the license at a fixed place of business shall keep such license conspicuously posted and exhibited in such place of business while the license is in force. Every person having such a license and not having a fixed place of business shall carry or transport such license with him at all times while conducting such business. (Prior code § 6-1.118)

5.04.190 Exhibition of licenses to officials.
Every person having a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit such license to the license collector or his authorized deputy when applying for a renewal thereof and whenever requested to do so by any police officer of the city or by any officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. (Prior code § 6-1.119)

5.04.200 Duplicate licenses.
The license collector may, on the receipt of an affidavit filed in the office of the license collector by or on behalf of any licensee, stating that any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has been lost or destroyed, issue a duplicate of such license to the licensee therein named. A charge in an amount set by resolution of the city council shall be made for each such duplicate license issued, which sum shall be paid into the city treasury to the credit of the General Fund. (Ord. 1726 § 5, 2011: prior code § 6-1.120)

5.04.205 Statements, records, and audits.
A. No statement contained in an application shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of an application preclude the director from collecting by appropriate action such license fee as is actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Applications and each of the items contained in an application shall be subject to audit and verification by the director who is hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant as may be necessary, in the director’s judgment, to verify or ascertain the amount of business license fee due. A certificate executed and delivered to the city by a certified public accountant licensed by the state shall establish a rebuttable presumption that the gross receipts of such certificate holder are as stated in the certificate.

C. All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the director. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records pursuant to the provisions of this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the director to examine such records at reasonable times and places. At the director’s request, copies of the records shall be provided to the director by mail.

D. Where an audit conducted pursuant to this chapter reflects an understatement of gross receipts by more than ten percent, the cost of such audit shall be paid to the city by the applicant or certificate holder. (Measure A § 5, 2001)

5.04.210 Gross revenue statements.
A. Form and Content. In all cases where the amount of the license fee to be paid by any person is based upon the amount of gross annual revenue of the business and/or the receipts, sales or amount of business, trade, vocation, enterprise, calling, etc., the applicant for such license shall, before obtaining a license for such business, file with the license collector, for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license fee to be paid or deposited for the license applied for, a written statement, under penalty of perjury, by such applicant in the following form:

I declare that this statement is made by me, that I am authorized to make such statement, and that to the best of may knowledge and belief it is a true, correct, and complete statement, made in good faith pursuant to the provisions of Section __________ (insert section number) of the Municipal Code of the City of Gardena, and under penalty of perjury, I accordingly so represent.

Signed:

Title:

Date:

Such statement or return shall show:

1. In the case of a new business, the date upon which such new business was or is to be commenced;

2. If the business was in operation for less than the whole of the preceding calendar year, the amount of the receipts, sales or business transacted during the portion of such preceding calendar year during which such business was in operation; or

3. If such business was in operation during all of the preceding calendar year, the amount of the receipts, sales or business transacted during such preceding calendar year.

B. Statements Inconclusive. No statement furnished pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section shall be conclusive upon the city, or upon any officer thereof, as to the matters therein set forth or otherwise, and the same shall not prejudice the right of the city to recover any amount that may be ascertained to be due from such person, in addition to the amount shown by such statement to be due, in the event such statement should be found to be incorrect.

C. Failure to Make Statement. If any person required to make any such statement shall fail to do so, such person shall be required to pay a license fee at the maximum rate prescribed for the business carried on by such person and shall be guilty of a violation of the provisions of this chapter.

D. Verification of Statements. The correctness of all such statements shall be subject to audit and verification by the license collector, or his properly authorized representative, who is authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books, records and accounts of any and all persons licensed to commence or conduct any business. It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to wilfully make any false representation in any statement required to be delivered or filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

E. Statements Confidential. The statements filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to general public inspection.

F. License Collector to Keep Statements Confidential. It shall be the duty of the license collector to preserve and keep the statements so that the contents thereof may not become known except to the persons charged by law with the administration of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, any and all such statements may be presented and used as evidence in any trial or proceeding relating to a violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-1.121)

5.04.215 Information confidential.
It is unlawful for the director or any other person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a license fee, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A. The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for the purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of the code, and this chapter;

B. The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, authorized federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists;

C. The disclosure to any person of information and results of examination of records of particular license holder authorized by court order or subpoena;

D. The disclosure of information to any person after the filing of a written request to that effect, by the license holder;

E. The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom certificates have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business;

F. The disclosure of general statistics regarding license fees collected or business done in the city; and

G. The disclosure of any information required by law. (Measure A § 6, 2001)

5.04.220 Refunds and additional fees.
A. Refunds. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City, such amount may be refunded as provided in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 3.24 of the Gardena Municipal Code with the added provision that any claim filed thereunder shall be under penalty of perjury.

B. Additional Fees. If it is found that an additional license fee amount is required for any licensee, the license collector shall bill the licensee for such amount, and such amount shall be paid within ten days after such billing. (Ord. 1618 § 5, 2001; prior code § 6-1.123)

5.04.240 Cancellation of licenses.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other remedy or right in this chapter declared or reserved by the council, it is further provided that any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be cancelled by the community development director after fifteen days’ notice to the holder of such license, or to any of his agents, servants or employees. The notice shall provide for a hearing before the community development director, at which hearing the holder shall have the right to offer evidence and have the services of counsel if necessary. When it satisfactorily appears to the community development director that such holder has violated any of the conditions of the license or has violated, or permitted to be violated, any law of the United States, or the state, or any law of the city on the premises where the business covered by such license is being conducted or in connection with such business, the license shall be cancelled.

B. Forfeiture of License Rights. Thereafter the person whose license has been so cancelled shall not be entitled to receive any business license of any character from the city except upon a permit fee from the city manager.

C. Notice. The notice provided for in this section shall contain in substance the nature of the charge against the holder of the license and a statement of the place and date of the hearing and may be served personally or left at the place of business of the holder. The notice shall include all relevant materials relating to the grounds for cancellation.

D. Appeal. The licensee shall have the right to a de novo hearing before the city manager by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days of the community development director’s decision. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The appeal hearing shall be held not fewer than ten calendar days nor more than thirty calendar days from the date of the appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final with no right of appeal to the city council.

E. The decisions of the community development director and city manager shall be in writing and shall set forth findings supporting the decision.

F. The cancellation of the business license shall not be effective until the time for appeal has lapsed and no appeal has been filed, or the date of the city manager’s decision on appeal. (Ord. 1726 § 6, 2011: prior code § 6-1.125)

5.04.250 Cancellation – Forfeiture of fees.
In the event of the cancellation for cause of any business license issued by the city, any license fee theretofore paid by the licensee for such license shall be forfeited to the city, and said licensee shall be entitled to no refund for any unexpired term of such license. (Prior code § 6-1.126)

5.04.260 Apportionment.
A. None of the license fees imposed by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States and the state.

B. None of the license fees imposed by this chapter shall be applied to businesses operating both within and outside the city’s jurisdiction as to not fairly reflect that proportion of the license activity actually carried on within the city.

C. In any case where a license fee is believed by a certificate holder or applicant for a business license certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses or to not fairly reflect the proportion of the license activity actually carried on within the city, he/she may apply to the director for an adjustment of the license fee. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his/her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the director deems necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The director shall then conduct an investigation, and after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license fee so fixed. In fixing the license fee to be charged, the director shall have the power to base the license fee upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license fee as prescribed by this chapter. Should the director determine the gross receipts measure of license fee to be the proper basis, the director may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant’s business in the city, or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license fee therefore. The burden of proof is upon the owner of the business claiming an exemption or adjustment pursuant to this section. (Measure A § 4, 2001)

5.04.270 Exemptions – Disabled veterans.
A. Application for Free License. Every honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the United States who is unable to obtain his livelihood by manual labor shall have the right to hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise, except spirituous, malt, vinous, mixed or other intoxicating liquors, without payment of any license fees required whatsoever, and the business license collector shall issue to any such soldier, sailor or marine, without cost, a free license to do so provided such veteran:

1. Makes application for such free license in the form of a written affidavit showing the facts upon which the issuance of such free license depends, within the meaning of this chapter, and upon a form which shall be provided by the license collector;

2. Displays to the license collector, or his authorized representative, as proof of his right to such exemption, the following documents:

a. A certificate of honorable discharge or honorable release from any of the armed forces of the United States, or a certified or exemplified copy thereof, and

b. A certificate of total permanent disability issued by the United States, or a certified or exemplified copy thereof, or

c. A statement that the applicant is physically unable to earn his livelihood by manual labor, signed by any practicing physician or surgeon employed by the United States or the county, or by any physician or surgeon who is engaged in private practice in the city, such statement to be current and dated and signed in the year in which submitted. The requirement of a statement of physical disability may be waived by the license collector if it is obvious by looking at the disabled veteran that, in the opinion of the license collector, such veteran is physically unable to perform manual labor, or if he provides a certificate of total permanent disability issued by the United States, or a certified or exemplified copy thereof, as provided in subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section;

3. Is a registered voter of the state, and such disabled veteran shall furnish proof of such registration;

4. Signs his name for the purpose of comparison identification in the space provided therefor on the original free license and on the duplicate free license retained by the license collector; and

5. Delivers to the license collector at the time the application for license is made two copies of a photograph of himself taken within a period of not more than one year immediately preceding the making of such application. It shall be and is made the duty of the license collector to satisfy himself by proper examination and investigation that such photograph is a true likeness of the person who made the application and whose name appears in the discharge and in the physician’s certificate. One such photograph shall be pasted in a space to be provided for that purpose upon the original free license form issued to such licensee, and the free license, with such photograph attached thereto, shall be carried on the person of such licensee at all times while the licensee is actually engaged in conducting the activity licensed thereby. The second photograph shall be pasted upon the duplicate copy of such free license form and shall be retained in the office of the license collector. Any license found without such photograph attached thereto shall be taken up and forfeited, and the person to whom such license was issued, and the holder thereof, shall forthwith surrender all rights thereunder.

B. Display of Identification. Such person shall identify himself by his signature whenever required so to do by any police officer, license inspector, license collector or other officer of the city. Should any such license be found in the possession of any person other than the person named therein, it shall be taken up, surrendered to the license collector, and canceled.

C. Term of Free License. All such free licenses shall be renewable quarterly of each calendar year, the first of such renewals under this subsection to be made on or before April 1, 1965, and quarterly thereafter, on or before July 1st, October 1st, January 1st and April 1st of each year. All such licenses now issued and valid which expire after April 1, 1965, shall become null and void as of said date unless renewed as provided herein. When applying each quarter for renewal of such license, the disabled veteran shall not be required to submit the certificates and/or statements of disability, nor his honorable discharge or honorable release; provided, however, at least once a year, prior to the end of each calendar year, the disabled veteran shall be required to submit to the license collector for review required proof of disability and the license collector may require submission of any or all of the following:

1. A certificate of honorable discharge or honorable release from any of the armed forces of the United States, or a certified or exemplified copy thereof;

2. A certificate of total disability issued by the United States, or a certified or exemplified copy thereof; and

3. A statement that the veteran is physically unable to earn his livelihood by manual labor, signed by any physician or surgeon employed by the United States or the county, or by any physician or surgeon who is engaged in private practice in the city. Such statement shall be current and shall be signed and dated in the year in which such statement is reviewed by the license collector.

D. Use of Free License by Licensees Only. No person except the person named in such free license or a municipal authority having custody thereof, shall use or have in his possession any free license issued under the provisions of this section.

E. Transfer of Free License. No person shall sell, purchase or transfer any such free license or transfer or convey the discharge or certificate mentioned in this section to any other person for the purpose of securing the free license provided for.

F. Free License Required to Vend. It is unlawful for any such veteran (unless licensed to do so under some other section of this chapter and for which a license fee has been paid as required by this chapter) to commence or conduct any such distribution, hawking, peddling or vending without having first procured a valid free license so to do. The license collector shall not issue any free license to any such veteran not actually hawking, peddling or vending his own goods, wares or merchandise or to any such veteran who actually, or by signs, advertising or any other means, directly or indirectly, represents another person who would otherwise be liable for payment of a license fee pursuant to this chapter. The license collector shall not issue any such free license to any veteran distributing, hawking, peddling or vending food products for human or animal consumption until such veteran has first obtained a health permit so to do from the health officer or his authorized representative.

G. Soliciting Charitable Contributions. A veteran’s free license to hawk, peddle and vend goods, wares and merchandise shall not be deemed to authorize the licensee to solicit charitable contributions without the permission of the council.

H. Violations of Free License Privileges. Any police officer or other person charged with the duty of enforcing the license provisions of this chapter shall summarily take up the free license of any person holding such a license who is observed to violate any provision of this chapter or any law of the city applicable thereto. Any license so taken up shall be delivered to the license collector who shall mark it “Canceled,” and no subsequent free license shall be issued to the same licensee unless by further order of the council. (Ord. 1601 § 4, 2000; prior code § 6-1.129)

5.04.275 Exemptions – Nonprofits.
Deleted. (Ord. 1694 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1672 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1634 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1619 § 2, 2001; Ord. 1565 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 9, 1998: prior code § 8-7.104)

5.04.278 Annual/periodic events.
A. Notwithstanding Section 5.04.275 above, in the case of periodic events which occur more than once a year but which do not take place on a regular daily basis, the sponsor of the event may obtain a license and permit for all approved vendors included in the event and pay a fee for the business license based upon gross receipts pursuant to Section 5.08.510 of this code.

1. The procedure set forth in this subsection may only be used for events in which the sales from all individual vendors are handled by the sponsor of the event so that the sponsor may accurately account for the gross receipts upon which the fee(s) is based.

2. When the license or permit is issued to a sponsor in accordance with this subsection, all individual vendors shall be conclusively presumed to be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a separate business license or permit pursuant to the provisions of this title, for the purposes of the event.

3. If an individual vendor is exempt from the requirements pursuant to this title, the sponsor shall pay the fee based upon the gross receipts of those vendors who are not exempt. An individual vendor is not exempt from the provisions of this subsection, based on the fact that such vendor has a license or permit for a business elsewhere in the city.

B. Notwithstanding Section 5.04.275 above, in the case of annual events, the sponsor of the event may obtain a license or permit in accordance with this code for all approved vendors included in the event.

1. This method of certification may only be used for events which take place once a year, regardless of the number of days in the event.

2. When the license or permit is issued to a sponsor in accordance with this subsection, all individual vendors shall be conclusively presumed to be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a separate business license or permit pursuant to the provisions of this title for the purpose of conducting a business or activity at the event. (Ord. 1510 § 1 (part), 1996)

5.04.280 Vehicle tags.
A. Issuance. Whenever in the conduct of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter the use of a truck or vehicle is required, the licensee shall pay to the license collector before such license is issued the sum of two dollars for each truck or vehicle required and shall receive from the license collector a tag for each of such trucks or vehicles, which tag shall show such truck or vehicle is licensed to do business within the city. Such tag shall be affixed on the left rear end of the vehicle and shall remain upon the vehicle so as to be plainly visible until a new and different license is issued for the business to which the use of such vehicle is required.

B. Duplicate Tags. The license collector, on the receipt of an affidavit filed in the office of the license collector by or on behalf of any licensee stating that any such tag has been lost or destroyed, may issue a duplicate of such tag to the licensee therein named. A charge of two dollars shall be made for each such new tag issued, which sum shall be paid into the city treasury to the credit of the general fund. (Prior code § 6-1.130)

5.04.290 Licensed vehicles – Lingering on streets.
It is unlawful for any truck, wagon or vehicle licensed by the city to remain upon or permanently occupy or linger in one place upon the public streets, but such vehicles shall have only the right to travel along the streets in the usual method of doing business. (Prior code § 6-1.131)

5.04.300 Inspection fees.
Where a certificate of occupancy is a necessary requirement and/or inspection from the police, fire or community development departments is a necessary requirement for the operation of a business, the licensee shall pay such initial and/or annual inspection fees in amounts established by resolution of the city council in addition to the business license fee. The owner and/or operator of such business shall arrange a mutually satisfactory time with the respective departments for the inspections by such departments to be made. (Ord. 1530 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1502 §§ 1, 3, 1996: prior code § 6-1.132)

5.04.310 Police officers appointed inspectors.
All police officers of the city are appointed inspectors of licenses and shall be diligent to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-1.133)

5.04.320 Right of entry powers.
Representatives of the city shall have the power to enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business or any place where any business for which a license as required by this chapter is being commenced or conducted, for purposes of determining compliance with the Gardena Municipal Code as well as other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1533 § 2, 1998: prior code § 6-1.134)

5.04.330 Violation – Conviction not to excuse license fee payment.
The conviction and punishment of any person for commencing or conducting any business without a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license fee due or unpaid hereunder at the time of such conviction, and nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-1.135)

5.04.340 Sealing devices in violation of this code.
The license inspector, or his designee, shall have the power to seal the coin insertion slots of any device which violates the provisions of this code. Such devices shall include, but not be limited to, amusement devices, vending machines, amusement rides and sound or music devices. The unauthorized removal of any seal shall be a violation of this section. (Prior code § 6-1.136)

Chapter 5.08
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
Sections:

5.08.010    Application of provisions.

5.08.020    Advertising.

5.08.030    Amusement rides.

5.08.040    Auctioneers.

5.08.050    Auction houses.

5.08.060    Automobile agencies.

5.08.070    Automobile wrecking yards.

5.08.080    Bankrupt, fire and closing-out sales.

5.08.090    Barber shops.

5.08.100    Bath and massage parlors.

5.08.110    Beauty shops.

5.08.120    Bowling lanes.

5.08.130    Boxing and wrestling arenas.

5.08.140    Cabarets, cafes and restaurants.

5.08.150    Catering trucks – Lunch wagons.

5.08.160    Christmas trees and specialties.

5.08.170    Circuses and carnivals.

5.08.180    Contractors.

5.08.190    Dances – Dancehalls.

5.08.195    Film production.

5.08.200    Gardening maintenance and/or services.

5.08.210    Gymnasiums.

5.08.220    Hospitals, sanitariums and rest homes.

5.08.230    Hotels and motels.

5.08.240    Junk collectors.

5.08.250    Junk dealers.

5.08.260    Cleaning, dyeing, laundries and towel and linen supply.

5.08.270    Manufacturing.

5.08.280    Oil well drilling.

5.08.290    Peddling at retail, canvassing and soliciting.

5.08.300    Peddling from vehicles.

5.08.310    Poolrooms, billiards and social clubs.

5.08.320    Private detectives and patrol services.

5.08.330    Private playgrounds.

5.08.340    Professions and services.

5.08.350    Residential property rentals and lodging houses.

5.08.355    Nonresidential property rentals.

5.08.360    Rubbish collection.

5.08.370    Selling and distributing certain commodities over a regular route.

5.08.380    Shooting galleries.

5.08.390    Skating rinks.

5.08.400    Sound or music devices.

5.08.410    Sports stadiums.

5.08.420    Swap meets.

5.08.430    Taxicabs.

5.08.440    Theaters, shows and entertainments.

5.08.450    Trailer parks.

5.08.460    Transfer, moving and trucking.

5.08.470    Truck delivery.

5.08.480    Vending machines.

5.08.490    Warehousing.

5.08.500    Wholesale sales.

5.08.510    Retail and miscellaneous sales.

5.08.520    Telephone companies.

5.08.530    Newsracks.

5.08.010 Application of provisions.
The amount of license fees to be paid to the city by any person engaging in or carrying on any business or profession designated by this chapter is fixed and established as provided in this chapter, and such license fee shall be paid by every person engaging in or carrying on any business or profession in the city. (Prior code § 6-1.201)

5.08.020 Advertising.
License fees for advertising shall be as follows:

A. For advertising by means of sound trucks, portable loudspeakers or sound producing apparatus or equipment, ten dollars per day; provided, however, a permit as to the type of advertising and hours when speakers may be operated shall first be procured from the chief of police;

B. For advertising by means of portable signs mounted on wagons or vehicles when not in connection with any business licensed pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section, five dollars per day;

C. For advertising by means of portable searchlights, arc lights, or light producing apparatus or equipment, ten dollars per day or fifty dollars per year; provided, however, when such portable searchlights, arc lights, or light producing apparatus or equipment is owned by an established business licensed by the city desirous of using the same for its own purposes in connection with its own business, such lights may be used without a fee;

D. For advertising by posting, sticking, affixing or painting bills, posters or signs to or upon posts, fences, billboards, advertising signboards, buildings or other structures, seventy-five dollars per year; and

E. For the distribution of advertising handbills in residential areas pursuant to a special permit first had and obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.160, one hundred dollars per year. (Prior code § 6-1.202)

5.08.030 Amusement rides.
A. An amusement ride shall not be made available for operation without a license. The license shall be obtained by the owner of the ride. One license may be obtained by one applicant for more than one ride or location.

B. A license fee shall be paid based upon the annual gross receipts as set forth in Section 5.08.510.

C. The ride shall not be placed as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (Prior code § 6-1.204)

5.08.040 Auctioneers.
License fees for every person engaged in the business of an auctioneer shall be seventy-five dollars per year. No license fee, or portion thereof, paid to the city under the provisions of this section shall be refundable.

Any merchant within the city who desires to dispose of his entire stock of goods at public auction may do so without securing a license or paying the fee required by this section if such merchant has continuously engaged in business in the city for a period of one year next preceding the date of the opening of such auction and if such auction does not continue for a longer period than thirty days after the date of the opening thereof.

The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to any public officer selling any goods, wares or merchandise under or pursuant to any order of any court, commission or other legal authority. (Measure A § 7, 2001; prior code § 6-1.205)

5.08.050 Auction houses.
A. License Fee. License fees for every person engaged in the business of conducting an auction house shall be five hundred dollars per year.

B. Permit Required. Any person commencing or conducting an auction house business shall first obtain a permit from the community development director in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be conducted on the applicant. All individuals employed at the business shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the Gardena police department.

C. Bond. No auction house license shall be issued or renewed by the license collector unless there is on file with the license collector a surety bond, in the principal sum of two thousand dollars, which bond has been approved by the mayor as to sufficiency and by the city attorney as to form, and which has been executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do surety business in the state and as principal by the applicant for such license, indemnifying any person against any loss through fraud or misrepresentation. Any person licensed by the state and having deposited a bond with the state shall not be required to file a bond with the license collector; provided, however, in such case the license collector shall make a record of the expiration date of the state bond and note the expiration date on the city license. Any city license for an auction house shall be revoked automatically whenever either such bond becomes ineffective for any reason unless the principal shall file a new surety bond in compliance with the provisions of this section prior to the date such bond may become ineffective. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 5, 2000; prior code § 6-1.206)

5.08.060 Automobile agencies.
A. License Fee. Every person engaging in, conducting or carrying on the business of selling new or used motor vehicles, new or used automobiles, trucks or tractors, and other motor vehicles defined in Section 415 of the Motor Vehicle Code of the state and engaging in, conducting, or carrying on any service in connection with the same shall pay a license fee based upon annual gross receipts and prescribed as follows:

1. For the first fifty thousand dollars, the sum of eighty-five dollars; and

2. For each additional one thousand dollars, or fraction thereof, of retail sales above the base of fifty thousand dollars, the sum of twenty-five cents.

The burden of proving that a sale of a motor vehicle is not a sale at retail is upon the person who makes the sale unless he takes from the purchaser a certificate to the effect that the property is purchased for resale and is able to supply the resale number.

B. Bond. Before such license shall be issued, the licensee shall file with the license collector a bond in favor of the city, and/or any person aggrieved, executed and acknowledged by the licensee as principal and by a corporation licensed by the Insurance Commission of the state to transact the business of fidelity and surety insurance, and no license or permit shall be granted to any person until such a bond, in a form approved by the city attorney, has been so filed. The bond shall be joint and several, and the penalty thereof shall be two thousand five hundred dollars and shall be conditioned to be paid to the city, and/or any person aggrieved, insuring them against any loss or damage which may result to any person from any transaction involving a used motor vehicle through failure by the licensee to deliver a clear title to any person legally entitled thereto within thirty days after final payment has been made. Such bond shall not be required if the applicant can produce a bond in the amount of at least two thousand five hundred dollars as authorized by the state. Such bond shall not be void upon the first recovery but may be sued and recovered upon from time to time by any person aggrieved until the whole penalty is exhausted.

C. Trade-in Credits. For the purposes of this section, amounts allowed as bona fide credits for used vehicles traded in on the sales price of new or used vehicles shall not be included in gross receipts.

D. Advertising Restrictions. Every licensee shall be responsible for the accuracy and truthfulness of his advertising, whether such advertising was placed by his employees or by himself. No person shall advertise that he has for sale any used motor vehicle which is not actually for sale at the premises at the time the advertisement is inserted in the newspaper or medium.

Within twenty-four hours after any used motor vehicle which has been advertised for sale has been sold, the permittee shall withdraw or cancel any advertisement relative to such motor vehicle.

In advertising a used motor vehicle for sale, the year, make, model, correct and complete license plate number and the motor number or other identifying number of the vehicle required by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state for registration purposes shall be set forth. If a price is set forth in the advertisement, such price shall be the full and correct price to which no other charges may be added, except for sales tax, license transfer fee, finance and insurance costs.

If a down payment is referred to in the advertisement, the full and correct amount of the down payment required shall be set forth in the advertisement.

E. Documents of Sale. Every document relating to the sale of a used motor vehicle shall be in writing, completely filled out, have no blank space, and shall contain all of the agreements between the buyer and seller. The documents shall be signed by the buyer and seller or their authorized representatives. When so executed exact copies of the documents shall be delivered by the seller to the buyer at the time of execution thereof, and no used motor vehicle shall be delivered to the buyer prior thereto.

Every conditional sale contract for the sale of a used motor vehicle shall recite the following separate items in the following order:

1. The cash price of the personal property described in the conditional sale contract;

2. The amount of the buyer’s down payment, whether made in cash or represented by the net agreed value of described property traded in, or both, together with a statement of the respective amounts credited for cash and for such property;

3. The amount unpaid on the cash price, which is the difference between the amounts in subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection;

4. The cost to the buyer of any insurance, the premium for which is included in the contract balance;

5. A description and itemization of amounts, if any, which will actually be paid by the seller or his assignee to any public officer as fees in connection with the transaction, which amounts are included in the contract balance;

6. The amount of the unpaid balance, which is the sum of subdivisions 3, 4 and 5 of this subsection;

7. The amount of the time price differential;

8. The contract balance owed by the buyer to the seller, which is the sum of subdivisions 6 and 7 of this subsection; and

9. The number of installments required to pay the contract balance, the amount of each installment, and the date for the payment of the installments. (Prior code § 6-1.207)

5.08.070 Automobile wrecking yards.
A. License Fee. License fees for automobile wrecking yards shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as prescribed in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

B. Permit Required. Any person commencing or conducting an automobile wrecking yard business shall first obtain a permit from the community development director in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be conducted on the applicant. The permit under this section shall be in addition to the conditional use permit which is required pursuant to Section 18.36.030 A. of this Code. All individuals employed at the business shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the Gardena police department and shall pay a fee therefore in an amount set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 6, 2000; prior code § 6-1.208)

5.08.080 Bankrupt, fire and closing-out sales.
A. License Fee. License fees for bankrupt, fire, and closing-out sales shall be two hundred dollars ($200) per year.

B. (Deleted).

C. (Deleted). (Ord. 1601 § 8, 2000; prior code § 6-1.209)

5.08.090 Barber shops.
License fees for barber shops shall be based on the schedule contained in Section 5.08.510. (Measure A § 8, 2001; prior code § 6-1.210)

5.08.100 Bath and massage parlors.
License fees for every massage parlor, bath parlor or massage and bath parlor shall be based upon the schedules set forth in Section 5.08.340; provided, however, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as dispensing with the necessity of procuring any permit to conduct, manage or carry on any such business under any other law, rule or regulation of the city or of the council relating to any such business prior to the issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-1.211)

5.08.110 Beauty shops.
License fees for beauty shops shall be based on the schedule contained in Section 5.08.510. (Measure A § 9, 2001; prior code § 6-1.212)

5.08.120 Bowling lanes.
A. License Fees. License fees for bowling lanes shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as set forth in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

B. Sales Within Establishments. A license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not include the right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery stand or other type of concession or activity, including the sales of bowling equipment, incidentals or accessories. If such concession or activity is contemplated, a separate license shall be obtained for each such concession or activity pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08.510. (Ord. 1601 § 9, 2000; prior code § 6-1.213)

5.08.130 Boxing and wrestling arenas.
A. License Fees. License fees for boxing and wrestling arenas, which shall include the conducting therein of shows, events and exhibitions, shall be five hundred dollars per year.

B. Permit Required. Prior to any boxing or wrestling match taking place, the operator of such match shall first obtain a permit from the community development director in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code.

C. Sales Within Establishment. A license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not include the right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery stand or other type of concession, and a separate license shall be obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08.510 for any such cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery stand or other type of concession. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 10, 2000; prior code § 6-1.214)

5.08.140 Cabarets, cafes and restaurants.
A. License fees for cabarets, cafes, restaurants and establishments shall be based on the annual gross receipts as set forth in the schedule in section 5.08.510 of this Code regardless of whether entertainment or dancing is permitted.

B. Permit Required. Any person commencing or conducting a place of business where entertainment is provided or where the patrons are permitted to dance shall first obtain an entertainment permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.32 of this Code. The permit required by Chapter 5.32 is in addition to any conditional use permit that may be required for alcohol service in such businesses.

C. Charitable Organizations. Entertainment shall also include a fashion show or style show, except when conducted by a bona fide nonprofit corporation or organization as a part of the social activities of such corporation or organization, and except when such fashion show is conducted solely as a fund-raising activity for charitable purposes, and for which a permit shall be first had and obtained from the council upon such terms and conditions as the council may impose.

D. In cafes, restaurants and other establishments where dancing or entertainment is not permitted, and where there may be musicians who furnish music only, a sign shall be conspicuously posted containing the wording, “No Dancing Permitted, Gardena Municipal Code § 5.08.140.” (Measure A § 10, 2001; Ord. 1601 § 11, 2000; prior code § 6-1.215)

5.08.150 Catering trucks – Lunch wagons.
License fees for carrying on the business of catering trucks or lunch or refreshment wagons in or upon any public street or upon any unenclosed area, vacant lot or parcel of land shall be seventy-five dollars per year per vehicle. (Prior code § 6-1.215.1)

5.08.160 Christmas trees and specialties.
License fees for Christmas tree sales and/or Christmas specialties shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as set forth in subsection A of Section 5.08.510; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the owners of established places of business within the city licensed by this chapter. In such cases where sales of Christmas trees and/or Christmas specialties are made from such licensed business by the licensee, no further license need be secured and the license fee provided for by this section shall not be paid. (Prior code § 6-1.216)

5.08.170 Circuses and carnivals.
A. License fees for circuses and/or carnivals shall be one hundred dollars per day.

B. Permit Required. Prior to operating any circus or carnival, a permit shall first be obtained from the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. The application shall be filed no later than thirty-five days prior to the scheduled event. No background check shall be required of the applicant. A list of all employees and their date of birth shall accompany the application. Additionally, a temporary use permit shall be required pursuant to Chapter 18.60 of this Code for any circus or carnival which lasts more than three days. (Ord. 1601 § 12, 2000; prior code § 6-1.217)

5.08.180 Contractors.
A. General Contractors.

1. Any person commencing or engaging in the business or acting in the capacity of a general building or engineering contractor (B-1 or A, as licensed by the state) within the city shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one hundred fifty dollars and, in addition thereto, shall pay, as part of the business license, a job fee of one dollar per one thousand dollars of the total building contract. The job fee shall be paid at the same time the building permit fee is paid and the building permit is issued.

2. Each general building or engineering contractor shall furnish the license collector with a list of each subcontractor under his control or direction before the final inspection on any building or structure shall be given by the development services department.

B. Subcontractors. Every person engaged in a business or acting as a subcontractor (C-2, C-4, C-6, C-8, C-9, C-11, C-12, C-15, C-16, C-17, C-20, C-21, C-23, C-26, C-27, C-29, C-33, C-35, C-38, C-39, C-42, C-43, C-45, C-50, C-51, C-53, C-54, C-55, C-57, C-60, C-61 and other classifications established by the State Contractors Board) shall pay to the city an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars.

C. Plumbing Contractors. Every person engaged in the business of plumbing (C-36) shall pay to the city an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars.

D. Electrical Contractors. Every person engaged in the business of electrical contractor (C-10) shall pay to the city an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars.

E. Owner-Builders. A business license shall be required of every person acting as an owner-builder who builds any building, structure, shop, store or apartment for rent, lease, or sale, and he shall pay the license tax as herein provided. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an owner of property building or improving structures thereon for the exclusive occupancy of such owner-builder and not offered for sale, lease or rent. (Measure A § 11, 2001; prior code § 6-1.219)

5.08.190 Dances – Dancehalls.
A. Permit Required. Any person commencing or conducting a place of business where dancing and/or a dancehall is the primary object and purpose of the business shall first obtain a permit from the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be required of the applicant. The permit set forth in this section is in addition to the conditional use permit which is required pursuant to Title 18 of this Code.

B. Area of Dancehalls.

1. Where patron dancing is permitted, the number of persons permitted to occupy a dance floor shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the California Building Code, as adopted by Chapter 15.04 of this code, and, pursuant to the determination of the number of occupants for both dining and dancing by the building official and the fire marshal, the occupant of such structure shall post a sign, in letters not less than three inches in height, in a conspicuous place in the structure and/or establishment stating the number of persons which may be permitted for dancing and the number of persons which may be permitted for dining within such structure.

2. EXCEPTION: If the provisions of this subsection B shall in any manner conflict with any other provision of this code or the statutes of the state, the council shall have the authority to make such determination as may be in the best interests of the public health, welfare and safety.

C. License Fee. Upon the granting of such permit the business license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year.

D. Dances. Any organization, not otherwise exempted, which rents its building facilities for the purpose of holding a dance shall not allow such dance to take place until proof is furnished to the lessor that a permit has been granted by the community development director for such dance in accordance with the provisions of Gardena Municipal Code Section 5.04.160. No background check shall be required. The applicant which rents such building facilities for the purpose of holding a dance shall be required to comply with all conditions imposed by the community development director. The application for holding a dance shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council; the fee shall be waived for a bona fide nonprofit organization.

Upon submission of proof to the satisfaction of the City Manager that an applicant under the provisions of this subsection is a bona fide nonprofit organization, the City Manager is authorized to waive the permit fee imposed by the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Measure A § 12, 2001; Ord. 1601 §§ 13, 14, 2000; prior code § 6-1.220)

5.08.195 Film production.
A. License fees for film production shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

B. Permit Required. Prior to commencing any film production in the City, a permit shall first be obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.36 of this code. (Ord. 1644 § 2, 2003)

5.08.200 Gardening maintenance and/or services.
License fees for yard and/or gardening maintenance and/or services shall be fifty dollars ($50) per year per vehicle. (Measure A § 13, 2001; prior code § 6-1.221.1)

5.08.210 Gymnasiums.
A. License Fees. For every person engaged in the business of conducting a physical culture institution where instruction in physical culture, beauty culture, calisthenics or exercises is given to subscribers, students, pupils or members of the public, the license fee shall be as set forth in Section 5.08.510.

B. (Deleted). (Ord. 1601 § 15, 2000; prior code § 6-1.222)

5.08.220 Hospitals, sanitariums and rest homes.
A. Hospitals, Sanitariums and Rest Homes. License fees for hospitals, sanitariums and rest homes shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as prescribed in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

B. Animal Hospitals. License fees for animal hospitals shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as prescribed in subsection A of Section 5.08.510. (Prior code § 6-1.223)

5.08.230 Hotels and motels.
Every person carrying on the business of operating a hotel, motel, auto court or motor court shall pay a license fee based upon the annual gross receipts as prescribed in subsection A of Section 5.08.510. (Prior code § 6-1.224)

5.08.240 Junk collectors.
License fees for junk collectors, excepting those having a valid license under the provisions of Section 5.08.250, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75) per year for each vehicle. In addition, all junk collectors shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 5.60 of this code relating to junk collectors. “Junk collector,” as used in this section, means a person commencing or conducting the business of going from house to house or from place to place gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper or other articles commonly known as junk. (Measure A § 14, 2001; prior code § 6-1.225)

5.08.250 Junk dealers.
License fees for junk dealers and similar businesses including collection centers operating at a fixed place of business within the City shall be based on the schedule set forth in Section 5.08.510, subject however to obtaining a permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.60 of this Code as well as obtaining any land use approvals required by Title 18 of this Code. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall include the right to collect junk with one vehicle. (Measure A § 15, 2001; Ord. 1601 § 16, 2000; prior code § 6-1.226)

5.08.260 Cleaning, dyeing, laundries and towel and linen supply.
A. License fees for cleaning, dyeing, laundries, coin-operated laundries and towel and linen supply shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as prescribed in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

B. (Deleted). (Ord. 1601 § 18, 2000; prior code § 6-1.227)

5.08.270 Manufacturing.
A. Wholesale Manufacturing. Any person, not otherwise classified, manufacturing, processing or fabricating any product, commodity, machine, instrument, tool or other thing and selling any such product at wholesale or to jobbers only shall pay a license fee based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule, plus the per employee rate:

Total Annual Gross Receipts

Amount of License Fee per Annum

Not more than $50,000.00

$75.00

$50,000.00 and over

$75.00 and .50 for each and every $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, in excess of $50,000.00

In addition to the license fee set forth in this subsection A of this section, each person shall pay four dollars per employee.

B. Retail Manufacturing. Any person, not otherwise classified, manufacturing, processing or fabricating any product, commodity, machine, instrument, tool or other thing and selling any such product at retail or providing services shall pay a license fee based upon the annual gross receipts as set forth in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

A licensee holding a license pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall have the right to sell such products at retail only, and in the event sales of such products are made at wholesale by such licensee within the city, a separate license for any such wholesale business shall be obtained as provided in subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 6-1.229)

5.08.280 Oil well drilling.
A. License Fees. License fees for oil and/or petroleum products produced from any well shall be one hundred eighty dollars per well per year (minimum), which shall cover the first eighteen thousand or less barrels produced from such well and which shall be paid at the beginning of the license period, and, in addition thereto (payable within fifteen days after the close of each license year), the sum of one cent per barrel for each barrel of oil or other hydrocarbon products produced from such well during such year. In the event of the abandonment of any well, such additional amount shall be paid within fifteen days after production from such well is finally stopped. A separate license shall be procured, and a separate license fee paid, for each such well.

B. Permit Required. Each such license shall be subject to a special permit from the council to be first had and obtained as provided in Chapter 8.40 of this code. Each such permit, so far as the provisions of this chapter are concerned, shall be valid for the particular well covered thereby until the same expires or is forfeited, canceled or revoked according to its terms, conditions and provisions. (Prior code § 6-1.230)

5.08.290 Peddling at retail, canvassing and soliciting.
A. Peddling at Retail. License fees for peddling at retail shall be as follows:

1. For any food, goods, wares or merchandise (except as otherwise provided for in this chapter) on foot or from a vehicle, twelve dollars per quarter of each calendar year for each person so engaged;

2. For medicine of any kind, twenty-five dollars per day for each person so engaged;

3. For new jewelry of any kind, two hundred fifty dollars per year for each person not having a fixed place of business in the city and, in addition thereto, one hundred dollars per year for each peddler more than one so engaged; and

4. For used jewelry of any kind, two hundred fifty dollars per year for each person not having a fixed place of business in the city and, in addition thereto, one hundred dollars per year for each peddler more than one so engaged. Before a license may be issued by the license collector, any person desiring to peddle used jewelry of any kind shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 5.60 of this code relating to special jewelry permits.

B. Canvassing and Soliciting. License fees for canvassing and soliciting shall be as follows:

1. For orders for the immediate or future delivery of any goods, wares, merchandise or service (except as specified in this subsection), twelve dollars per quarter of each calendar year for each person so engaged; and

2. For orders for pictures, photographs or paintings or for any work in connection with the photographic or pictorial business, twenty-five dollars per quarter of each calendar year for each person not having a fixed place of business in the city and, in addition thereto, fifteen dollars per quarter for each canvasser or solicitor more than one so engaged.

C. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the owners or employees of established places of business in the city, licensed by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, when acting in their capacities as such owners or employees of such licensed business. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2002; prior code § 6-1.231)

5.08.300 Peddling from vehicles.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the license fees for any person peddling goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale or retail shall be seventy-five dollars ($75) per year per vehicle. (Measure A § 16, 2001; prior code § 6-1.232)

5.08.310 Poolrooms, billiards and social clubs.
A. License Fee. Where pool or billiards are a predominant part of amusement, the license fee shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as prescribed in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

B. Permit Required. Any person commencing or conducting a business of a poolroom, billiard or social club shall first obtain a permit from the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be conducted on the applicant. A permit required under this section shall be in addition to any conditional use permit which is required pursuant to Title 18 of this Code.

C. Minors Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person operating such business, or any of his agents, servants or employees, to permit any minor under the age of eighteen years to enter or be upon the premises of any such licensed place of business, and it is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to enter or be upon the premises of any such licensed place of business, unless such person under the age of eighteen years shall be accompanied by his parent or lawful guardian.

D. Hours of Operation. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsections A, B and C of this section, such business shall be conducted only from the hours of eight a.m. to two a.m. daily.

E. Alcoholic Beverages. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsections A, B, C and D of this section, where the games of pool or billiards are the predominant or principal items of amusement, it is unlawful for any person operating such business, or any of his agents, servants or employees or any customer or person entering upon the premises of such licensed place of business for any purpose whatsoever, whether for amusement, business or otherwise, to consume any alcoholic beverage of any kind on such premises.

F. Exception. Where pool or billiards is the principal part of amusement, the City Council may, as part of the permit, allow the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises when the sale and consumption of such beverages is incidental to the operation of a bona fide restaurant conducted on the same premises.

G. Additional License Requirement. When any business obtains a license under the provisions of this section and is engaged in serving food as a bona fide restaurant, an additional license shall be obtained for that phase of the enterprise pursuant to Section 5.08.510. (Ord. 1601 §§ 19, 20, 2000; prior code § 6-1.233)

5.08.320 Private detectives and patrol services.
A. License fees for private detectives shall be one hundred dollars per year for each business, plus two dollars per year for each detective more than one operating pursuant to such license; and, as a condition precedent to the issuance of such license by the city, such detectives shall first present evidence that they are licensed by the state.

B. License fees for any person engaged in the business of accepting employment for the location or recovery of personal property sold under conditional sales agreements, or which property is subject to the terms of a chattel mortgage, including personal property licensed pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state, all as defined in Section 7253.1 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, shall be one hundred dollars per year. As a condition precedent to the issuance of such license by the city, such persons shall first present evidence that they are licensed by the state.

C. License fees for any street patrol special officer or any person who furnishes street patrol services, as defined in Section 7523 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, shall be one hundred dollars per year. As a condition precedent to the issuance of such license by the city, such persons shall first present evidence that they are licensed by the state. (Prior code § 6-1.234)

5.08.330 Private playgrounds.
A. License fees for places where children are permitted to congregate and play and for which: an admission fee is charged: or at which charges are made for the use of or participation in any activity; or at which charges are made for the use of or participation in any amusement device shall be one hundred dollars ($100) per year.

B. Permit Required. Any person commencing or conducting a business of a private playground shall first obtain a permit from the community development director in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be conducted on the applicant.

C. The requirements set forth in this section are in addition to any conditional use permit which may be required pursuant to Title 18 of this Code. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 22, 2000; prior code § 6-1.235)

5.08.340 Professions and services.
Every person engaged in any trade, calling, occupation, vocation, profession or other means of livelihood not specifically licensed by other provisions of this chapter shall pay an annual license fee based upon the annual gross receipts or the annual costs of operation as defined herein, whichever is greater. For the purposes of this business classification, “costs of operation” shall be equal to the total of the following items: a) annual fair rental value of all real property located in the City and used by such business; b) annual payroll of all employees based in the City; and c) the cost of all utilities related to the operation of such business.

Total Annual Gross Receipts or Total Annual Cost of Operation

Amount of License Fee per Annum

Not more than $50,000.00

$150.00

Each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof

$1.00

(Measure A § 17, 2001; prior code § 6-1.236)

5.08.350 Residential property rentals and lodging houses.
A. Every person owning, operating, leasing or engaging in the business of renting residential or living units (other than hotels, motels or motor courts) shall pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50) for the first four units and ten dollars ($10) for each unit over four in number which is used, offered for rental or otherwise related to or connected with such business in the City.

B. A separate license shall be required for each property parcel. (Measure A § 18, 2001; prior code § 6-1.238)

5.08.355 Nonresidential property rentals.
A. Every person engaged in the business of rental of nonresidential property shall pay an annual business license fee of fifty dollars ($50) for the first five thousand square feet of gross rental space and one cent for each additional square foot of rental space over five thousand square feet. For purposes of this section, “rental of nonresidential property,” means any business conducted or carried on by any person engaged in the business of renting or letting a building or structure of any kind, including, but not limited to, office buildings, warehouses, commercial spaces and industrial spaces to a tenant for purposes other than dwelling sleeping, or lodging.

B. A separate license shall be required for each property parcel. (Measure A § 19, 2001)

5.08.360 Rubbish collection.
A. License Fees. The license fee for rubbish collection within the City shall be the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150) per calendar year per vehicle. In addition to the license fee, the licensee shall be required to comply with the provisions of Chapter 8.20 of this Code for rubbish collected within the City. The license fee set forth herein shall be in addition to any franchise amount set by the franchise agreement, unless the franchise agreement specifically waives the license fee.

B. Insurance. One of the conditions of any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be that the permittee shall be required to carry public liability and property damage insurance in amounts not less than the following:

1. Five hundred thousand dollars for the death of or injuries to any one person in any one accident;

2. Five hundred thousand dollars for the death of or injuries to two or more persons in any one accident; and

3. One hundred thousand dollars for property damages.

All such insurance policies shall contain a clause providing for a written thirty day cancellation notice to the city.

The city’s residential contractor shall name the city as an additional insured on its insurance policy.

Such insurance shall be carried with an insurance carrier and in a form approved by the city attorney. Evidence satisfactory to the city attorney that such coverage is so carried shall be filed with the license collector.

C. Annual Inspections. Routine inspections by the California Highway Patrol shall be required annually on all collection vehicles used to provide service in the city, and certificates of such inspections shall be filed with the director of finance. (Ord. 1601 § 23, 2000; prior code § 6-1.239)

5.08.370 Selling and distributing certain commodities over a regular route.
License fees for selling and delivering the following commodities at retail or wholesale over a regular route, with only incidental solicitation for new customers, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75) per year for each vehicle used in such business:

Auto accessories;

Barber and beauty supplies;

Baker and confectionery supplies;

Bakery goods;

Box lunches;

Coffee, tea and spices;

Dairy products;

Eggs;

Fish;

Fruit;

Ice;

Ice cream;

Meat;

Vegetables;

Water; and

Similar substances. (Measure A § 20, 2001; prior code § 6-1.241)

5.08.380 Shooting galleries.
A. License Fees. License fees for shooting galleries shall be one hundred dollars ($100) per day. For purposes of this section, a shooting gallery means a place of business where live ammunition is used. If no live ammunition is used, the business is governed by Chapter 5.12.

B. Permits Required. Any person commencing or conducting a business involving a shooting gallery shall first obtain a permit from the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be required.

C. In addition to the license and permit required by this section, a conditional use permit shall also be required pursuant to Title 18 of this Code. (Ord. 1601 § 24, 2000; prior code § 6-1.242)

5.08.390 Skating rinks.
A. License Fees. License fees for skating rinks, whether ice skating or roller skating, shall be based upon the annual gross receipts as set forth in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

B. In addition to the license required by this section, a conditional use permit shall also be required pursuant to Title 18 of this Code.

C. Sales Within Establishments. A license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not include the right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery stand, or other type of concession and a separate license shall be obtained for any such cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery stand or other type of concession pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08.510. (Ord. 1601 § 25, 2000; prior code § 6-1.243)

5.08.400 Sound or music devices.
A. A sound or music device shall not be made available for operation without a license. The license shall be obtained by the owner of the machine. One license may be obtained by one applicant for more than one device or location.

B. A fee shall be paid based upon the annual gross receipts as set forth in Section 5.08.510.

C. The device shall not be placed as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (Prior code § 6-1.243.1)

5.08.410 Sports stadiums.
A. Event Defined. “Event,” as used in this section, means any promotion, program or attraction held or staged for a period of time and drawing any number of persons or held solely for radio or television audiences for the duration of that particular promotion, program or attraction. An event shall always be construed to have terminated at the end of any given calendar day. Any program which is separately held to which a separate admission charge is made shall be an event subject to the license fee required. For example, an event held in the afternoon to which a separate admission is charged shall be an event subject to the license fee per event, and, for example, an event held the same evening, to which a separate admission charge is made, of a day in which an afternoon event was held shall be a second event for that day and thereby subject to the full license charge per event. The accumulated event fees shall be paid at the end of each thirty day period throughout the year.

B. License Fees. License fees for the operation of any sports stadium shall be forty dollars ($40) per event. In addition to the license required by this section, a conditional use permit shall also be required pursuant to Title 18 of this Code.

C. Sales Within Establishments. A license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not include the right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery stand or other type of concession, and a separate license shall be obtained for any such cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery stand or other type of concession pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08.510. (Ord. 1601 § 26, 2000; prior code § 6-1.244)

5.08.420 Swap meets.
A. Definitions.

1. “Swap meet” means a retail commercial use, conducted out-of-doors, where new or used merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange by two or more vendors from individual stalls. Swap meet includes “flea market,” “bazaar,” “open air market,” and similar words and phrases commonly used to describe a swap meet. Swap meet shall not include any activity set forth in Chapter 18.60 of the Gardena Municipal Code.

2. “Swap meet operator” means any person who conducts a swap meet.

3. “Swap meet participant” means any person who rents or is allotted a space from the swap meet operator and conducts the business of selling, buying or trading therein.

4. “Participant space” means ground space occupied for one day, or fraction thereof, by a participant and consisting of three hundred square feet more or less.

B. Quarterly License Fees. License fees for operating swap meets shall be five hundred dollars per quarter year, to be paid in advance. Such fee shall entitle the operator to conduct a swap meet at the location specified in the license and, in addition thereto, shall entitle the operator to use parking lots in connection with such business and transport customers or prospective customers from such parking lots to the swap meet location.

C. Gross Rental Receipts License Fees. License fees for renting participant spaces shall be four percent of all rent received. Such fee, when collected, shall be the property of the city and shall be paid to the license collector within thirty days following the end of each calendar quarter during which the license fee was collected. (Ord. 1483 § 8, 1994; prior code § 6-1.244.1)

5.08.430 Taxicabs.
A. License Fees. License fees for taxicabs shall be seventy-five dollars ($75) per year per taxicab. Prior to operating any taxicab or taxicab business, permits must be obtained in accordance with Chapter 5.68 of this Code.

B. Permit Fees. Application processing fees, including but not limited to costs of background investigation, fingerprinting, vehicle inspection and other costs of processing applications under this chapter, for issuance and renewal of any permits required pursuant to Chapter 5.68 shall be established by resolution of the city council.

C. Fingerprinting. Before any operator of any taxicab shall be licensed, he shall be fingerprinted by the police department and shall obtain special permission from the chief of police to act as such operator. (Ord. 1625 § 2, 2003; Measure A § 21, 2001; Ord. 1601 § 27, 2000; prior code § 6-1.245)

5.08.440 Theaters, shows and entertainments.
A. License Fees. License fees for theaters, motion picture shows, playhouses, exhibitions and all other shows or entertainments, other than those operating annually as provided in Section 5.08.140 for which license fees shall be paid annually on the basis of their gross revenue, shall be fifteen dollars per day after having first obtained special permission to do so from the council.

B. Permits Required. Any person commencing or conducting such a business shall first obtain an entertainment permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.32. (Ord. 1601 § 28, 2000; prior code § 6-1.246)

5.08.450 Trailer parks.
License fees for the operation of trailer parks shall be as provided in Section 18502 of Part 2.1 of Chapter 5 of Title 25 of the California Administrative Code which regulates mobile home parks, special occupancy trailer parks and campgrounds in the state. (Prior code § 6-1.247)

5.08.460 Transfer, moving and trucking.
License fees for transfer, moving and/or trucking shall be seventy-five dollars per year for each separate vehicle operated in connection with such business in the city. (Prior code § 6-1.248)

5.08.470 Truck delivery.
License fees for truck delivery, not having a fixed place of business in the city, and excepting those products and commodities set forth in Section 5.08.370, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75) per year per vehicle. (Measure A § 22, 2001; prior code § 6-1.249)

5.08.480 Vending machines.
A. Person Defined. “Person,” as used in this section, shall mean and include the following:

1. Any owner of a vending machine, device or apparatus;

2. Any person in whose place of business such machine, device or apparatus is used; and

3. Any person having the control of such machine, device or apparatus; provided, however, the payment of the license fee by any person defined in this subsection shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section.

B. License Fees. Every person engaged in the business of maintaining or operating, or permitting the maintenance or operation of, a vending machine, device or apparatus (one or more) designed or constructed for the purpose of selling peanuts, candy or other merchandise or services (unless specifically otherwise provided for in this chapter), the use or operation of which machine is permitted or allowed by the deposit of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, shall pay a license fee based upon the annual gross receipts set forth in subsection A of Section 5.08.510.

Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be issued on a calendar year basis, payable in advance.

C. Service Machines in Apartment Houses, Hotels, Motels, Trailer Parks, Etc. Any person maintaining or operating a vending machine, device or apparatus (one or more) designed or constructed for the purpose of laundry, including automatic washers, dryers, etc., placed in an apartment house, hotel, motel, trailer park, etc., for the exclusive use of tenants of such establishments, which machines are leased by the owner or landlord of such establishments, shall pay a license fee based on the provisions of Section 5.08.510. This subsection shall not apply to those machines which are owned and the property of the owner or landlord of such establishments.

D. Display of Licenses. Each such machine, device or apparatus licensed shall have such license affixed upon such machine, device or apparatus in some conspicuous place, and such license shall remain upon such machine, device or apparatus so as to be plainly visible until a new and different license is issued for such machine, device or apparatus.

E. List of Locations. Each operator of vending machines shall file a list of the locations of such machines with the license collector, and such list shall be kept current by the operator. (Prior code § 6-1.250)

5.08.490 Warehousing.
Any person conducting, carrying on, or engaging in a warehousing business shall pay a license fee based upon the annual gross receipts as prescribed in Section 5.08.500. (Prior code § 6-1.250.1)

5.08.500 Wholesale sales.
Any person conducting, carrying on, or engaging in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale for the purpose of resale in the regular course of business shall pay a license fee based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule:

Total Annual Gross Receipts

Amount of License Fee per Annum

Not more than $50,000.00

$75.00

$50,000.00 and over

75.00 and .50 for each and every $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, in excess of $50,000.00

(Prior code § 6-1.251)

5.08.510 Retail and miscellaneous sales.
A. Gross Revenue Schedule. Every person commencing, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of selling at retail shall obtain a license therefor and pay an annual license fee based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule:

Total Annual Gross Receipts

Amount of License Fee per Annum

$0 – $50,000.00

$75.00

Each Additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

$.50

B. Sales of Alcoholic Beverages. In computing the total annual gross revenue of any business which includes the sale of alcoholic beverages sold under State Board of Equalization licenses, the gross receipts from such alcoholic beverage sales shall not be included in the total of the annual gross revenue.

C. Cabarets, Cafes and Restaurants. The license fee for any cabaret, cafe or restaurant not doing business as provided in subsections A, B and C of Section 5.08.140 shall be as provided in subsection A of this section.

D. Maintenance Services. For orders for maintenance services, including janitorial services, scissors and lawn mower sharpening and repair, mechanical appliance repair and/or maintenance, and any similar repair, maintenance, and/or service, which shall include the performance of the work incidental thereto, the license fee shall be as provided in subsection A of this section. For yard and/or gardening maintenance and/or service, the license fee shall be as provided in Section 5.08.200. (Measure A § 23, 2001; prior code § 6-1.252)

5.08.520 Telephone companies.
Any person conducting, carrying on or engaged in providing telephone equipment or service within the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state shall pay a license fee based upon the annual gross receipts as provided in Section 5.08.500. (Prior code § 6-1.253)

5.08.530 Newsracks.
Any person engaged in the business of maintaining or operating, or permitting the maintenance or operation of a newsrack, whether in a public right-of-way or not, shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.08.480 in obtaining a business license and paying the applicable license fee. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, any newsrack in a public right-of-way shall comply with and be regulated by Chapter 12.04. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 5.10
GROCERY WORKER RETENTION ORDINANCE
Sections:

5.10.010    Definitions.

5.10.020    Grocery employers’ responsibilities.

5.10.030    Transition employment period.

5.10.040    Notice to public.

5.10.050    Enforcement.

5.10.060    Exemption for collective bargaining agreement.

5.10.070    Coexistence with other available relief for specific deprivations of protected rights.

5.10.010 Definitions.
A. “Change in Control” shall mean any sale, assignment, transfer, contribution, or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets or a controlling interest (including by consolidation, merger, or reorganization) of the Incumbent Grocery Employer or any Person who controls such Incumbent Grocery Employer (“IGE Parent”) or any Grocery Establishment(s) under the operation or control of either such Incumbent Grocery Employer or IGE Parent.

B. “Eligible Grocery Worker” shall mean any individual whose primary place of employment is at the Grocery Establishment subject to a Change in Control, and who has worked for the Incumbent Grocery Employer for at least six months prior to the execution of the Transfer Document. “Eligible Grocery Worker” does not include a managerial, supervisory, or confidential employee.

C. “Employment Commencement Date” shall mean the date on which an Eligible Grocery Worker retained by the Successor Grocery Employer pursuant to this chapter commences work for the Successor Grocery Employer in exchange for benefits and compensation under the terms and conditions established by the Successor Grocery Employer and as required by law.

D. “Grocery Establishment” shall mean a retail store in the City that is over 15,000 square feet in size and that sells primarily household foodstuffs for offsite consumption, including the sale of fresh produce, meats, poultry, fish, deli products, dairy products, canned foods, dry foods, beverages, baked foods and/or prepared foods. Other household supplies or other products shall be secondary to the primary purpose of food sales.

E. “Incumbent Grocery Employer” shall mean the Person that owns, controls, and/or operates the Grocery Establishment prior to the Change in Control.

F. “Person” shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, business trust, estate, trust, association, joint venture, agency, instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity, whether domestic or foreign.

G. “Retaliatory Action” shall mean the failure to hire, or the discharge, suspension, demotion, penalization or discrimination or any other adverse action against an Eligible Grocery Worker with respect to the terms and conditions of the Eligible Grocery Worker’s employment.

H. “Successor Grocery Employer” shall mean the Person that owns, controls, and/or operates the Grocery Establishment after the Change in Control.

I. “Transfer Document” shall mean the purchase agreement or other document(s) effecting the Change in Control. (Ord. 1677 § 1, 2006)

5.10.020 Grocery employers’ responsibilities.
A. The Incumbent Grocery Employer shall, within fifteen days after the execution of the Transfer Document, provide to the Successor Grocery Employer the name, address, date of hire, and employment occupation classification of each Eligible Grocery Worker.

B. The Successor Grocery Employer shall maintain a preferential hiring list of Eligible Grocery Workers identified by the Incumbent Grocery Employer as set forth in Subsection A of this Section and shall be required to hire from that list for a period beginning upon the execution of the Transfer Document and continuing for ninety days after the Grocery Establishment is fully operational and open to the public under the Successor Grocery Employer.

C. If the Successor Grocery Employer extends an offer of employment to an Eligible Grocery Worker, the Successor Grocery Employer shall retain written verification of that offer for no fewer than three years from the date the offer was made. The verification shall include the name, address, date of hire, and employment occupation classification of each Eligible Grocery Worker. (Ord. 1677 § 1, 2006)

5.10.030 Transition employment period.
A. A Successor Grocery Employer shall retain each Eligible Grocery Worker hired pursuant to this chapter for no fewer than ninety days following the Eligible Grocery Worker’s Employment Commencement Date. During this ninety-day transition employment period, Eligible Grocery Workers shall be employed under the terms and conditions established by the Successor Grocery Employer, as required by law and pursuant to the terms of a relevant collective bargaining agreement, if any.

B. If within the period established in Section 5.10.020.B the Successor Employer determines that it requires fewer Eligible Grocery Workers than were required by the Incumbent Grocery Employer, the Successor Grocery Employer shall retain Eligible Grocery Workers by seniority within each job classification to the extent that comparable job classifications exist or pursuant to the terms of a relevant collective bargaining agreement, if any. Non-classified Eligible Grocery Workers shall be retained by seniority and according to experience or pursuant to the terms of a relevant collective bargaining agreement, if any.

C. During the ninety-day transition employment period, the Successor Grocery Employer shall not discharge without cause an Eligible Grocery Worker retained pursuant to this chapter.

D. At the end of the ninety-day transition employment period, the Successor Grocery Employer shall perform a written performance evaluation for each Eligible Grocery Worker retained pursuant to this chapter. If the Eligible Grocery Worker’s performance during the ninety-day transition employment period is satisfactory, the Successor Grocery Employer shall consider offering the Eligible Grocery Worker continued employment under the terms and conditions established by the Successor Grocery Employer and as required by law. The Successor Grocery Employer shall retain a record of the written performance evaluation for a period of no fewer than three years. (Ord. 1677 § 1, 2006)

5.10.040 Notice to public.
A. The Incumbent Grocery Employer shall post public notice of the Change in Control at the location of the affected Grocery Establishment within five business days following the execution of the Transfer Document. Notice shall remain posted during any closure of the Grocery Establishment and until the Grocery Establishment is fully operational and open to the public under the Successor Grocery Employer.

B. Notice shall include, but not be limited to, the name of the Incumbent Grocery Employer and its contact information, the name of the Successor Grocery Employer and its contact information, and the effective date of the Change in Control.

C. Notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the Grocery Establishment so as to be readily viewed by Eligible Grocery Workers and other employees, customers, and members of the public. (Ord. 1677 § 1, 2006)

5.10.050 Enforcement.
A. Eligible Grocery Workers may bring an action in the Superior Court of the State of California, as appropriate, against the Incumbent Grocery Employer or the Successor Grocery Employer for violations of this chapter and may be awarded:

1. Hiring and reinstatement rights pursuant to this chapter, whereupon the ninety-day transition employment period shall not commence until the Eligible Grocery Worker’s Employment Commencement Date with the Successor Grocery Employer.

2. Front pay or back pay for each day during which the violation continues, which shall be calculated at a rate of compensation not less than the higher of:

a. The average regular rate of pay received by the Eligible Grocery Worker during the last three years of the Eligible Grocery Worker’s employment in the same occupation classification; or

b. The most recent regular rate received by the Eligible Grocery Worker while employed by either the Incumbent Grocery Employer or the Successor Grocery Employer.

3. Value of the benefits the Eligible Grocery Worker would have received under the Successor Grocery Employer’s benefit plan.

B. If the Eligible Grocery Worker is the prevailing party in any legal action taken pursuant to this section, the court shall award reasonable attorney’s fees and costs as part of the costs recoverable. (Ord. 1677 § 1, 2006)

5.10.060 Exemption for collective bargaining agreement.
Parties subject to this chapter may, by collective bargaining agreement, provide that the agreement supersedes the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1677 § 1, 2006)

5.10.070 Coexistence with other available relief for specific deprivations of protected rights.
This chapter shall not be construed to limit an Eligible Grocery Worker’s right to bring legal action for wrongful termination. (Ord. 1677 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 5.12
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Sections:

5.12.010    Definitions.

5.12.020    Adult supervision required.

5.12.030    Space requirements.

5.12.040    Restrictions on use.

5.12.050    Signs required.

5.12.060    Permits.

5.12.090    Licenses required.

5.12.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Amusement arcade” means any place, location or premises where five or more amusement devices are available for public use and operation.

“Amusement device” means any mechanical or electrical machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or for which playtime is sold, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, with or without registering a score, for the purpose of testing the operator’s skill. “Amusement device” includes, but is not limited to, video games, pool tables, air hockey, foosball, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all similar skill testing devices.

“School age person” means any person who is required by state law to be attending school. (Prior code § 4-22.01)

5.12.020 Adult supervision required.
Amusement devices shall be located only in a place or amusement arcade where there is an adult management attendant either within the room or such that he can easily see and supervise the operation of the devices. (Prior code § 4-22.02)

5.12.030 Space requirements.
Adequate space shall be provided for each device so as to allow its use without overcrowding. A minimum distance of one foot shall be maintained between devices. A minimum depth of five feet shall be maintained in front of each stand-up device and three feet around any tabletop device. (Prior code § 4-22.03)

5.12.040 Restrictions on use.
No school age person shall operate, or be allowed to operate, a device during a time when such person is required to be attending school. (Prior code § 4-22.04)

5.12.050 Signs required.
Readily visible signs shall be posted on or near every amusement device and at the entry or entries of every amusement arcade stating that the use of such amusement devices by persons who are required to presently be in school is prohibited by Section 5.12.040. (Prior code § 4-22.05)

5.12.060 Permits.
A. No amusement arcade shall operate in the city without the owner thereof first obtaining a permit issued by the community development director in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 5.04.160. A background check shall be required. Each device owned by such person shall receive an identification tag issued by the administrative services department which shall be prominently displayed.

B. In addition to the permit required by this section, a conditional use permit is required for an amusement arcade. (Ord. 1744 § 6, 2013: Ord. 1738 § 63 (part), 2012; Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 29, 2000; prior code § 6-1.501)

5.12.090 Licenses required.
A business license shall be required, based upon the annual gross receipts as set forth in subsection A of Section 5.08.510, for the following:

A. The leasing, renting or placing for operation of any amusement device;

B. The business at which amusement devices are place for operation, where the annual gross receipts for the devices will be added to the gross annual receipts for such business for license purposes; and

C. The operation of an amusement device or devices at a location where no other business activity occurs. (Prior code § 6-1.504)

Chapter 5.16
BINGO
Sections:

5.16.010    Bingo defined.

5.16.020    Licenses required.

5.16.030    Organizations eligible for licenses to conduct bingo games.

5.16.040    Applications for licenses.

5.16.050    Law enforcement costs.

5.16.060    Contents of applications.

5.16.070    Investigations of applicants.

5.16.080    Contents of licenses.

5.16.090    Revocation of licenses – Opportunity for hearings.

5.16.100    Maximum amount of prizes.

5.16.110    Profits/proceeds to be kept in separate funds or accounts.

5.16.120    Financial interests in licensees only.

5.16.130    Exclusive operation by licensees.

5.16.140    Bingo games open to the public.

5.16.150    Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.

5.16.160    Bingo games conducted only on property of licensees.

5.16.170    Minors not to participate.

5.16.180    Alcoholic beverages prohibited – Intoxicated persons not to participate.

5.16.190    Days and hours of operation.

5.16.200    Participants shall be present.

5.16.210    Receipts of profits by persons misdemeanors under state laws.

5.16.220    City may enjoin violations.

5.16.230    Violation – Penalty.

5.16.010 Bingo defined.
As used in this chapter, “bingo” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Penal Code Section 326.5, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1551 § 1, 1998: prior code § 6-8.01)

5.16.020 Licenses required.
The game of bingo shall not be allowed, played or conducted except pursuant to a license obtained from the city in the manner provided in this chapter. Such licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where bingo games are conducted so as to be easily seen. (Prior code § 6-8.02)

5.16.030 Organizations eligible for licenses to conduct bingo games.
The city shall have the authority, pursuant to this chapter and applicable state laws, to issue licenses for games of bingo by organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporations tax by California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701w and 23701 and by mobile home park associations, senior citizen organizations, and charitable organizations affiliated with a school district, provided all the requirements of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state are satisfied. (Ord. 1718 § 1, 2010: Ord. 1551 § 2, 1998: prior code § 6-8.03)

5.16.040 Applications for licenses.
Organizations eligible under Section 5.16.030, desiring to obtain such licenses to conduct bingo games in the city, shall file an application in writing in the community development department on a form provided by such department. The issuing authority shall be the city council. If the initial application is granted, it shall remain in force for a period of one year thereafter, subject to annual renewal upon filing a renewal application. Both the original application and renewal application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council. If the application or renewal is denied, one-half of the application fee shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 1726 § 7, 2011: Ord. 1551 § 3, 1998: prior code § 6-8.04)

5.16.050 Law enforcement costs.
The licensee shall pay for all law enforcement and public safety costs incurred by the city that are directly related to the bingo activities of the licensee. Bills shall be submitted within thirty days of the costs being incurred by the city and shall be paid within a thirty-day period of time. The fees billed shall not exceed the city’s actual costs incurred in providing the service. (Ord. 1551 § 4, 1998)

5.16.060 Contents of applications.
Applications for the licenses required by the provisions of this chapter shall contain the following:

A. The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.16.030;

B. The name and signature, under penalty of perjury, of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the organization and their places of residence. If any information pertaining to the officers shall change during the term of the license, the city shall be notified within five working days;

C. The particular property within the city, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant or donated to the eligible organization and used by the applicant for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place and a statement as to how long the applicant has occupied such property;

D. The desired day of the week and the hours of the day for the conduct of bingo games;

E. That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon the violation of any of such provisions;

F. Where applicable the applicant shall also submit, with its application, the appropriate documentation from the exemption division of the Franchise Tax Board of the state showing the applicable exemptions; and

G. Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager in order to render a decision. (Ord. 1551 § 5, 1998: prior code § 6-8.06)

5.16.070 Investigations of applicants.
Upon the receipt of the completed application and the fee, the community development director shall refer the application to the city manager for such investigations as the city manager deems necessary to determine whether or not all the statements in the application are true, and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies, and the extent to which it qualifies for the lawful conduct of bingo games. (Ord. 1726 § 8, 2011: prior code § 6-8.07)

5.16.080 Contents of licenses.
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under the law to conduct bingo games in the city, the council, at its discretion, taking into consideration all factors revealed or ascertained through the application process, may issue a license to the applicant, which license shall contain the following information; nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the placing of reasonable conditions or restrictions on any such license by the city:

A. The name and nature of the organization to which the license is issued;

B. The address where the bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

C. The occupancy capacity of the room in which the bingo games are to be conducted;

D. The date of the expiration of such license; and

E. Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-8.08)

5.16.090 Revocation of licenses – Opportunity for hearings.
A. Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. The order issued pursuant to this subsection shall inform the licensee of its right to appeal pursuant to subsection C of this section and that failure to file a written appeal shall constitute a final decision to revoke the license.

B. Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any suspension thereof under subsection A of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

C. Within seven days after the receipt of the notice of suspension, the applicant may file a notice of appeal with the city clerk, addressed to the council, and stating the basis of the appeal.

The city clerk shall schedule a hearing, to determine whether such license shall be revoked, to be held within fifteen days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The city clerk shall cause the applicant to be given notice of the hearing by certified mail at least five days in advance of the date of the hearing. The applicant, or his designated representative, may appear before the council and make an oral presentation of the appeal, or he may make the appeal through a written statement, or he may do both. The council shall rule on the appeal within fifteen days after it is heard, and such ruling shall be final.

D. Any organization whose permit is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the license is reinstated.

E. Any organization whose permit is finally revoked may not again apply for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year after the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption under subsection (d) of Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, such organization may again apply for a permit upon proof of the reinstatement of such exemption. (Ord. 1551 § 6, 1998; prior code § 6-8.09)

5.16.100 Maximum amount of prizes.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed five hundred dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 1718 § 2, 2010: prior code § 6-8.10)

5.16.110 Profits/proceeds to be kept in separate funds or accounts.
A. With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Those profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.

B. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations not within subsection A of this section. Those proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

1. The proceeds may be used for prizes.

2. A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel.

3. The proceeds may be used to pay the application fee.

C. The licensee shall keep a full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter.

D. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records available. (Ord. 1551 § 7, 1998: prior code § 6-8.11)

5.16.120 Financial interests in licensees only.
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the licensee, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo games. (Prior code § 6-8.12)

5.16.130 Exclusive operation by licensees.
Bingo games shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Those members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such games or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such games. This section does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the licensee organization. (Ord. 1551 § 8, 1998: prior code § 6-8.13)

5.16.140 Bingo games open to the public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Prior code § 6-8.14)

5.16.150 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building department of the city in accordance with applicable laws or regulations. The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Prior code § 6-8.15)

5.16.160 Bingo games conducted only on property of licensees.
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by that organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office or as a place for the performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an organization, upon an application under this chapter, when the organization again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. (Ord. 1551 § 9, 1998: prior code § 6-8.16)

5.16.170 Minors not to participate.
No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Prior code § 6-8.17)

5.16.180 Alcoholic beverages prohibited – Intoxicated persons not to participate.
No intoxicating liquor or beverage shall be sold, given away, dispensed, consumed or permitted on the premises of the licensee property designated for the playing of bingo during the hours of bingo operation on the day or days specified for the particular licensee’s bingo operation. No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Prior code § 6-8.18)

5.16.190 Days and hours of operation.
No licensee shall conduct any bingo game more than six hours out of any twenty-four hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before ten a.m. nor after two a.m. of any day. No licensee may conduct bingo games more than once each calendar week. The council may approve exceptions to the restrictions on days after a written application and hearing, if deemed necessary, by the council. The council may authorize bingo games on certain specified dates which may include more than one day in any given week. (Prior code § 6-8.19)

5.16.200 Participants shall be present.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Prior code § 6-8.20)

5.16.210 Receipts of profits by persons misdemeanors under state laws.
It shall be a misdemeanor under subsection (b) of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Security personnel employed by the licensee may be paid from the revenues of bingo games as provided for in Section 5.16.110(A) and (B) above. (Ord. 1551 § 10, 1998: prior code § 6-8.21)

5.16.220 City may enjoin violations.
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state or of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-8.22)

5.16.230 Violation – Penalty.
Any person, or persons, conducting a bingo game without a duly issued license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1744 § 7, 2013: prior code § 6-8.23)

Chapter 5.20
CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
Sections:

5.20.010    Short title.

5.20.020    Definitions.

5.20.030    Franchise purposes.

5.20.040    Franchise required.

5.20.050    Term of the franchise.

5.20.060    Franchise territory.

5.20.070    Federal or state jurisdiction.

5.20.080    Franchise nontransferable.

5.20.090    Geographical coverage.

5.20.100    Nonexclusive franchise.

5.20.110    Multiple franchises.

5.20.120    Franchise modification.

5.20.130    Filing of franchise applications.

5.20.140    Applications – Contents.

5.20.150    Consideration of initial applications.

5.20.160    Franchise renewal.

5.20.170    Minimum consumer operational standards.

5.20.180    Minimum consumer service standards.

5.20.190    Minimum billing and information standards.

5.20.200    Verification of compliance with standards.

5.20.210    Subscriber complaints and disputes.

5.20.220    Other requirements.

5.20.230    Franchise fee.

5.20.240    Security fund.

5.20.250    System construction.

5.20.260    Multiple franchises.

5.20.270    Applicable technical standards.

5.20.280    Noncompliance with standards.

5.20.290    Costs of technical assistance.

5.20.300    Hold harmless.

5.20.310    Insurance.

5.20.320    Records required.

5.20.330    Annual reports.

5.20.340    Opinion survey.

5.20.350    Review of system performance.

5.20.360    Special review.

5.20.370    Remedies for franchise violations.

5.20.380    Procedure for remedying franchise violations.

5.20.390    Grantor’s power to revoke.

5.20.400    Appeal of finding of revocation.

5.20.410    Force majeure – Grantee’s inability to perform.

5.20.420    Abandonment or removal of franchise property.

5.20.430    Restoration by grantor – Reimbursement of costs.

5.20.440    Extended operation and continuity of services.

5.20.450    Receivership and foreclosure.

5.20.460    Reservation of grantor rights.

5.20.470    Waiver.

5.20.480    Rights of individuals.

5.20.490    Separability.

5.20.500    Applicability of chapter to state video services franchisees.

5.20.510    Regulation of state video services franchisees.

5.20.520    State video franchise and PEG fees.

5.20.530    Audit authority.

5.20.540    Customer service penalties under state video franchises.

5.20.550    City response to state video franchise applications.

5.20.560    Notice to adjacent property owners prior to installation of video services facilities.

5.20.570    Savings clause.

5.20.010 Short title.
This chapter shall constitute the “cable system regulatory ordinance” of the city and may be referred to as such. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

“Basic cable service” means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

“Cable operator” means any person or group of persons who:

1. Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or

2. Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system.

“Cable service” means:

1. The one-way transmission to subscribers of:

a. Video programming, or

b. Other programming service; and

2. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

“Cable system” or “system,” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:

1. A facility that serves only to retransmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

2. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way;

3. A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for the purposes of 47 USC 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;

4. An open video system that complies with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 USC 573) as amended; or

5. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.

“Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum that is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Gardena.

“Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any other license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city.

“Franchise agreement” means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.

“Franchise fee” means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation for the grantee’s use of the public rights-of-way. The term “franchise fee” does not include:

1. Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);

2. Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;

3. Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or

4. Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.

“Grantee” means any “person” receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.

“Grantor” or “city” means the city of Gardena as represented by the council or any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.

“Gross annual cable service revenues” means the annual gross revenues received by a grantee from the operations of the cable system within the city to provide cable service utilizing the public rights-of-way for which a franchise is required, excluding refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and any sales, excise or other taxes or charges imposed externally to the franchise, and collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government.

“Installation” means the connection of the system to subscribers’ terminals, and the provision of service.

“Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions that are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.

“Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.

“Public, educational or government access facilities” or “PEG access facilities” means the total of the following:

1. Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and

2. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.

“Service area” or “franchise area” means the entire geographic area within the municipal boundaries of the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise.

“Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged.

“State” means the state of California.

“Street” or “public way” or “public rights-of-way” means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property.

“Subscriber” or “customer” or “consumer” means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.030 Franchise purposes.
A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes:

A. To permit the grantee to engage in the business of providing cable service, and such other services as may be permitted by law that grantee provides to subscribers within the designated service area;

B. To permit the grantee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area;

C. To permit the grantee to maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law;

D. To set forth the obligations of the grantee under the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.040 Franchise required.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable system in the city within any public way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.050 Term of the franchise.
A. A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor’s adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise.

B. A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.060 Franchise territory.
Any franchise shall be valid within all the municipal limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.070 Federal or state jurisdiction.
This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.080 Franchise nontransferable.
A. Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied, withheld or delayed; provided, however, that the prior consent of the council shall not be required for an intra-corporate or intra-company transfer from one wholly-owned subsidiary to another wholly-owned subsidiary. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation or by assignment of any right, title or interest in the cable system in order to secure indebtedness, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section.

B. The requirements of subsection (A) of this section shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The word “control” as used herein includes majority ownership, and actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior consent of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than twenty percent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively.

C. Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply.

D. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in such inquiry. In seeking grantor’s consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the grantee and/or the proposed transferee complete an application in accordance with Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or equivalent. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than one hundred twenty days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the grantee is then in compliance with the requirements of the franchise, and the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall consent to the transfer of the franchise. The grantor may impose such reasonable conditions upon the transfer as are within the grantor’s legal authority, and are considered necessary to protect the interests of subscribers and the general public. If the grantor has not taken action on the grantee’s request for transfer within one hundred twenty days after receiving such request, grantor’s consent to such transfer shall be deemed given. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed.

E. Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also agree in writing to continue cable service and comply with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system.

F. Any submission of an application for transfer of a franchise shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable franchise processing fee in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars. Additionally, grantee shall reimburse grantor for grantor’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with the proposed transfer of the franchise including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses to the extent that such expenses exceed the amount of the franchise processing fee. Any such franchise processing fee or reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.090 Geographical coverage.
A. Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to have the capability to pass every residential dwelling unit in the service area, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement.

B. Business and commercial facilities shall be passed and/or served in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement.

C. After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables and any nodes within any portion or portions of the service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within such portion or portions of the service area within thirty days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all easements, rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty day period on reasonable terms and conditions. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.100 Nonexclusive franchise.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law, provided that if the grantor grants an additional franchise, then the material provisions of any such additional franchise shall be reasonably comparable to the terms and conditions contained in the initial grantee’s franchise, so that all grantees are accorded competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory treatment. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.110 Multiple franchises.
A. Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:

1. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage;

2. The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service;

3. The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way.

B. Where electric and telephone utilities are to be placed underground in any new residential housing developments, grantor and the developer of such new residential housing shall give each grantee serving the franchise area within which the new residential housing development is located at least seventy-two hours prior written notice of the date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee’s installation of conduit, pedestals and vaults. On request of the grantor or developer, the grantee shall provide specifications needed for trenching. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two new entrant cable systems and dedicate the use of such conduit to the city.

C. Grantor may require that any new entrant, nonincumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor’s opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.120 Franchise modification.
The grantee may be required to pay any costs incurred by the grantor in processing a grantee request for franchise modification, lease or hypothecation of franchise. Such costs may include the costs incurred for hiring consultants to assist in evaluating the request. Such costs shall be paid by the grantee prior to final consideration of the request by the grantor. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.130 Filing of franchise applications.
Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable initial application fee established by the city shall accompany the initial franchise application to cover all validly documented reasonable costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such validly documented reasonable costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.140 Applications – Contents.
An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, where applicable:

1. A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area;

2. A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable system field;

3. A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent or greater interest, if a corporation;

4. A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;

5. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;

6. A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city;

7. A proposed construction and service schedule;

8. Any reasonable relevant additional information that the city deems applicable. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.150 Consideration of initial applications.
A. Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager or a delegate shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the council.

B. A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the council. Within sixty days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the initial franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.160 Franchise renewal.
Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.170 Minimum consumer operational standards.
A. Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall maintain the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under normal conditions of operation:

1. Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty seconds; and callers needing to be transferred shall not be required to wait more than thirty seconds before being connected to a service representative. Under normal operating conditions, a caller shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time;

2. Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. During periods when an answering service or machine is used, grantee shall provide on-call personnel who shall contact the answering service or machine, at a minimum, every four hours to check on requests for service or complaints;

3. A conveniently located local business and service and/or payment office open during normal business hours where grantee provides adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints. Normal business hours shall include some evening hours, at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours. The grantee may petition the grantor to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are not justified by subscriber demand, and grantor may not unreasonably deny the petition;

4. An emergency system maintenance and repair staff capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a twenty-four hour per day basis;

5. An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. “Standard installations” shall be those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in any franchise agreement;

6. Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four hour time period during normal business hours, all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the subscriber location. Grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be contacted and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.

B. Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall be met not less than ninety percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subsections (A)(4) – (A)(6) of this section shall be met not less than ninety-five percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis.

C. Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.180 Minimum consumer service standards.
A. Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six a.m. local time.

B. The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames:

1. For a System Outage. Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least ten percent of the subscribers of the system;

2. For an Isolated Outage. Within twenty-four hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels that affects three or more subscribers. On weekends, an outage affecting fewer than three subscribers shall result in a service call no later than the next business day;

3. For Inferior Signal Quality. Within two business days of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

C. Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of arrival.

D. Grantee shall not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or the equipment owned by the subscriber requires repair or replacement.

E. Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem resulting in a request for service within two business days of beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems within five business days unless technically infeasible. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.190 Minimum billing and information standards.
A. Subscriber bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.

B. In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty days.

C. Grantee shall automatically provide credits or refunds to such subscribers whose service has been interrupted for twenty-four consecutive hours or more, and upon request to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for two or more hours. Credits or refunds shall automatically be provided by grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscriber(s) affected by interruption(s) of service for more than two hours due to actions or outages under the control of the grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs or maintenance that grantee has provided advance notice of to subscribers. In cases where notice has been given to subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in said notice, the provisions of this section shall apply.

D. In the event grantee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected cable services to a subscriber, grantee shall provide for restoration without charge to subscriber as soon as possible, but no later than within two days of discovery of disconnection. Grantee shall credit or provide refunds to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected from receiving cable services for the period of time without cable service.

E. All credits or refunds for service shall be issued no later than the customer’s next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than thirty days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment.

F. Grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas: (1) at the time of the installation of service; (2) at least annually to all subscribers; and (3) at any time upon request:

a. Products and services offered, and

b. Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services, and

c. Installation and service maintenance policies, and

d. Instructions on how to use the cable service, and

e. Channel positions of programming carried on the system, and

f. Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the grantor office designated for dealing with cable-related issues.

G. Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing and in accordance with state and federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers thirty days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection F of this section. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.200 Verification of compliance with standards.
A. Upon thirty days prior written notice, grantee shall respond to a request for information made by grantor regarding grantee’s compliance with any or all of the standards required in Sections 5.20.170, 5.20.180 and 5.20.190 of this chapter. Grantee shall provide sufficient documentation to permit grantor to verify grantee’s compliance.

B. A repeated and verifiable pattern of significant noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of Sections 5.20.170 and 5.20.190 of this chapter, after grantee’s receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.

C. In order to determine whether sufficient telephone lines are provided, the grantor may require that a busy study, traffic study or other study be conducted, at grantee’s expense, if any, by the local telephone company. Should grantee have its own telephone equipment that can report on telephone line(s) usage, the grantee may submit such report from its own system. The grantor, pursuant to Section 5.20.170(C) of this chapter, may require grantee to acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering standards of this section.

D. Grantee shall take necessary steps to ensure that adequate telephone lines and/or staffing are available to permit grantee to satisfy its obligations under this chapter and the franchise. Consideration shall be given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing period shall be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and/or staffing. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.210 Subscriber complaints and disputes.
A. Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber’s grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor. The written procedures shall include a requirement that grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within thirty days of receipt.

B. Upon prior written request, grantor shall have the right to review grantee’s response to any subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee’s compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber’s right to privacy.

C. Subject to applicable law, it shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive cable service so long as the franchise remains in force.

D. In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system.

E. Grantee response to subscriber complaints, as well as complaints made by subscribers to grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, shall be initiated within one business day of receipt by grantor. The resolution of subscriber complaints, whenever feasible, shall be effected by grantee not later than three business days after receipt of the complaint. Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber, a supervisor shall respond to the subscriber’s complaint at the earliest possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day. For complaints received by grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, grantee shall notify grantor of grantee’s progress in responding to, and resolving, said complaints. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.220 Other requirements.
A. In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days other than for reasons beyond the control of grantee, without prior approval or subsequent excuse of the grantor, the grantor may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by grantor that are the result of grantee’s failure to perform.

B. All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers’ premises shall carry a photo identification card in a form approved by grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee.

C. Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance. A verified and continuing pattern of significant noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that grantee shall receive due process, including prior written notification and a reasonable opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.230 Franchise fee.
A. Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement.

B. The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within one hundred twenty days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon thirty days prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent financial audit of grantee’s gross annual revenue and franchise fee records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP), and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable documented costs of such audit.

C. Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.

D. In the event that any franchise fee payment or payment of any adjustment to any franchise fee is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise excused, grantee shall pay:

1. An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the highest of the most recently published prime lending rate of any of the five largest member banks of the New York Clearing House Association, plus one percent during the period for which payment was due; and

2. If the payment is late by thirty days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor due to grantee’s delinquent payment.

E. Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.240 Security fund.
A. Grantor may require grantee to provide a security fund, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security fund shall be established based on the extent of the grantee’s obligations under the terms of the franchise.

B. The security fund shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a material breach of the franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement.

C. If the security fund is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty days after receiving written confirmation from the bank where such security fund is deposited that grantor has made a draw against the security fund. Failure to replenish the security fund shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.250 System construction.
A. Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other responsible public agencies. The grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding requirements applicable to contractors working within the public rights-of-way. No provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay grantor for the issuance of a permit.

B. In those areas of the city where transmission lines and distribution facilities of cable systems and the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground.

C. In those areas of the city where the grantee’s cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee’s cost. Certain of grantee’s equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.

D. Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as “structures”), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be made under the direction of the public works director or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof.

E. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights- of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations.

F. In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the grantee pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor’s satisfaction said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property or improvement shall, within two years (or in the case of street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the two years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor’s satisfaction said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by the grantor.

G. Prior to commencing any work on the system in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits, licenses and authorizations lawfully required for such work. If emergency work on the system in the public right-of-way is required, the grantee shall with all due diligence, seek to obtain any and all such required permits, licenses and authorizations within three working days after commencing such emergency work.

H. There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. The grantee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property.

I. If the grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. If, however, other similarly situated users of such public rights-of-way are compensated or reimbursed for any of the cost associated with the removal, relay or relocation of any equipment or facilities, grantee shall be entitled to comparable compensation in amount.

J. The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the grantor.

K. In accordance with applicable law, the grantee or any utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by the grantor to permit joint use of its poles and/or conduit located in the public rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. In the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, each party shall be entitled to exercise any rights and defenses provided by applicable law.

L. The grantee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than twenty business days prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes.

M. The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with the grantee’s wires, cables and other equipment. The grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee.

N. Grantee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by the grantor with regard to the placement and screening of grantee’s facilities and equipment located in the public rights-of-way. Such requirements may include, but not be limited to, use of landscaping to screen pedestals and cabinets and requiring that construction be flush with the natural grade of the surrounding area. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.260 Multiple franchises.
A. Subject to applicable law, in the event that more than one franchise is awarded, the grantor reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to require that the drop cable(s) be utilized only by the cable operator selected by the resident to provide service.

B. The grantor reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchise applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant’s risk, with no recourse against the grantor in the event the pending franchise application is not granted. The grantor may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant’s cost.

C. If the grantor authorizes or permits another cable system to operate within the municipal limits of the city, it may do so on conditions that such new cable system entrant indemnify and hold harmless and reimburse the existing grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities and all other costs including those of existing grantee, the city and utilities, incident to inspections, make ready, and construction of an additional cable system in the franchise area; and the existing grantee may be required to be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted to such new entrant cable system. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.270 Applicable technical standards.
A. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon written request, a written report of the results of the grantee’s periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines.

B. Should the FCC no longer require proof of performance tests, the grantee shall make and submit such proof of performance tests and reports in response to a written request from the grantor. Such report shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty days of issuance of the grantor request. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.280 Noncompliance with standards.
Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified FCC technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.290 Costs of technical assistance.
The grantee shall pay the costs incurred by the grantor for obtaining any technical assistance deemed necessary by the grantor for obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with all franchise-imposed standards. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.300 Hold harmless.
Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.310 Insurance.
A. On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall furnish to grantor certificates of insurance for liability, workers’ compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies, which shall be admitted in the state. The certificates of insurance shall provide that the insurance is in force and will not be canceled or modified without thirty days prior written notice to grantor. The certificates of insurance shall be in a form satisfactory to grantor.

B. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise a liability insurance policy which shall:

1. Name grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds;

2. Indemnify all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to:

a. Negligent acts or omissions of grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations, and/or

b. Use of motor vehicles;

3. Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement.

C. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise a policy of workers’ compensation insurance which shall comply with the laws of the state.

D. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise a policy of property insurance which shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance.

E. The certificates of insurance shall indicate the following information:

1. The policy number;

2. The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire;

3. The names of the primary insureds and any additional insured required by the franchise agreement;

4. The subject of the insurance;

5. The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and

6. The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance.

If the certificates of insurance do not provide all of the above information, grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant insurance policies.

F. The commencement of franchise operations shall not begin until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section.

G. In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight hours notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. In order to account for increases in consumer prices, no more than once during any five year period, grantor shall have the right to order grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance provided in the franchise agreement. Such order may be made by grantor after conducting a duly noticed public hearing. Increases in insurance coverage shall be based upon current prudent business practices of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.320 Records required.
A. Grantee shall at all times maintain:

1. A written or computer-stored record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber’s right of privacy;

2. A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system components installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber’s homes;

3. If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty days following any written request by grantor, in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor;

4. If requested by grantor, a complaint record which shall contain a semi-annual (through June 30th and December 31st) breakdown indicating the total number of complaints received for the preceding reporting period, and shall indicate the classifications of complaints as follows: construction, billing, customer relations/service and miscellaneous;

5. A full and complete record of rates for programming services, equipment, installations and other subscriber charges. This information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic service tier, tiers of service beyond the basic tier, premium service, pay-per-view services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any charges for installation or service at the subscriber premises.

B. The grantor may impose requests for additional information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city’s rights under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise agreement.

C. Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all:

1. Franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service area; and

2. All records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.330 Annual reports.
A. Within ninety days after the end of the calendar year, upon grantor’s written request, grantee shall submit a written report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information:

1. A summary of the previous year’s (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year’s) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year;

2. A list of grantee’s officers and members of its board of directors;

3. A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in grantee;

4. An indication of any residences in grantee’s service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service;

5. Information as to:

a. The number of homes passed,

b. Total subscribers, and

c. The number of basic and pay subscribers;

6. A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber’s homes and exclusive of confidential or proprietary information that would be open for public review under the California Public Records Act. It is the intent of this section that the grantor have a complete set of plans and records drawings. After the initial submission of a complete set of drawings, the grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings that have changed;

7. Any other information relevant to franchise regulation which the grantor shall reasonably request, and which is relevant to its regulatory responsibilities.

B. Upon request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications and reports, which are nonroutine in nature and which will materially affect its cable system within the franchise area.

C. Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence and protected by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee may provide grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor.

D. If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee’s annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within forty-five days of the publication of such reports.

E. Upon grantor’s request, but no more than annually, grantee shall submit to grantor a privacy report indicating the degree of compliance with the provisions contained in Section 5.20.480 of this chapter and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected.

F. All reports required under this chapter, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor’s offices during normal business hours.

G. All reports and records required to be delivered to grantor under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.

H. The wilful refusal, failure, or wilful negligence of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty days after written request therefor, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under this chapter or the franchise agreement.

I. Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and wilfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.340 Opinion survey.
Upon written request of the grantor, but not more than once every two years, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee’s invoice for cable services. The results of such survey shall be provided to the grantor on a timely basis. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the grantee. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.350 Review of system performance.
A. Not more often than every two years throughout the term of the franchise, if reasonably requested by prior written notice from the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee’s response to those complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty days after the conclusion of such a review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system’s franchise compliance and quality of service.

B. If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee’s franchise agreement, grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific details of each alleged noncompliance. Grantor may then direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of the grantee, after due notice, to:

1. Correct the area(s) of noncompliance within the period specified therefor; or

2. Commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter; or

3. Demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are incorrect;

shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement considered appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.360 Special review.
When there have been extensive complaints made or where there exists other demonstrative evidence which, in the reasonable judgment of the grantor, casts reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service to the effect that the grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or its franchise, the grantor shall have the right to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system in order to protect the public against substandard cable service. Grantor may not compel grantee to provide such tests or reports unless and until grantor has provided grantee with at least thirty days prior written notice of its intention to exercise its rights under this section and has provided grantee with an opportunity to be heard prior to its exercise of such rights. Such test or tests shall be made and the report shall be delivered to the grantor no later than thirty days after the grantor notifies the grantee in writing that it is exercising such right, and shall be made at grantee’s sole cost. Such report shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests, what system component was tested, the equipment used and procedures employed in said testing, the results of such tests, and the method by which such complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special test shall be recorded. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.370 Remedies for franchise violations.
If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following reasonable written notice from the grantor and a reasonable opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion:

A. Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in the franchise agreement if such violation is not cured within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of grantor’s intention to cure and draw upon the security fund;

B. Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violation(s) if such violation is not cured, or if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule reasonably acceptable to grantor, within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of grantor’s intention to assess liquidated damages. Such assessment may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney’s fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.380 Procedure for remedying franchise violations.
Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this chapter, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures:

A. Grantor shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction, or evidence of non-violation, within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than fifteen business days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise and thirty business days in all other cases. If grantee fails to:

1. Correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed; or

2. Commence correction of the alleged violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or

3. Provide evidence that there is no violation;

the grantor shall then give, by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, written notice of not less than thirty days of a public hearing to be held before the council. Said notice shall set forth in detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred.

B. Subsequent to the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision.

C. If the council finds that:

1. The grantee has corrected the alleged violation; or

2. The grantee has diligently commenced correction of such alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such alleged violation; or

3. No material violation has occurred;

the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.

D. If the council finds that material violations exist and that grantee:

1. Has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner; or

2. Has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation;

then the council may impose one or more of the remedies provided in this chapter and the franchise agreement as it, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.390 Grantor’s power to revoke.
A. Grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material breach under the franchise:

1. If grantee fails to perform any of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and continues such failure to perform after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure;

2. If grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required in the franchise agreement;

3. If grantee violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee’s franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee in good faith in an appropriate proceeding;

4. If grantee knowingly practices any material fraud or deceit upon grantor;

5. If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt.

B. After completing the procedures set forth in Section 5.20.380 of this chapter, the grantor may make a formal request before the council that the grantee’s franchise be revoked. The council shall cause to be served on the grantee written notice of its intent to consider revoking grantee’s franchise. Such notice shall be served on grantee at least thirty days prior to the date of the hearing on the issue. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area ten days prior to the hearing date.

C. The council shall hear any person(s) interested in the revocation and within ninety days after the date of the hearing shall make its determination, based on a preponderance of the evidence, whether the grantee has committed a material breach of the franchise.

D. If the grantor determines that the grantee has committed a material breach, then the grantor may:

1. Declare the franchise revoked and any security fund and bonds forfeited; or

2. If the material breach is curable by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner and under the terms and conditions reasonably specified by the grantor.

The termination and forfeiture of the grantee’s franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.400 Appeal of finding of revocation.
The grantee may appeal a finding of revocation made pursuant to Section 5.20.390 to an appropriate court of jurisdiction, which shall have the power to review de novo. Any such appeal must be taken by the grantee within sixty days of the issuance of the grantor’s decision to revoke the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.410 Force majeure – Grantee’s inability to perform.
In the event grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee’s control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by Section 5.20.190 pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.420 Abandonment or removal of franchise property.
A. If the grantee discontinues the use of any of its property within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of twelve months, such property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use.

B. Grantor, upon such reasonable terms as grantor may lawfully impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore to grantor’s satisfaction any affected public right-of-way. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section.

C. Upon the approved abandonment of any franchise property, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the abandoned franchise property.

D. At the expiration, without renewal or extension, of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided herein, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of the cable system from all streets and public ways within the service area within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty days.

E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other franchise holder. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.430 Restoration by grantor – Reimbursement of costs.
Upon reasonable written notice and upon the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause the work to be commenced and/or completed. The grantor shall provide to the grantee an itemized work order setting forth in detail the exact nature of the work completed and the supplies used in such work. The grantee shall pay to the grantor the reasonable costs for such work no later than thirty days after receipt of the itemized work order. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.440 Extended operation and continuity of services.
Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.450 Receivership and foreclosure.
A. At the option of the grantor and subject to applicable law, a franchise granted hereunder may be revoked one hundred twenty days after appointment of a receiver(s) or trustee(s) to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless:

1. The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated within said one hundred twenty days; or

2. Such receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty days shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; or

3. Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty days, have executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise.

B. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, in whole or in part, the grantor may serve notice of revocation upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall be revoked one hundred twenty days after service of such notice, unless:

1. Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in the manner provided by law; and

2. The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.460 Reservation of grantor rights.
In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.470 Waiver.
A. The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines (1) that it is in the public interest to do so; or (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or on the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites.

B. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement by any failure of the grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.480 Rights of individuals.
A. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. However, nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any household or individual which has a negative credit or service history with the grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to grantee’s equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the grantee in the course of their employment.

B. Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time.

C. Except where provided for under federal law, neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber’s consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified.

D. In the conduct of providing its cable services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber’s or general citizen’s right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the system’s interactive two-way equipment or capability, if such equipment or capability exists, for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen.

E. No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber’s premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber’s property shall be deemed granted.

F. The grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not sell, or otherwise make available to any party without consent of the subscriber pursuant to state and federal privacy laws:

1. Any list of the names and addresses of subscribers containing the names and addresses of subscribers who request in writing to be removed from such list; and

2. Any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, without the prior written consent of such subscribers. This does not prohibit the grantee from providing composite ratings of subscriber viewing to any party. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.490 Separability.
If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision thereof which had previously been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee thirty days written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. (Ord. 1604 § 4 (part), 2001)

5.20.500 Applicability of chapter to state video services franchisees.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any person or entity to obtain a franchise issued by the city, to the extent that such person or entity is authorized to provide cable service or video services under a cable franchise or video services franchise issued under applicable state or federal law, including but not limited to Sections 5800 et seq. of the California Public Utilities Code. The requirements and provisions of this chapter shall not apply or be enforced to the extent that they actually conflict with applicable state or federal law. (Ord. 1704 § 2, 2008)

5.20.510 Regulation of state video services franchisees.
Sections 5.20.500 through 5.20.570 of this chapter are designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city. As of January 1, 2007, the state of California has the sole authority to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“Act”). Pursuant to the Act, the city of Gardena shall receive a franchise fee and shall receive a fee for public, educational and government (“PEG”) programming purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally, the city has the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards, but the Act grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. The Act leaves unchanged the city’s authority to regulate the city’s current cable franchises in accordance with this chapter and the cable franchises currently in effect, until such time as the cable franchisees no longer hold a city franchise or are no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise. (Ord. 1704 § 3, 2008)

5.20.520 State video franchise and PEG fees.*
(a) For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Gardena, there shall be a fee paid to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.

(b) For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Gardena, there shall be an additional fee paid to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city for public, educational, and government access purposes consistent with state and federal law. This fee obligation shall take effect upon the earlier of: (i) the fulfillment of all obligations to remit cash payments to the city for support of public, educational, and government access facilities which are contained within a city-issued cable franchise that was in effect on January 1, 2007, and which remained unsatisfied as of the effective date of this ordinance; or (ii) the termination by the holder of a city-issued cable franchise of its franchise as provided under state law. The intent of this subsection is to comply with the requirements of subsections (l), (m), and (n) of Section 5870 of the California Public Utilities Code, and the fee established in this subsection is intended to be a fee authorized by subsection (n) of Section 5870.

(c) Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 1704 § 4, 2008)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ords. 1788 and 1789 reauthorize the city’s authorization to collect the PEG fees established in this section.

5.20.530 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the city manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of all holders of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Gardena to ensure compliance with Section 5.20.520 of this code. (Ord. 1704 § 5, 2008)

5.20.540 Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
(a) Any holder of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Gardena shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

(b) The city manager shall monitor the compliance of holders of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Gardena with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager, or his or her designee, will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

(1) For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

(2) For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation.

(3) For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

(c) A holder of a state video franchise operating within the boundaries of the city of Gardena may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within sixty days of the initial assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 1704 § 6, 2008)

5.20.550 City response to state video franchise applications.
(a) Applicants for state video franchises, or amendments to existing franchises, that will authorize the applicant to operate within the boundaries of the city of Gardena must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the Public Utilities Commission. At a minimum, one complete copy must be provided to the city manager.

(b) Within thirty days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 1704 § 7, 2008)

5.20.560 Notice to adjacent property owners prior to installation of video services facilities.
(a) Any holder of a state video franchise, or city-issued cable franchise, operating within the boundaries of the city of Gardena, that proposes to install above-ground facilities in the public right-of-way shall, prior to applying for an encroachment permit for the installation of such facilities, but in no case less than twenty days prior to installing such facilities, provide written notice to the owner of the private or public property (excluding the public right-of-way) nearest to the proposed facility. For purposes of this subsection, “above-ground facilities” shall include only those facilities that are located on the ground or on a base or pedestal that is on the ground, and shall exclude aerial or pole-mounted facilities.

(b) Any franchisee to which this section applies shall provide the city with a copy of the proposed form of notice to be used in compliance with subsection (a) of this section, no less than ten days prior to mailing or delivering the notice. The city may require the franchisee to amend the form of the notice. Once the city has approved the form of notice, the franchisee shall not be required to obtain additional approvals of notice from the city, so long as the franchisee does not materially deviate from the form of notice approved by the city. (Ord. 1704 § 8, 2008)

5.20.570 Savings clause.
Each provision of this chapter is separate and distinct, and individually enforceable. In the event any provision is declared to be unlawful, the enforceability of all other provisions shall not be affected. Sections 5.20.500 through 5.20.570 of this chapter shall not limit the city’s authority to regulate the city’s current cable franchisee in accordance with Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.490 of this chapter and any cable franchises currently in effect until such time any cable franchisee no longer holds a city franchise or is no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise. (Ord. 1704 § 9, 2008)

Chapter 5.24
CARD GAMES
Sections:

5.24.010    Definitions.

5.24.020    Number of licenses – Number of tables.

5.24.021    Location of card clubs.

5.24.030    Licenses – Required.

5.24.040    Licenses – Applications.

5.24.050    Licenses – Applications – Investigations and reports.

5.24.060    Licenses – Applications – Granting and denial.

5.24.070    Licenses – Applications – Grounds for denial.

5.24.080    Licenses – Issuance.

5.24.090    Licenses – Expiration.

5.24.100    Licenses – Suspension and revocation.

5.24.110    Licenses – Transfer and assignment.

5.24.120    Licenses held by veterans organizations.

5.24.130    Pointholders – Approval required.

5.24.140    Pointholders – Applications – Approval or denial.

5.24.150    Pointholders – Notices of acquisition of points and transfers and assignments thereof.

5.24.160    Pointholders – Revocation of approval – Divestment.

5.24.170    Employees – Work permits – Required – Nontransferability.

5.24.180    Employees – Work permits – Applications – Approval or denial.

5.24.190    Employees – Work permits – Suspension and revocation.

5.24.195    Appeal of chief’s decision on employee work permits.

5.24.200    Employees – Notice of employment – Identification badges.

5.24.210    Rules and regulations.

5.24.211    Patron security and safety.

5.24.220    Alcoholic beverages.

5.24.230    Age limitation.

5.24.240    Seating arrangements.

5.24.250    Seat rental fees.

5.24.260    Convenience dealers.

5.24.270    Rules of play.

5.24.280    Playing area.

5.24.290    Signs.

5.24.300    Entertainment.

5.24.310    Inspections.

5.24.320    Investigations.

5.24.330    Reporting of loans.

5.24.340    Hours of operation.

5.24.350    Credit and check cashing.

5.24.360    Holding valuables for safekeeping.

5.24.370    Cheating prohibited.

5.24.380    Exclusion of persons from card clubs.

5.24.390    Fees and deposits.

5.24.400    Quarterly reports.

5.24.410    Audits of records.

5.24.420    Unlawful acts.

5.24.430    Games permitted.

5.24.440    Games not permitted.

5.24.450    Amendments.

5.24.460    Licensees responsible.

5.24.470    Confidentiality.

5.24.480    Violations – Penalty.

5.24.490    Nonseverability.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 466, 471, 481, 484, 492, 555, 563, 575, 577, 655, 708, 751, 762, 777, 779, 784, 809, 840, 890, 903, 914, 927, 931, 936, 945, 957, 967, 969, 973, 976, 980, 992, 993, 1005, 1013, 1015, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1053, 1057, 1069, 1072, 1078, 1099, 1114, 1154, 1159, 1163, 1211, 1219, 1224, 1259, 1261, 1267, 1278 and 1296.

5.24.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Applicant” means any person wishing to be approved by the city as having an ownership interest in a licensed card club or as being employed by a card club in any capacity.

“Card club” means a business or enterprise licensed under the provisions of this chapter for the playing of draw poker, panguingue, or any other game permitted under state law which has also been permitted by resolution of the council. “Card club” includes business activities incidental to the playing of such games, including, but not limited to, food, beverage and valet services.

“Commence” means and includes commence, begin, initiate, start, open and establish.

“Conduct” means and includes conduct, transact, maintain, prosecute, practice, manage, operate and carry on.

“Conviction” means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere.

“Employee” means every person who is an agent of an owner or who acts under the direction of an owner or other employee of an owner of any card club.

“Game” or “games” means draw poker, panguingue or any other game permitted under state law which has also been permitted by resolution of the council, whether or not such game involves the use of cards.

“License” means a license for operating a card club.

“Owner” means every person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity having any interest, legal or equitable, in any card club or card club license.

“Person” means and includes every person, shareholder, partner, firm, association, partnership, joint venture and corporation, whether acting as principal or agent, manage, clerk, employee, or servant, either for or on behalf of himself or for any other person, shareholder, partner, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or otherwise and any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other entity owning, operating or proposing to operate a card club in the city.

“Playing cards” or “card games” means the playing of draw poker, panguingue or any other game permitted under state law which has also been permitted by resolution of the council, whether or not such game involves the use of cards.

“Pointholder” means any person, shareholder, partner, corporation, partnership or other entity of whatsoever character, or at all, having any interest whatsoever, or at all, in the ownership in a card club, whether legal, equitable or of whatsoever kind or character.

“Purport to commence” and “purport to conduct” means and includes any showing, representation, indication or action which:

1. By means of any sign, advertisement, or advertising matter, whether in, upon or about any premises or otherwise; or

2. By the appearance or arrangement of any premises; or

3. By acts or statements of any person, or by the agents, servants, or employees of any person, indicates, suggests, holds out, or represents that any person is, would be, or appears to be conducting or in a position to conduct any business referred to in this chapter within the city.

“Work permit” means the permit issued by the city to any person wishing to be employed by a card club in any capacity whatsoever. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-3.01)

5.24.020 Number of licenses – Number of tables.
There shall be no more than two card club licenses in the city at any one time. There shall be no more than five hundred playing tables in the city at any one time, and each active licensee shall be permitted to have no more than two hundred fifty tables. Licensees shall obtain administrative approval from the city manager prior to expanding the number of tables allowed by their initial and/or current licenses. In addition, each licensee shall be permitted to have a maximum of two instructional tables at which no wager of anything of value shall be permitted. Such instructional tables shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.24.020. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 1994: prior code § 6-3.02)

5.24.021 Location of card clubs.
No gambling establishment may be located in any zone which has not been specifically approved for such a business and no new card club may be established, nor an existing club expanded, that is located within five hundred feet of any of the unsuitable areas specified in Business and Professions Code Section 19852(a)(3), or within such other distance as may be established by regulation of the division of gambling control. (Ord. 1563 § 3, 1999)

5.24.030 Licenses – Required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, or purport to commence or purport to conduct, within the city any business, activity, enterprise, undertaking or place where tables or other items or units of furniture are used directly or indirectly for playing cards or card games and for the use of which a fee, commission or compensation is directly or indirectly charged, accepted or received from players or participants in any such playing of games until such person shall have first obtained a written license to do so under and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. No application form for a license for the conduct of any game and/or business under this chapter shall be furnished by the city clerk, nor shall any application for any such license be received and filed by the city clerk, nor shall the city clerk be required to process any such application, nor shall a public hearing on the application be conducted when the number of current and valid licenses for the conduct of such card games in the city, when added together, shall total the sum provided for in Section 5.24.020. (Prior code § 6-3.03)

5.24.040 Licenses – Applications.
A. Any person desiring or proposing to commence or conduct any business, activity, enterprise or undertaking designated, specified or referred to in this chapter for the playing of card games shall file with the city, on a form furnished by the city, a written application for a license as required by the provisions of this chapter. Each such application shall contain and clearly and truthfully, under oath or affirmation, set forth and show, in addition to such other information as the city may require, the following information:

1. The date of the application;

2. The true name of the applicant;

3. The status of the applicant as being an individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or corporation;

4. If the applicant is an individual, the residence and business address of such applicant;

5. If the applicant is other than an individual, the name, residence, business address and capacity of each of the partners, shareholders or members of the firm, partnership, corporation or joint venture and the name, residence, business address, and capacity of each of the officers, directors and shareholders of the association or corporation applicant;

6. The location of the business for which the license is sought;

7. The games proposed to be played, that is, draw poker, panguingue, or both, and that no other games are proposed;

8. The number of tables to be placed, employed, or used for the playing of card games;

9. A description of any other business or activity proposed to be conducted at the same location;

10. A description of the building in which the business proposed to be licensed is to be housed, giving the dimensions and floor plan of the entire premises;

11. A statement that such building conforms to all the laws of the state and the city for occupancies of the nature proposed;

12. A statement that the applicant understands that the application shall be considered by the council only after a full investigation and report have been made by the chief of police, other city officials, or their representatives;

13. A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that any business or activity conducted or operated under any license issued under such application shall be operated in full conformity with all the laws of the state and the laws and regulations of the city applicable thereto and that any violation of any such laws or regulations in such place of business, or in connection therewith, shall render any license subject to immediate suspension or revocation;

14. A statement that the applicant has read the provisions of this chapter and understands the same;

15. A full and complete financial statement of the applicant or, if the applicant is other than an individual, a full and complete financial statement of all persons having an ownership interest in the endeavor; provided, however, the financial statement required by this subsection shall be a confidential qualified document and shall not be open to public inspection but shall be available only to those city officials having direct jurisdiction over the provisions of this chapter, to those state officials having jurisdiction over card clubs pursuant to the Gaming Registration Act of the state, and to any court of competent jurisdiction where any matter relating thereto may be actually pending; and

16. Such other information as may be required by the city.

B. Concurrently with the filing of the application, the applicant, including its officers, shareholders, partners, management, employees, and all persons proposing to have an ownership interest therein, shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the chief of police or his designee and pay the applicable fees.

C. The council shall not consider any application for any license for less than forty playing tables or units. (Ord. 1630 § 2, 2003; prior code § 6-3.04)

5.24.050 Licenses – Applications – Investigations and reports.
A. Investigations Required. Whenever an application has been filed with the city clerk for a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall immediately refer such application, or a true copy thereof, to the chief of police who shall cause an investigation to be conducted as follows:

1. An investigation of the building and location where the applicant proposes to conduct such business or activity;

2. An investigation of the applicant, including his officers, shareholders, partners, management, and all persons proposing to have an ownership interest therein;

3. An investigation as to the type of tables or units to be used at, or in conjunction with, the proposed business and the types of games proposed to be played, which investigation shall also include the proposed locations of the tables or other units in, within, or about the proposed place of business; and

4. Such other information as deemed necessary.

B. Reports Required. The chief of police shall make such investigations with reasonable promptness and shall report to the council with reference thereto in due time. (Ord. 1630 § 3, 2003; prior code § 6-3.05)

5.24.060 Licenses – Applications – Granting and denial.
A. Decision of the Council. The council, in its discretion, may either approve the application and grant the license applied for or deny the application and refuse to grant the license applied for.

B. License Conditions. Any such license granted by the council shall be subject to all of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this chapter as well as all laws of the city, state or federal governments and such additional rules, regulations, terms, and conditions, if any, as the council, in the exercise of its discretion, may see fit to promulgate, determine, or prescribe for the particular license applied for.

C. Decision of the Council Final. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 6-3.06)

5.24.070 Licenses – Applications – Grounds for denial.
The council may deny any license under the provisions of this chapter in any of the following cases:

A. If any applicant does not have a valid registration from the Attorney General of the state;

B. If the proposed business or activity to be operated is in violation of any federal, state or city law or regulation;

C. If any applicant has been convicted of any crime punishable as a felony;

D. If any applicant has been convicted of an offense involving dishonesty;

E. If any applicant has engaged in bookmaking, loan sharking, or illegal gambling activities or has been convicted of an offense involving such activities;

F. If any applicant has made any false statement in the application or as to any other information presented as part of the application process;

G. If the applicant does not have the financial capability or business experience to operate a card club in a manner which would adequately protect the patrons of the card club and the citizens of the community;

H. If the game for which a license is applied for is unlawful;

I. If a license is not available;

J. When any table or unit to be permitted or licensed will not, at all times, be in full view of all patrons. However, licensed clubs with tables on more than one story of a building shall be required to have all tables on each story in full view of all patrons on that story;

K. When doors, screens, or other obstructions of any kind conceal, or are apt to conceal, the players at any table or unit;

L. If the building in which the business or activity proposed to be conducted does not meet the requirements of new buildings of like occupancy;

M. If the building or premises do not comply with the established requirements and regulations relating to building safety, zoning, and fire within the city; or

N. If the approval of any applicant would be inimical to the interests of legitimate gaming. (Prior code § 6-3.07)

5.24.080 Licenses – Issuance.
If the action of the council on any such application is to grant the license, the city manager or his delegate may issue the necessary licenses and renewals of licenses upon the payment of the required fees therefor until such time as such license is either surrendered, suspended, or revoked. (Prior code § 6-3.08)

5.24.090 Licenses – Expiration.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be and remain valid until either surrendered by the licensee, suspended by the chief of police, suspended or revoked by the council, or expiration pursuant to subsection E of Section 5.24.390.

B. In the event of surrender, suspension, revocation, or expiration, no license deposit or fee, or any portion thereof, shall be refunded. (Prior code § 6-3.09)

5.24.100 Licenses – Suspension and revocation.
All licenses authorized and issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to, and accepted as subject to:

A. Immediate suspension by the chief of police until a decision is rendered by the council pursuant to subsection B of this section. The matter of such suspension shall be submitted to the council at the first meeting following such action. A license may be immediately suspended if the chief of police finds that:

1. The Attorney General of the state has suspended or revoked an applicant’s registration under the Gaming Registration Act of the state; or

2. A licensee, or any agent or employee thereof, has violated, or permitted, allowed or caused the violation of, any provision of this chapter, any regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, any condition of approval imposed upon the issuance of the card club license, or any state law or regulation relating to the operation of a card club, and the continued operation of the card club jeopardizes, or threatens to jeopardize, the public welfare;

B. Suspension or revocation by the council after a public hearing held after not less than five days’ notice to the licensee and after testimony has been taken by the licensee and/or any other interested person if the council finds that:

1. The Attorney General of the state has suspended or revoked an applicant’s registration under the Gaming Registration Act of the state; or

2. A licensee, or any agent or employee thereof, has violated, or permitted, allowed or caused the violation of, any provision of this chapter, any regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, any condition of approval imposed upon the issuance of the card club license, or any state law or regulation relating to the operation of a card club; or

3. A licensee has made any fraudulent statement as to a material fact on an application form or as to any other information presented as part of the application process; or

4. A licensee commits any act which would have constituted grounds for the denial of an application for a license pursuant to Section 5.24.070; and

C. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. In the event of the suspension or revocation of a license, no part of any license fee previously paid shall be refunded. (Prior code § 6-3.10)

5.24.110 Licenses – Transfer and assignment.
No license for a card club or any business conducted in conjunction therewith shall be transferred or assigned in whole or in part, either as to the licensee or location of the business, without the prior approval of the city. The licensee shall notify the city manager of the possibility of such transfer or assignment concurrently with the commencement of negotiations for the same. (Prior code § 6-3.11)

5.24.120 Licenses held by veterans organizations.
The provisions of this section specifically concern those licenses which are presently held in the names of (1) American Legion Post No. 187, Inc., (2) Veterans of Foreign Wars, General Rosecrans Post No. 3261, Inc., (3) Nisei Veterans of Foreign Wars, Post No. 1961, Inc., and (4) Alondra Park AMVETS, Post No. 30, Inc. The council is mindful that in the past such veterans organizations (referred to in this chapter as veterans organizations) found it desirable to assign the functions involved in and directly related to the operation, management, and conduct of the card clubs authorized under the licenses heretofore issued to such veterans organizations. The council may permit such practice in the future, but only upon absolute and strict compliance with the respective licenses heretofore issued to such veterans organizations, with the following special terms and conditions, including, but not limited to, the fact that such veterans organizations shall be nonprofit, charitable and/or eleemosynary corporations, limited partnerships, or unincorporated associations, each and all of which shall be met, kept and performed in every particular:

A. No assignment of functions related to the operation, management and conduct of a card club by a veterans organization shall be valid without the prior approval of the council, including the approval of the operating agreement. The assignee shall be considered a sublicensee and shall be subject to approval in the same manner as a licensee.

B. Should an assignment be approved, the veterans organization shall be considered the licensee, and the assignee shall be considered the sublicensee. Both the licensee and the sublicensee shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, any regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, any condition of approval imposed upon the licensee or sublicensee, and any state law or regulation relating to the operation of a card club. The violation of any such statute, regulation or condition shall subject the licensee and sublicensee to any and all penalties specified in this chapter.

C. Any veterans organization shall understand and agree, in accepting and retaining a card club license, that neither the city, nor any of its officers, agents, or employees, shall be liable for any loss or damage suffered or sustained by such veterans organization, as licensee, which may arise out of, or be concerned with, the veterans organization complying with, or being required to comply with, the provisions of this chapter, any regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, any condition imposed upon its license, or any state law or regulation relating to the operation of a card club.

D. Any veterans organization holding a card club license, as a condition of such license, shall be responsible for filing with the city clerk a current and updated copy of:

1. The Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws;

2. The operating agreement with the assignee; and

3. The names and business residence addresses of all officers and directors and the names of all officers, directors, and/or members authorized to bind the veterans organization to any contract or agreement or who have the authority to disburse funds of the veterans organization. Upon acquiring such authority, such persons shall be required to file with the city a personal questionnaire on forms approved by the city attorney.

Any change in such documents shall be filed with the city clerk within five days after such change taking place.

E. The veterans organization, if requested by the city, shall submit a list of all of its members.

F. A veterans organization, as licensee, shall file with the city clerk, within sixty days after the end of every fiscal year, an annual report, financial statement and/or balance sheet which shall fully disclose the manner in which such veterans organization, as licensee, disburses the moneys received from the operating agreements it has with a sublicensee.

G. Each veterans organization holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times maintain its permanent and only official location within the corporate limits of the city, and any attempt or removal of such location from the city shall be grounds for the revocation of its license pursuant to Section 5.24.100. (Prior code § 6-3.12)

5.24.130 Pointholders – Approval required.
No person shall acquire an ownership interest in a card club without receiving prior approval from the council and the Attorney General of the state. As used in this section, “ownership interest” shall include the receipt of points by hypothecation or holding points in trust for another. (Ord. 1630 § 4, 2003; prior code § 6-3.13)

5.24.140 Pointholders – Applications – Approval or denial.
A. Persons wishing to become pointholders, prior to acquiring an ownership interest in any card club, shall file an application with the city clerk on a form approved by the city attorney and shall include a full financial statement.

B. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee which shall be used to cover the costs of investigation.

C. The application shall include the applicant’s photograph and fingerprints taken by the chief of police or his designee.

D. The chief of police shall investigate such person and recommend to the council the approval or denial of such application, and the council’s decision shall be final and conclusive.

E. The council may deny an application to become a pointholder in the following cases:

1. If the applicant has been convicted of any crime punishable as a felony;

2. If the applicant has been convicted of an offense involving dishonesty;

3. If the applicant has engaged in bookmaking, loan sharking, or other illegal gambling activities or has been convicted of an offense involving such activities;

4. If the applicant is not a person of good character, integrity and honesty;

5. If the applicant has made any false statement in the application or as to any other information presented as part of the application process; or

6. If the approval of the applicant would be inimical to the interests of legitimate gaming.

F. No application shall be submitted to the council until the applicant has received approval from the Attorney General of the state pursuant to the Gaming Registration Act of the state. (Prior code § 6-3.14)

5.24.150 Pointholders – Notices of acquisition of points and transfers and assignments thereof.
No ownership interest in a card club shall be acquired, transferred, or assigned by previously approved pointholders without giving notice of such acquisition, transfer or assignment to the city clerk within five days after the consummation of such transaction. “Notice,” as used in this section, shall be made on a form approved by the city attorney and shall contain all the information requested therein. It shall be the responsibility of both the pointholder and the licensee to ensure that such form is filed. Failure to file a completed form in a timely manner shall be a violation of this chapter and the pointholder and licensee shall be subject to the penalties contained in this chapter. (Prior code § 6-3.15)

5.24.160 Pointholders – Revocation of approval – Divestment.
A. The approval of a pointholder may be revoked by the council after a hearing held not less than thirty days after notice has been given to the pointholder if the council finds that:

1. The Attorney General of the state has suspended or revoked an applicant’s registration under the Gaming Registration Act of the state; or

2. A pointholder has violated, or permitted, allowed or caused the violation of, any provision of this chapter, any regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, any condition of approval imposed upon the issuance of the card club license, or any state law or regulation relating to the operation of a card club; or

3. A pointholder has made any fraudulent statement as to a material fact on an application form or as to any other information presented as part of the application process; or

4. A pointholder commits any act which would have constituted grounds for the denial of approval pursuant to Section 5.24.140.

B. The council, in making its decision, shall consider any mitigating factor presented by the pointholder. The decision of the council shall be final.

C. The ownership interest shall be divested within one hundred twenty days after the notice of revocation. Failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor, and each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate and complete offense. In addition, the city attorney may invoke appropriate civil remedies to enforce compliance.

D. No person required to divest an ownership interest in a card club following a revocation of approval shall transfer such ownership interest to his or her spouse, child, sibling, or parent or to his or her spouse’s child, sibling, or parent without the approval of the council. (Prior code § 6-3.16)

5.24.170 Employees – Work permits – Required – Nontransferability.
Any person wishing to work in a card club, in any capacity whatsoever, shall first obtain a work permit from the city. No card club shall employ, in any capacity, any person not having a work permit issued by the city. Work permits shall not be transferred or assigned but shall be valid in all card clubs in the city. Persons employed in a card club on December 15, 1983, and who have been fingerprinted and photographed by the chief of police prior to said date, shall be issued a work permit permitting them to work only in the card club in which they are then employed. Upon the termination of employment in said card club, the employee shall become subject to the provisions of Section 5.24.180. However, all employees shall immediately be subject to the provisions of Section 5.24.190. (Prior code § 6-3.17)

5.24.180 Employees – Work permits – Applications – Approval or denial.
A. Any person wishing to obtain a work permit shall file an application with the chief of police on a form approved by the city attorney. The application shall be complete in all respects, shall include photographing and fingerprinting, and shall be accompanied by the payment of the applicable fees. The chief of police shall process the application and may approve, conditionally approve (including the issuance of a temporary permit), or deny such application. The chief of police shall deny an application for a work permit only in the following cases:

1. Failure of the applicant to clearly establish eligibility and qualification in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 5 of Division 8 of the California Business and Professions Code as the same may be amended from time to time, or in accordance with this Chapter of the Gardena Municipal Code.

2. Failure of the applicant to provide information, documentation and assurances required by Chapter 5 of Division 8 of the California Business and Professions Code as the same may be amended from time to time, by this Chapter of the Gardena Municipal Code, by the Director of the California Division of Gambling Control, or by the Chief of Police, failure of the applicant to reveal any fact material to qualification, or the supplying of information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria.

3. Conviction of a felony, including a conviction by a federal court or a court in another state for a crime that would constitute a felony if committed in California.

4. Conviction of the applicant for any misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude within the 10-year period immediately preceding the submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief pursuant to Section 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.45 of the Penal Code.

5. Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code.

6. Contumacious defiance by the applicant of any legislative investigatory body, or other official investigatory body of any state of the United States, when that body is engaged in the investigation of crimes relating to gambling; official corruption related to gambling activities; or criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code.

7. The applicant is less than 21 years of age.

B. Notice of the Chief’s decision shall be given to the applicant within thirty days of receipt of a completed application and shall state the reasons for the decision of a denial or a conditionally approved permit. The notice shall state that the decision of the Chief is final absent a timely appeal to the City Manager in accordance with section 5.24.195.

C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any application for a work permit shall be subject to objection by the division of gambling control. In the event of such an objection the chief of police shall deny the work permit and the applicant shall not be entitled to appeal pursuant to subsection B of this section. Instead, the applicant shall be entitled to appeal the denial to the division of gambling control pursuant to Sections 19851 and 19910.5 of the Business and Professions Code and any regulations implementing those sections.

D. Renewal. Employee work permits shall be subject to renewal every three years. The procedure for renewal shall be the same as for the issuance of a new permit, except no fingerprints shall be required.

E. Reapplication. No person shall apply for a permit which has been revoked or denied for a minimum of one year from the date that the denial or revocation is final, absent a change in the facts causing the revocation or denial. (Ord. 1601 § 31, 2000; Ord. 1563 § 5, 1999: prior code § 6-3.18)

5.24.190 Employees – Work permits – Suspension and revocation.
A. A work permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:

1. The commission of any act which would have been grounds for the denial of a work permit pursuant to subsection A of section 5.24.180; or

2. The violation of any condition imposed in granting such permit.

B. The Chief of Police shall give notice to the permittee of the violation(s) involved and set forth a period of time for the correction of the violation(s) if correction is possible. If the Chief finds that the violation(s) continue without correction, or if correction is not possible, then the Chief shall issue a notice of revocation which shall contain a statement of the violation(s). The Chief shall serve the notice of revocation on the permittee, the permittee’s employer, and as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. The notice of revocation shall specify that the decision is final and conclusive in the absence of a timely appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.24.195. If the permit is being revoked due to an immediate danger to the public health and safety, the notice shall set forth the danger and provide that an appeal will not stay the revocation. (Ord. 1601 § 32, 2000; prior code § 6-3.19)

5.24.195 Appeal of chief’s decision on employee work permits.
A. Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the Chief of Police relating to an employee work permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, within ten consecutive calendar days from the date of the notice, file a written appeal with the City Manager.

B. The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as all relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent.

C. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, City staff and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as they may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’s files, the City Manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying, or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken and if appropriate, specifying the time period in which corrective actions must be taken. The notice shall be given within five working days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6.

E. A timely appeal shall stay the order from which the appeal is being taken, unless the notice provides that a permit has been revoked or other order made due to an immediate danger to the public health and safety.

F. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1601 § 33, 2000)

5.24.200 Employees – Notice of employment – Identification badges.
A. Within five days after employing any person, the card club shall notify the chief of police of such person’s employment status.

B. Each such employee, unless specifically exempted by the chief of police, at all times while acting within the scope of his employment, shall wear in a prominently visible place upon his person an identification badge in a form prescribed by the chief of police, such badge bearing the name, identification number, and photograph of the employee. It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to wear such badge when required, and any such failure shall be cause for penalties to be imposed upon the employee, the licensee, or both. (Prior code § 6-3.20)

5.24.210 Rules and regulations.
Rules and regulations may be established and promulgated by resolution adopted by the council to enhance, preserve or ensure security and safety in and about the premises of the card club, to establish maximum and minimum wagering limits and to otherwise regulate the operations of licensees. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law, and any violation thereof shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1542 § 1, 1998: prior code § 6-3.21)

5.24.211 Patron security and safety.
Each card club licensee shall adopt and enforce a plan to provide for the safety and security of patrons in and around the gambling establishment and file a copy of the adopted plan with the chief of police. (Ord. 1563 § 2, 1999)

5.24.220 Alcoholic beverages.
A. Alcoholic beverages may be sold, dispensed, consumed or permitted in licensed card clubs in accordance with applicable state and local laws and regulations and only after the club obtains a conditional use permit from the city.

B. No on-duty employee of a card club shall consume alcoholic beverages.

C. No complimentary or reduced price alcoholic beverages shall be offered by the card club on the casino floor.

D. No licensee or other person in charge or control of any card game operating under any permit or license held or issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall permit any person to play in any game licensed by the provisions of this chapter at any time while such person appears to be, or is, under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance.

E. No licensee or other person in charge or control of any card game or premises where card games are operating under any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall permit any person to enter the premises while such person appears to be or, in the opinion of the licensee or duly authorized agents or employees, is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. (Prior code § 6-3.22)

5.24.230 Age limitation.
Persons under twenty-one years shall be permitted in card clubs in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 19915.5. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 2000: prior code § 6-3.23)

5.24.240 Seating arrangements.
It has come to the attention of the council that in the past various operators and/or employees of operators of duly licensed card clubs in the city have entered into arrangements with various and sundry persons not holding licenses to conduct card games within the city wherein games conducted at certain tables have been farmed out, assigned or otherwise sublet to persons in duly licensed card clubs in the city. The council therefore ordains that is unlawful for any person as an operator, agent and/or employee of any duly licensed card club to assign, arrange for, or in any other manner sublet any table, directly or indirectly, with or without consideration, to any person to conduct a card game. It is likewise unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in such game of draw poker or panguingue. (Prior code § 6-3.24)

5.24.250 Seat rental fees.
A. Except in a duly authorized tournament, no licensee shall charge any person, including proposition players, a sum less than that set forth in the following schedule, as and for seat rental, entitling such person to play in such game:

DRAW 

Maximum

 

Limit

Bet

Rental

$1.00

$2.00

$ 1.00 per one-half hour per player

2.00

4.00

1.25 per one-half hour per player

3.00

6.00

1.75 per one-half hour per player

4.00

8.00

2.25 per one-half hour per player

5.00

10.00

2.50 per one-half hour per player

6.00

12.00

2.75 per one-half hour per player

8.00

16.00

3.00 per one-half hour per player

10.00

20.00

3.00 per one-half hour per player

20.00

Straight

5.00 per one-half hour per player

20.00

40.00

5.00 per one-half hour per player

30.00

60.00

6.00 per one-half hour per player

40.00

80.00

7.00 per one-half hour per player

50.00

100.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

60.00

120.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

70.00

140.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

80.00

160.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

90.00

180.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

100.00

200.00

10.00 per one-half hour per player

LOW BALL – OPEN BLIND 

Maximum

 

Limit

Bet

Rental

$1.00

$2.00

$1.25 per one-half hour per player

2.00

4.00

1.75 per one-half hour per player

3.00

6.00

2.50 per one-half hour per player

4.00

8.00

3.00 per one-half hour per player

5.00

10.00

3.00 per one-half hour per player

6.00

12.00

3.25 per one-half hour per player

8.00

16.00

3.50 per one-half hour per player

10.00

20.00

3.50 per one-half hour per player

10.00
(raise blind)

20.00

4.00 per one-half hour per player

15.00

20.00

4.00 per one-half hour per player

15.00
(raise blind)

20.00

5.00 per one-half hour per player

20.00

20.00

5.00 per one-half hour per player

20.00
(raise blind)

20.00

6.00 per one-half hour per player

20.00

40.00

6.00 per one-half hour per player

30.00

60.00

7.00 per one-half hour per player

40.00

80.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

50.00

100.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

60.00

120.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

70.00

140.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

80.00

160.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

90.00

180.00

8.00 per one-half hour per player

100.00

200.00

10.00 per one-half hour per player

PANGUINGUE 

$.50

condition games

$1.00 per one-half hour per player

1.00

condition games

1.25 per one-half hour per player

2.00

condition games

2.00 per one-half hour per player

3.00

condition games

2.75 per one-half hour per player

4.00

condition games

3.50 per one-half hour per player

5.00

condition games

4.00 per one-half hour per player

10.00

condition games

6.00 per one-half hour per player

15.00

condition games

7.00 per one-half hour per player

20.00

condition games

8.00 per one-half hour per player

20.00 to 40.00

condition games

8.00 per one-half hour per player

B. If convenience dealers, as defined in Section 5.24.260, are provided by the card clubs for the games of jackpot poker and panguingue, the rental fee shall be as set forth in subsection A of this section or, at the option of the card clubs, as follows:

Panguingue

Fee Per Hand

$ 1.00

condition games

$1.00

2.00

condition games

1.50

3.00

condition games

1.75

4.00

condition games

2.00

5.00

condition games

2.25

10.00

condition games

3.50

20.00

condition games

5.00

Jackpot Poker Game

Fee Per Hand

2/4

$1.50

3/6

2.00

5/10

2.50

3/6 Raise Blind

3.00

10 Draw

3.00

The convenience dealer, at the start of each half-hour collection period, shall inform each player of the rental fee schedule in effect for the following half-hour.

Moneys collected on a fee per hand basis shall immediately be placed by the convenience dealer into a locked box at each table. The city shall have the right to inspect and audit the contents of such boxes at any time and for any reason.

C. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to temporarily permit the lowering of the fee schedules set forth in this section until the next meeting of the council. (Prior code § 6-3.25)

5.24.260 Convenience dealers.
A. Convenience dealers are employees of the card clubs provided for the convenience of the players so that no player deals. Other than dealing the cards and making collections as set forth in this section, such dealer does not participate in any way in the game, does not bet, and does not take a percentage of the winnings.

B. The convenience dealer shall collect the fixed fee as set forth in Section 5.24.250. Such dealers shall be clearly identifiable and shall adhere to whatever designation or identification standards are required by the chief of police.

C. The chief of police may promulgate regulations concerning the periodic rotation of convenience dealers, subject to the approval of the council.

D. Neither the condition of the particular game nor its status as a convenience game shall be altered during any half-hour collection period.

E. The amounts collected by convenience dealers as set forth in this section shall be segregated and secured by such dealers for collection purposes.

F. The provisions of this section may be suspended immediately by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 6-3.26)

5.24.270 Rules of play.
Rules of play for all games permitted to be played pursuant to this chapter, including rules establishing wagering limits in each game to be played, shall first be filed with the chief of police who shall make a recommendation and then send to the city council for final approval. During hours of operation copies of such rules shall be made available to patrons upon request or shall be clearly posted at the gaming tables where the games are offered. (Ord. 1563 § 4, 1999: prior code § 6-3.27)

5.24.280 Playing area.
The playing of all games provided for in this chapter shall be confined to the areas designated as “card room” as approved in the reasonable discretion of the City Manager. No games shall be permitted in any restaurant or lounge of a card club. (Ord. 1668 § 1, 2005; prior code § 6-3.28)

5.24.290 Signs.
Outdoor signs advertising a card club or any activity therein shall receive the approval of the city council prior to their installation. Such signs shall not be subject to the requirements of the zoning title of this code and are not subject to review by the planning and environmental quality commission unless so ordered by the city council. (Prior code § 6-3.28.1)

5.24.300 Entertainment.
Requests for entertainment in a licensed card club shall be submitted to the city manager for review and approval. All requests shall state with specificity the type of entertainment desired, the hours for such entertainment, and any other information requested by the city manager. The city manager’s decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny, shall be subject to ratification by the city council. The city manager and/or city council may suspend, revoke or re-condition such permit at any time. Such requests for permits shall not be subject to Chapter 5.32 of this code. (Prior code § 6-3.28.2)

5.24.310 Inspections.
All card clubs shall be open for inspection during all hours to the chief of police, or his duly authorized representatives, without a search warrant. (Prior code § 6-3.29)

5.24.320 Investigations.
The chief of police shall have the right to require any licensee, pointholder or employee to supply additional or updated information to that previously required of such person in any application. Additionally, each such person shall cooperate in any investigation undertaken by the chief of police, or any other law enforcement official, and shall allow any books, records and accounts to be inspected. Failure to supply such information or cooperate in such investigation may result in the imposition of penalties as specified in this chapter. (Prior code § 6-3.30)

5.24.330 Reporting of loans.
Licensees shall report the city manager all loans received by them within ten days of execution of final loan documents. The information to be supplied shall include the name and address of the lender and the amount and terms of the loan. (Prior code § 6-3.30.1)

5.24.340 Hours of operation.
Each card club shall adopt a schedule of the hours of operation and shall submit the schedule to the city manager for his or her approval. The approved schedule of hours shall be clearly posted at the gambling establishment so as to give law enforcement and patrons adequate notice of the hours of operation. Unless otherwise restricted, a gambling establishment may be allowed to operate twenty-four hours each day. (Ord. 1563 § 1, 1999: prior code § 6-3.31)

5.24.350 Credit and check cashing.
The giving of credit or lending of anything of value to a patron and the cashing of checks of patrons shall be permitted only if the licensee’s written check cashing and credit policies are posted at the cashier’s window. (Prior code § 6-3.32)

5.24.360 Holding valuables for safekeeping.
Licensees holding valuables for safekeeping may do so only under the following conditions:

A. Only cash may be held; no other valuable, including coins or paper money worth more than face value, may be held.

B. Money deposited shall be secured by cash or other liquid assets or a security bond. Such security shall be sufficient to cover all money deposited.

C. No person may deposit money for safekeeping without the written approval of a general partner of the licensee or his designee with the prior approval of the chief of police. Money may be deposited and withdrawn only by the person named on the account. Accurate records of all deposits and withdrawals shall be kept for a period of not less than two years. No person shall hold more than one account at any one card club.

D. The actual deposits held and the records of all transactions shall be available for inspection by the chief of police or other law enforcement officials upon demand. (Prior code § 6-3.33)

5.24.370 Cheating prohibited.
A. For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

1. “Blind cut” or “false cut” means a maneuver which appears to cut the deck but does not in fact do so.

2. “Blind shuffle” means to false shuffle, or to give the deceptive impression of intermixing playing cards, while actually retaining the same sequence of all or a group of cards.

3. “Burn” means a discard in accordance with the rules of the game, made before the draw when playing draw poker.

4. “Capping the deck” means to place cards on to the top of the deck.

5. “Cooler” means a deck of cards secretly prearranged in a known sequence or marked to be substituted for the deck in play.

6. “Daubing” means to mark cards by applying a faintly visible substance to the back of the cards.

7. “Greek deal” or “second bottom” means to deal a card which is second from the bottom of the deck.

8. “Hand mucking” means the surreptitious switching of cards from those that are dealt to a player.

9. “Holdout” means a mechanical device used for the purpose of surreptitiously switching or retaining cards.

10. “Hopping the cut” means to surreptitiously nullify the cutting of the deck.

11. “Middle dealing” means to deal a card from the center section of the deck.

12. “Punching” means to mark the back of the cards by creating a dimple or indentation thereon.

13. “Roughing fluid” means a liquid chemical applied to the back of the cards for the purpose of marking them by roughening the surface.

14. “Run up,” “stacking,” or “stocking” means to shuffle the cards in such a fashion as to surreptitiously arrange the sequence of known cards.

15. “Sanding” means to mark cards by applying an abrasive substance to the cards.

16. “Shiner” means a mirror or other reflecting device used for the purpose of enabling a player to see cards which the player is not entitled to see under the rules of the game being played.

17. “Slick sleeve” or “mohair sleeve” means a long sleeve on a clothing garment to assist in holding out a playing card.

18. “Slug” means a group of cards.

19. “Transmitter” means an electronic or radio device used for the purpose of transmitting signals or information to another player who receives such signals or information by use of a receiver.

20. “White flash” means a form of daubing whereby a chemical is used to create a “white on white” marking on the back of the cards.

B. It is unlawful for any person as a player or dealer to deal, draw, distribute or burn any playing card other than the top card of a deck. The “top card” is defined as the uppermost face-down card of the face-down deck. It is therefore unlawful to deal, or cause to be dealt, what is known as a second bottom or to engage in greek dealing or middle dealing.

C. It is unlawful for any person as a player, dealer, employee or agent to shuffle or cause to be shuffled any playing cards which are to be used or are being used in a licensed card game, other than in a random manner. It is unlawful to predetermine, or prearrange the sequence of playing cards by value or suit, or to retain or hold back a card or cards either individually, or as a group or slug, in an effort to circumvent a random mixing of the playing cards. Any blind shuffle, run up, stacking or stocking of the deck to gain an unfair advantage in play, whether or not an advantage is gained, shall be prohibited.

D. It shall be unlawful for any player or dealer to palm, hold out, or conceal any card during a card game, whether by sleight of hand, mechanical apparatus, or by clothing, such as a slick sleeve. It is also unlawful for any person, player or dealer to switch, exchange or cause to be exchanged any playing card, or cards, as a means of deception. The deceptive practices known as hand mucking, capping the deck, introducing additional cards into a game, or switching the decks with a cooler shall be prohibited.

E. It is unlawful for any person to use any technique in a card game designed to accomplish a blind or false cut, or to use a fraudulent technique to nullify a cut once performed by a player, or to influence or indicate to another person to cut the deck at a specific location.

F. It is unlawful for any person, player, or dealer to deliberately mark or alter any card or cards when there is a likelihood that such cards will be used in licensed games or when such cards are in play. It is unlawful to knowingly use any altered or marked cards in a card game. “Marking and altering,” as used in this section, includes sanding, daubing, white flash, white on white, punching, adding to, removing from or blocking out the existing design, whether on the face, back side, or edge of any card or cards.

Any deliberate crimping, warping, bending, cutting, trimming, shaving, or alteration by means which would or may cause an advantage for any player over other players, whether or not such advantage is gained, shall be unlawful.

G. The use of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or other device so as to gain any advantage, or to gain information which would enable a player or dealer to deceive others, is prohibited. Such devices shall include, but shall not be limited to, holdouts, shiners, transmitters, receivers, punches, chemical solutions, shading, roughing fluids, inks and dyes.

H. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly aid or abet another in any cheating action.

I. It is unlawful for any person to use any cheating techniques, whether or not such techniques are successful. The licensee or management shall immediately notify the police department upon the detection of any person suspected of cheating.

J. It is the responsibility of the licensee, management and their employees to fully cooperate with card game surveillance and protection personnel in the detection, apprehension and identification of those persons involved in cheating or fraudulent accounting practices. The management shall retain and deliver to the police department as evidence all playing cards and implements suspected of involvement in cheating.

K. The licensee shall cause this section to be reproduced and posted in the licensed premises. Such posting shall be in a location where it is easily readable by anyone. Such posting shall be of readable print and enclosed within a frame or as a sign either laminated or protected by glass or a plexiglass covering.

L. Notwithstanding other provisions of law, any person committing an unlawful act as set forth in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-3.34)

5.24.380 Exclusion of persons from card clubs.
A. A licensee may exclude or eject from the premises any person who has been engaged in or been convicted of bookmaking, loan sharking, the sale of controlled substances, illegal gambling activities, or whose presence in or about such card club would be inimical to the interests of legitimate gaming. No person shall be excluded or ejected on the grounds of race, color, creed or sex.

B. Any person excluded or ejected by a licensee may appeal to the city manager as to whether the conditions for exclusion or ejection set forth in subsection A of this section are applicable. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct a hearing at which time both the person excluded and the licensee may present evidence. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. The licensee and appellant shall reimburse the city for the cost of holding such hearing in amounts determined by the hearing officer. (Prior code § 6-3.35)

5.24.390 Fees and deposits.
The fees set forth in this chapter are for both regulation and revenue purposes. All fees shall be nonrefundable and shall not be prorated unless otherwise specified. In addition to the fees set forth in this section, the applicant shall reimburse the city for any reasonable and necessary expenses over and above such fees. In the case of veterans organizations having operating agreements pursuant to Section 5.24.120, either the veterans organization as licensee or assignee as sublicensee may pay such fees as are required, but the veterans organization as licensee shall be responsible for the payment thereof. Each application shall be accompanied by the following fees and deposits, and no application shall be accepted unless so accompanied:

A. Card Club Licenses. A nonrefundable application fee of five thousand dollars which shall be retained by the city for the payment of the costs of investigation and a refundable license fee of three thousand dollars which shall be the property of, and be retained by, the city in the event the license applied for is issued but which shall be returned to the applicant if such license is not issued;

B. Pointholder Applications. A fee of five hundred dollars;

C. Pointholder Transfers and Assignments. A fee of fifty dollars;

D. Employee Work Permits and Renewals. Fees in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.

E. Quarterly License Fees.

1. Amount. The council hereby determines that all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be renewed quarterly on January 1st, April 1st, July 1st and October 1st of each calendar year, and a quarterly license fee of fifteen thousand dollars shall be paid quarterly in advance.

2. New Applications. In the case of a new application, a nonrefundable license fee of thirty thousand dollars covering the first two quarterly payments shall be paid in advance to the city when the license is issued.

Such advance fee shall be payable as a condition precedent to the issuance of the license.

3. Nonrefundable. All fees referred to in this subsection shall become the absolute property of the city and shall be nonrefundable, nor shall such fees be prorated in any manner whatsoever.

4. Loss of Licenses. Failure to pay such quarterly license fees in a timely manner shall constitute a loss of license, and the license shall revert to the city. The operation of a card club without a valid license shall be a violation of law; and

F. Gross Revenue License Fees.

1. Amount. In addition to the quarterly license fees set forth in subsection E of this section, each licensee licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the city a monthly fee of twelve percent of the total monthly gross revenue of the card game business so licensed.

2. Tournaments. Should any tournament be held, six percent of the total entry fees shall be included as part of the total monthly gross revenue set forth in subsection F1 of this section.

3. Statements of Revenue. Each licensee shall file with the city a daily statement of revenue and, in addition, shall deliver on or before the tenth day of each calendar month a statement, under oath, showing the true and correct amount of gross revenue derived from the card game business permitted by the license held by such licensee for the preceding calendar month. Should the tenth day of any month fall on a weekend or city holiday, such statement shall be filed on the previous business day. All required statements shall be provided on forms approved by the director of finance. Such statements shall be accompanied by the payment of the correct amount of license fee due and owing in accordance with the provisions of subsection F1 of this section, and such sums correctly reflecting the monthly fees payable for the preceding month shall be accepted by the city, subject, however, to the right of the city to audit the matters referred to in the statement and to determine the correctness of the figures set forth in such statement and the amount payable to the city pursuant to the provisions of subsection F1 of this section. In addition to the foregoing, a certification shall be attached to the statement, or included therein, and signed by an owner, which certification or declaration shall be substantially in the following form:

I hereby declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.

Owner

4. Jackpot Games. An accounting of moneys received and expended in connection with each and every jackpot game shall be filed weekly with the chief of police. (Ord. 1601 § 34, 2000; Ord. 1507 § 1, 1996; prior code § 6-3.36)

5.24.400 Quarterly reports.
A. When renewing licenses quarterly, as set forth in subsection E of Section 5.24.390, licensees shall file with the city clerk a quarterly report on a form approved by the city attorney. Such report shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:

1. A list of all pointholders with the amount of points held; and

2. A list of all employees with their police identification numbers.

B. Licensees shall be responsible for the accuracy of such reports, and licenses shall be renewed conditionally pending the review and certification of such reports by the chief of police. (Prior code § 6-3.37)

5.24.410 Audits of records.
The books, records, and accounts relating to the gross revenues of all licensees in the city shall be audited at the end of the licensee’s fiscal year by a certified public accountant. The report of such accountant and all work papers utilized in the preparation of such audit shall be submitted to the city manager. The city manager shall review the report and work papers and may require any further information from the licensee. The city manager may submit such documents and information to a certified public accountant selected by the city.

The city may require, at any time, an audit of the gross revenues of any licensee by a certified public accountant. Such audit shall be in addition to the audit mentioned in the preceding paragraph. Any inaccuracy found in the revenues previously reported to the city shall be adjusted accordingly. If such additional audit shall disclose an inaccuracy of greater than two percent error with respect to the gross revenues reported by the licensee for the period of such audit, the cost thereof shall be paid to the city by the licensee; otherwise, the cost of such audit shall be borne by the city.

Nothing set forth in this section shall limit the city’s right at any time to inspect or audit the books, records and accounts of any licensee relating to items other than gross revenues.

Any information obtained pursuant to the provisions of this section or any statement filed by a licensee shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection, except in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the city manager to so preserve and keep such information so that the contents thereof shall not become known, except to persons charged by law with the administration of the provisions of this chapter or pursuant to the order of any court of competent jurisdiction. (Prior code § 6-3.38)

5.24.420 Unlawful acts.
A. Unlawful Locations. It is unlawful for any person to play in, or permit the playing of, any game regulated or referred to by the provisions of this chapter at any place within the city, except a place licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Unlawful Games. It is unlawful for any person to play in, or permit the playing of, any game at any place licensed pursuant to this chapter which game is not permitted by the provisions of this chapter or regulations issued pursuant thereto, or in any game played in violation of this chapter.

C. Unlawful Activities. It is a violation of this chapter for any licensee to knowingly permit any unlawful activity to take place upon the premises of the card club or to fail to take reasonable steps to prevent such activities from taking place. (Prior code § 6-3.39)

5.24.430 Games permitted.
The only games permitted under this chapter shall be the game of draw poker, the game of panguingue, or any other game permitted under state law which is also permitted by resolution of the council. Should any licensee wish to permit the playing of any game not illegal under state law, other than the games of draw poker or panguingue, he shall first file a request with the city manager which shall include a copy of the rules of play. The city manager shall confer with the city attorney and chief of police and may conditionally permit the playing of said game until the next council meeting at which time the council, by resolution, may permit the playing of the game under regulations set forth therein. No other game or games shall be played or permitted to be played in any of the establishments licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 6-3.40)

5.24.440 Games not permitted.
A. Gambling Places Prohibited. It is declared unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or maintain within the city, or knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or under his charge or control in the city, where any game not mentioned in Sections 330, 330a, and 337a of the Penal Code of the state, including, but not limited to, draw poker, lowball poker, high-low split, or panguingue, is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards, dice or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representation of value.

B. Playing or Betting Prohibited. It is declared unlawful for any person to play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in Sections 330, 330a, and 337a of the Penal Code of the state, including, but not limited to, draw poker, lowball poker, high-low split, or panguingue, which game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representation of value, at any place within the corporate limits of the city.

C. Visiting Gambling Places. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly visit any location wherein gambling as prohibited by this section is being conducted or maintained.

D. Exceptions. Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to bingo conducted in accordance with the Penal Code of the state and this code or to any game conducted pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 6-3.41)

5.24.450 Amendments.
The council reserves the right to adopt by resolution additional emergency rules and regulations which shall become effective immediately upon adoption and the violation of any such emergency rules and regulations shall constitute grounds for the imposition of penalties pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-3.42)

5.24.460 Licensees responsible.
All persons licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for all violations thereof, including all conditions, rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, including any violations committed by the agents or employees of such licensee, whether or not such licensee had knowledge of the act of the agent or employee or participated in the act. (Prior code § 6-3.43)

5.24.470 Confidentiality.
All applications, personal history statements and financial information filed by a licensee, sublicensee, pointholder or employee shall be confidential and accessible only to members of the council and their designees. (Prior code § 6-3.44)

5.24.480 Violations – Penalty.
A. Violations of this chapter, including any conditions, rules, or regulations issued pursuant thereto, shall be punishable as follows:

1. As a misdemeanor, prosecutable by the city attorney or the district attorney; and/or

2. By revocation of the license or permit as specified in this chapter; and/or

3. By suspension of the license or permit as specified in this chapter; and/or

4. By a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars for each violation, such fine to be imposed by the council after a hearing held no less than ten days after notice has been given to the alleged violator.

B. Such penalties shall be cumulative and may be imposed for each violation. Each day such violation takes place shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1744 § 8, 2013; prior code § 6-3.45)

5.24.490 Nonseverability.
The provisions of this chapter providing for the payment of license fees, and the provisions allowing the licensing of draw poker and panguingue within the city, shall not be severable one from the other. Should the requirements of this chapter relating to the payment of license fees, as set forth in this chapter or as subsequently amended, be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason by the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, then this chapter in its entirety shall thereupon become null and void, and the licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall likewise become null and void, and the playing of draw poker or panguingue within the city shall thereupon become unlawful to the same extent as such playing was unlawful prior to the adoption of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-3.46)

Chapter 5.28
CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS
Sections:

5.28.010    Definitions.

5.28.020    Soliciting – Permits required.

5.28.030    Permits – Applications.

5.28.040    Permits – Granting or denying.

5.28.050    Carrying of credentials.

5.28.060    Written receipts.

5.28.070    Solicitations by mail.

5.28.080    Telephone solicitations.

5.28.090    Denial of permit applications – Hearings.

5.28.100    Permits – Suspension and revocation.

5.28.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Bona fide member” means any person who has been on the membership rolls of any charitable or religious organization for a period of at least sixty days prior to the date of the filing of an application for a permit.

“Charitable” means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.

“City Manager” shall mean the City Manager or his designee.

“Contribution” means and includes food, clothing, money, subscriptions, property or donations given or solicited, either directly or under the guise of a loan.

“Person” means any individual, group of individuals or legal entity.

“Professional solicitor” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, solicits or holds himself out to the public as engaged in the business of soliciting contributions for, or on behalf of, any other person or any charitable or religious association, or conducts any drive or campaign for any such purpose.

“Religious” and “religion” shall not be included within the meaning of the word “charitable” as defined in this section but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.

“Solicit” and “solicitation” means the direct or indirect request for money, pledges, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value (whether by way of donation or as a consideration for services or the sale of things) upon the plea that such items will be used for a charitable or religious purpose. A solicitation shall be deemed completed when such a request has been made. (Ord. 1601, Prior code § 4-23.01)

5.28.020 Soliciting – Permits required.
No person, without first having applied for and received a permit from the city manager as provided in this chapter, shall make any appeal to the public for a charity or charitable or religious purpose either by soliciting or collecting gifts, contributions, donations or subscriptions or by promoting or conducting any sale, bazaar, or exhibition or by any other means whatsoever at any place or to any person in the city; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person if the solicitations are conducted among the members of the soliciting agency thereof. (Prior code § 4-23.02)

5.28.030 Permits – Applications.
Any person desiring to do any of the actions set forth in Section 5.28.020 shall file an application with the city manager or his delegate upon forms provided by the city. Such application shall be sworn to and filed at least fifteen days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, the city manager, for good cause shown, may permit the filing of an application less than fifteen days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. Such application shall set forth the following information:

A. The name and address of the applicant and whether the applicant is affiliated with or working for any organization other than the one for which such solicitation is intended;

B. The location of the national, state and local headquarters, if any;

C. The names and addresses of all persons directly interested in, or who in any manner shall be engaged in the work:

1. Each professional solicitor shall be required to present proof of identification to and be photographed and fingerprinted by the police department. A fee in the amount set by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the City to cover such costs.

2. The signature of each professional solicitor shall accompany the application;

D. The exact purpose for which the proceeds of the solicitation, sale, bazaar, exhibition, promotion, amusement, show, lecture, entertainment or other enterprise, or any part thereof, are to be used, including the manner in which, and the amount of, any compensation is intended to be paid to any person, firm, association, or corporation out of such proceeds;

E. The total amount which is sought to be raised;

F. The bank or place, including the branch, address, and account numbers, where all or any part of the funds raised by such activity will be placed on deposit or invested;

G. What records of funds received will be kept, and where, and where such records will be open to the public;

H. The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the preferred date for the beginning and ending of such solicitation;

I. A statement that no person under the age of sixteen years shall be used as a solicitor without constant and direct supervision by a responsible adult;

J. A statement of what times during each day the solicitation shall be conducted; and

K. Whether the uniform or identification worn or carried resembles that of any other group in the area conducting a similar type of activity. (Ord. 1601 § 36, 2000; Ord. 1511 § 3, 1996; prior code § 4-23.03)

5.28.040 Permits – Granting or denying.
Should the city manager, after an investigation of the applicant and of the representations contained in the application, be of the opinion that the applicant has not stated true facts in his application, or that if a permit should be granted to the applicant a fraud in all probability would be perpetrated upon the public, the city manager may refuse to issue a permit to such applicant. Should the city manager be satisfied that the application is truthful and that the applicant is acting in good faith, a permit shall be issued to such applicant for such period of time as the applicant may request; provided, however, no permit may grant the right to solicit longer than ninety days from its date, but the city manager may extend any permit for not more than ninety additional days upon a showing that an unnecessary hardship would be created by a failure to extend the original ninety day period for such additional days.

Such permits issued shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, the signature of the permit holder, the signature of the city manager or his authorized representative, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city. (Prior code § 4-23.04)

5.28.050 Carrying of credentials.
All persons or organizations to whom such permits have been issued, and all professional solicitors, shall furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors for such solicitations. Such credentials shall include the name of the permit holder, the date, a statement describing the holder’s charitable activity, a description of the purpose of the solicitation, the signature of the permit holder or of the holder’s chief executive officer, the name, address, age, sex, and signature of the solicitor to whom such credentials are issued, and the specific period of time during which the solicitor is authorized to solicit on behalf of the permit holder.

A copy of the credentials shall be filed with the city manager. No person shall solicit under any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter without the credentials required by this section and a facsimile copy of the permit in his possession. Such credentials and the facsimile copy of the permit shall be shown, upon request, to all persons solicited and to any employee of the city. (Prior code § 4-23.05)

5.28.060 Written receipts.
Any person receiving money or anything having a value of one dollar or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall give the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date, and the amount received. (Prior code § 4-23.06)

5.28.070 Solicitations by mail.
No permit shall be required for any solicitation through the United States mail. (Prior code § 4-23.07)

5.28.080 Telephone solicitations.
No person shall use, or cause to be used, a telephone to accomplish any of the acts set forth in this chapter, unless such person is a bona fide member of an organization in whose name a permit has been issued. (Prior code § 4-23.08)

5.28.090 Denial of permit applications – Hearings.
A. If any person is aggrieved by any ruling of the city manager upon any application filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such aggrieved person may file with the city clerk within five days a statement addressed to the council setting forth the full contents of the application filed and the action taken thereon, together with written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the city manager based his denial of the application.

B. The council, at a regular meeting held not more than twenty-one days after the date on which such appeal was filed with the city clerk, shall hear the applicant, the witnesses, and the city manager and shall determine the issue, and the ruling of the council thereon shall be final. (Prior code § 4-23.09)

5.28.100 Permits – Suspension and revocation.
A. Any permit issued may be suspended immediately by the city manager whenever it shall be shown or whenever the city manager has knowledge that any person to whom a permit has been issued under the provisions of this chapter has violated any applicable law or any of the provisions of this chapter, or that any promoter, agent or solicitor of a permit holder is not operating in accordance with the application pursuant to which such permit was issued, or if further activity of the permittee would operate to defraud the public. The city manager shall give the permit holder written notice, by registered mail directed to the address of the applicant as stated upon the application pursuant to which the permit was issued, of a hearing to be held within three days after such suspension to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. Such notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the city manager has acted in suspending the permit. At the hearing the permit holder, and any other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the city manager based the suspension of the permit and any other facts which may aid the city manager in determining whether the provisions of this chapter have been violated and whether the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented. If, after such hearing, the city manager finds that the provisions of this chapter have been violated, or the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented, he shall, within two days after the hearing, file in his office for public inspection, and serve upon the permit holder, a written statement of the facts upon which he bases such finding and shall immediately revoke the permit. If, after such hearing, the city manager finds that the provisions of this chapter have not been violated and the purpose of the solicitation has not been misrepresented, he shall, within two days after the hearing, give to the permit holder a written statement cancelling the suspension of the permit and stating that no violation or misrepresentation was found to have been committed.

B. Any professional solicitor, as defined in Section 5.28.010, who has contracted with, or intends to contract with, any charitable or religious organization for the purpose of conducting a solicitation in the city shall possess a valid business license pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.08.510 of this code.

C. Failure to comply with any part of this chapter by any professional solicitor or organization, or failure by the professional solicitor to fulfill the contract or agreement entered into by the professional solicitor and organization, shall be considered justification for the suspension of the business license pursuant to provisions of Section 5.04.240 of this code. (Prior code § 4-23.10)

Chapter 5.32
ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS
Sections:

5.32.010    Permits required.

5.32.020    Definitions.

5.32.030    Permits – Application.

5.32.040    Permits – Application – Hearings.

5.32.050    Permits – Grounds for denial or revocation.

5.32.060    Permits – Nontransferability – Posting.

5.32.070    Permits – Renewal.

5.32.080    Permits – Suspension – Appeals.

5.32.085    Appeals.

5.32.090    Reapplication.

5.32.100    Violation – Penalty.

5.32.010 Permits required.
No person shall perform, nor shall any person or entity allow to be performed, any act of entertainment at a place of entertainment without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 4-14.01)

5.32.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Entertainment” means any performance designed to amuse or divert the attention of the public. “Entertainment” includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1. Any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, karaoke, dance, dance act, song and dance act or mimical performance performed or participated in by one or more persons, whether or not such person or persons are compensated for such performance;

2. The conduct or performance of any of the acts of entertainment set forth in this subsection live, by animation, by picture, by motion picture or by other visual art or portrayal;

3. Entertainment does not include any activity for which an adult-oriented business permit would be required pursuant to Chapter 18.62 of this code.

“Notice” means written notice given by personal service upon the addressee or given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. The service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or upon the placing of the notice in the custody of the United States postal service.

“Permit” means a permit required and issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Place of entertainment” means a place open to members of the public, with or without charge, in which entertainment is offered or performed, but excluding theaters therefrom.

“Theater” means a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, the primary function of which is to present such performances, and in which the serving of food or beverages is clearly incidental to such performances. This definition is not intended to supersede the provisions of Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code of the state. (Ord. 1738 § 60, 2012; Ord. 1498 § 16, 1996; prior code § 4-14.02)

5.32.030 Permits – Application.
A. No owner or operator of any business shall allow entertainment, as defined in this chapter, to occur on the premises until an entertainment permit has been issued by the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. The application for the permit shall be filed with the community development department and accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. No background check shall be required.

B. Each applicant shall specify on the application the following:

1. The location of the proposed entertainment;

2. The name, address and telephone number of the entertainers, if known; the persons in control of the premises; the property owners; the business owners; and, if any owner is a corporation, the name of the corporation and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the corporate officers;

3. A description of the proposed entertainment;

4. A diagram of the location of the proposed entertainment; and

5. The address at which the applicant should be sent notice. (Ord. 1738 § 63 (part), 2012; Ord. 1601 § 37, 2000; prior code § 4-14.03)

5.32.040 Permits – Application – Hearings.
A. The council may either approve, deny, or conditionally approve the application for a permit at a hearing held no more than thirty days after receipt of a completed application accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall receive at least five calendar days notice of the date and time of the hearing along with any written recommendation of staff and related material. At least five days prior to the hearing, the proposed entertainment location shall be conspicuously posted with a notice of the date, time and location of such hearing.

B. If no objections are received prior to or at the time of the scheduled hearing, the city council may act on the item under the consent calendar.

C. Notice of the city council’s decision shall be given to the applicant within five working days after the decision is rendered and shall state the reasons for the decision if the permit is denied or conditionally approved. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, or in the case of a First Amendment activity, in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 1601 § 38, 2000; prior code § 4-14.04)

5.32.050 Permits – Grounds for denial or revocation.
The City Council may deny an original application, deny a renewal application, or uphold a revocation on appeal upon any of the following grounds:

A. That the business for which the entertainment permit is issued is being operated contrary to state laws, city laws or the conditions of the entertainment permit;

B. That the entertainment is contrary to zoning or off-street parking regulations;

C. That there are false statements in the application knowingly made;

D. That the entertainment is visible from a street or other public place, thereby causing traffic congestion or viewed by pedestrians interfering with the use of the sidewalks;

E. That there is inadequate lighting (less than three footcandles) on the entertainment site;

F. Repealed;

G. Where patron dancing is permitted, that the number of persons permitted to occupy a dance floor does not comply with the requirements set forth in the California Building Code, as adopted by Chapter 15.04 of this code, and, pursuant to the determination of the number of occupants for both dining and dancing by the building official and the fire marshal, the occupant of such structure has not posted a sign, in letters not less than three inches in height, in a conspicuous place in the structure or establishment stating the number of persons which may be permitted for dancing and the number of persons which may be permitted for dining within such structure;

H. Repealed;

I. That the advertising is misleading and may perpetuate a fraud upon the public;

J. That there has been illegal activity upon the premises, and the applicant or permittee has been negligent in allowing such activity;

K. Repealed;

L. That the applicant or permittee has allowed intoxicated persons on the premises;

M. That the applicant or permittee has allowed loud, raucous, or unnecessary noise, disturbed the peace, or interfered with the neighbors’ peaceful enjoyment of their property; or

N. That the applicant or permittee has allowed entertainment to take place in a place of business between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. (Ord. 1601 §§ 39 and 40, 2000; Ord. 1592 § 1, 2000; prior code § 4-14.05)

5.32.060 Permits – Nontransferability – Posting.
Permits shall be nontransferable and shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the location where the entertainment is to take place. (Prior code § 4-14.06)

5.32.070 Permits – Renewal.
Entertainment permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Applications for renewal shall be filed with the community development department no later than two months prior to the expiration date and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The application shall be approved by the community development director if there are no proposed changes in operations and no objections or changes in conditions are submitted by the affected departments. If there are proposed changes in operations or objections or changes are submitted, the renewal permit shall be submitted to the city council. Additionally, city councilmembers shall be notified of the renewal applications and any councilmember may request that the matter be acted upon by the city council. Applications for renewal may be denied upon any of the grounds set forth in Section 5.32.050. (Ord. 1738 § 63 (part), 2012; Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 41, 2000; prior code § 4-14.07)

5.32.080 Permits – Suspension – Appeals.
A. The community development director may revoke an entertainment permit if s/he finds that any of the grounds set forth in Section 5.32.050 exist or that the entertainment constitutes a public nuisance.

B. Notice. The community development director shall give notice to the permittee of the violation(s) involved and set forth a period of time for the correction of the violation(s) if correction is possible. If the director finds that the violation(s) continue without correction, or if correction is not possible, then the director shall issue a notice of revocation which shall contain a statement of the violation(s). The director shall serve the notice of revocation on the permittee, as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and conclusive in the absence of a timely appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in section 5.32.085. If the permit is being revoked due to an immediate danger to the public health and safety, the notice shall set forth the danger and provide that an appeal will not stay the revocation. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 42, 2000; prior code § 4-14.08)

5.32.085 Appeals.
A. Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, within ten consecutive calendar days from the date of the notice, file a written appeal with the city clerk who shall set the matter for hearing before the city council.

B. The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as all relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent.

C. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, city staff and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as they may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D. Based upon the submission of such evidence, the review of the city’s files and inspection of the business, if appropriate, the city council shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying, or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken and if appropriate, specifying the time period in which corrective actions must be taken. The notice shall be given within five working days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6 or in the case of a First Amendment activity, in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8.

E. A timely appeal shall stay the order from which the appeal is being taken, unless the notice provides that a permit has been revoked, or other order made, due to an immediate danger to the public health and safety.

F. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 43, 2000)

5.32.090 Reapplication.
No person shall apply for a permit which has been denied or revoked for a minimum of one year from the date that the denial or revocation is final. (Ord. 1601 § 44, 2000; prior code § 4-14.09)

5.32.100 Violation – Penalty.
Any violation of any of the requirements of this chapter, or of any of the grounds set forth in Section 5.32.050, or of any condition imposed by the council in approving an application or the renewal thereof shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this code. (Prior code § 4-14.10)

Chapter 5.36
FILM PRODUCTION
Sections:

5.36.010    Purpose.

5.36.020    Definitions.

5.36.030    Permit required.

5.36.040    Permit fees.

5.36.050    Permit requirements and issuance.

5.36.060    Exemptions.

5.36.070    Suspension or revocation of permit.

5.36.080    Appeal.

5.36.010 Purpose.
The City Council declares that film production is an important economic activity, which benefits the community. Nevertheless, such activity requires regulation to ensure that impacts on property, vehicle and pedestrian traffic, circulation, the safety of bystanders and crew are protected and that the least possible amount of disruption to the community occurs. (Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003)

5.36.020 Definitions.
For purposes of his chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. “Charitable Films” shall mean motion pictures, television, still photography, or videotapes, produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization.

B. “Film Production” shall mean and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting motion pictures, television shows or programs, still photography, and commercials.

C. “News Media” shall mean the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen.

D. “Student Filming” shall mean the photographing, filming or videotaping for educational purposes with a letter from the school verifying the student status.

E. “Studio” shall mean a fixed place of business where film production is regularly conducted upon the premises. (Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003; prior code § 6-1.402)

5.36.030 Permit required.
All film production in the city shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter and the policies adopted and administered by the community development director or their designee necessary to implement this chapter. No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence within the city of Gardena for film production without first applying for and receiving a film production permit from the city, unless exempted as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003; prior code § 6-1.403)

5.36.040 Permit fees.
Issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the payment by the applicant of any fee(s) established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003)

5.36.050 Permit requirements and issuance.
A. The applicant for a film production permit shall complete and file a permit application, in a form provided by the City, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Evidence of Workers’ Compensation Insurance coverage demonstrating conformance with all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under the permit, including any off-duty City employee e.g., off-duty police officer, who is directly employed by the film production.

2. The applicant has submitted a policy of general liability insurance of not be less than $1,000,000.00 single limit which insures the city, its officers and employees against any liability, or claims of liability, brought or made by or on behalf of any person for personal injury or property damage caused by or arising out of any negligent act or omission of either the applicant, its agents or employees, including any officers or employees of the city, or caused by or arising out of the condition of any city-owned or controlled property, whether real or personal, and occurring during the period and as a result of the activities for which the permit is to be issued; and for all vehicles operated by applicant under the permit, Business Auto Coverage under standard ISO form including symbol 1 (All Auto) auto coverage with limits of no less than $1,000,000.00 and scheduled under any umbrella policy. However, the community development director or designee shall have the authority to require higher limits if, in his or her opinion and discretion, the type of activity thus permitted is of such a nature as to warrant greater risk protection. It shall be permissible in satisfaction of the requirement imposed by this subsection that the applicant cause the issuance of a certificate of insurance, for at least the required amount of coverage, which indicates that, by endorsement thereto, City of Gardena, its officers, employees and agents have been added as additional insureds.

3. Applicant has executed an agreement to defend and to hold the City, its officers and employees harmless, from any and all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the issuance of a film production permit by the City.

4. Designation of City facilities or public streets applicant requests to use in the activity for which the film production permit is to be obtained. Use of such City facilities or public streets is subject to a permit fee as provided in chapter 11.08 of this Code or by resolution of the City Council.

5. Designation by applicant of any on-duty City personnel necessary and requested to assist the film production. Applicant shall deposit with the City the reasonable estimated costs for on-duty City personnel to assist in the film production, which costs shall account for the hourly rates for such employees as indicated in the salary schedule maintained by the City, employee benefits, and the City’s administrative costs in providing such personnel. Applicant shall be responsible for and pay the cost of all City personnel, whether on-duty or off-duty, used for film production during the period of this permit.

6. Payment of all permit and business license fees required by this title.

7. Proof of Filming Permit from Los Angeles County Fire Department.

8. The following information:

a. The name of the property owner, address and telephone number of the location at which the film production is to be conducted;

b. The specific location of film production within such address or place;

c. The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;

d. A detailed statement of the nature of the proposed film production;

e. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such film production;

f. The exact number of personnel to be involved in such activity;

g. Description of any animals or pyrotechnics to be used in the activity; and

h. The exact amount and type of vehicles and equipment to be involved in the activity.

B. No permit shall be issued unless the community development director or their designee makes the following findings:

1. The film production will not unduly interfere with vehicular traffic, pedestrian movement or with the rights of nearby residents to the quiet enjoyment of their property, and will not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare.

2. The film production will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring significant costs or expenditures, in either money or personnel, not reimbursed by the applicant.

3. The applicant will take all proper safety precautions such that the film production will not constitute a fire hazard.

4. The film production will not require the diversion of such a large number of police officers to adequately police the activity so as to interfere with the normal level of police protection for all other areas of the City.

5. The applicant has submitted a complete application and the information contained therein is not found to be false in any material detail.

6. The film production will not violate federal, state or local law, including license and permit requirements.

C. In order to make the findings required in paragraph B of this section, reasonable conditions may be imposed on the time, place and manner of film production in the City as the City deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare of the community. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Requirements for the presence of Gardena Police Department or public works department employees, when required for the particular film production, at the applicant’s expense;

2. Posting of no parking signs and placement of other traffic control devices at the applicant’s expense;

3. Restrictions on the use of gunfire, pyrotechnics, and other noise-creating or hazardous devices;

4. Restrictions on days and hours of film production;

5. Notice of the film production to affected property owners. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003)

5.36.060 Exemptions.
A. The following film production is exempt from this chapter:

1. News media activities.

2. Film production conducted at a licensed studio.

3. Photographing, filming or videotaping conducted solely for private, non-commercial use, provided such activity will not unduly interfere with vehicular traffic, pedestrian movement or with the rights of nearby residents to the quiet enjoyment of their property, and will not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare.

B. The following film production is exempt only from the permit fee requirements and shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter:

1. Charitable films.

2. Student Filming. (Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003)

5.36.070 Suspension or revocation of permit.
The community development director or his/her designee shall have the authority, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, to suspend or revoke any permit issued hereunder where the terms and conditions of said permit have been violated or ignored or where the public safety or welfare is endangered by the permitted activity. Provided however, that whenever there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from activities conducted by the permittee to the extent that immediate action is necessary to protect the public, the community development director or their designee shall have the authority to immediately suspend a permit pending a hearing. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003)

5.36.080 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the community development director or their designee to grant, deny, suspend or revoke a permit hereunder shall have the right to appeal that decision subject to the notice, hearing and appeal procedures set forth in chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1644 § 3, 2003)

Chapter 5.40
FORTUNETELLING
Sections:

5.40.010    Definitions.

5.40.020    Permits – Required.

5.40.070    Permits – Issuance.

5.40.090    Exceptions – Entertainment.

5.40.100    Exceptions – Religious practices.

5.40.120    Violation – Penalty.

5.40.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“For pay” means for a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.

“Fortunetelling” means the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirit, tea leaves or other such readings, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy or other craft, art, science, card, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, oriental mystery or magic of any kind or nature.

“License collector” means the officer created by Section 5.04.020. (Prior code § 6-1.601)

5.40.020 Permits – Required.
No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice fortunetelling or cause the same to be done without first having obtained a permit from the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be required. Additionally, the applicant must post and maintain in full force and effect a bond as required by this Chapter. (Ord. 1601 § 45, 2000; prior code § 6-1.602)

5.40.070 Permits – Issuance.
If the council approves the permit, the license collector shall thereafter issue a permit and business license when:

A. A business license and permit fee in an amount established by City Council resolution, and

B. The applicant has posted with the city clerk a surety bond in the principal amount of ten thousand dollars executed by a good and sufficient surety business in the state as surety and by the applicant as principal. The form of such bond shall be approved by the city attorney and shall have been given to ensure good faith and fair dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, theft or other unfair dealings suffered by any patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit. (Prior code § 6-1.608)

5.40.090 Exceptions – Entertainment.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mindreading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers. (Prior code § 6-1.610)

5.40.100 Exceptions – Religious practices.
No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, clairvoyant (collectively referred to in this section as minister) from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles which is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided that:

A. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section.

B. The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, shall file with the city manager a certified copy of the minister’s name, age, street address and telephone number in the city where the activity set forth in this chapter is to be conducted.

C. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a percentage basis pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association. (Prior code § 6-1.611)

5.40.120 Violation – Penalty.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.

B. Each day such violation occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 1744 § 9, 2013; prior code § 6-1.603)

Chapter 5.44
HOTELS AND MOTELS
Sections:

5.44.010    Definitions.

5.44.020    Daily rates.

5.44.030    Reduced rates.

5.44.040    Posting of rates.

5.44.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Daily rate” means the rate charged for occupying a room beginning with the establishment’s check-in time and ending twenty-four hours after such time.

“Day” means the period beginning with the establishment’s check-in time and ending twenty-four hours after such time.

“Hotel” means any building containing six or more guest rooms or suites of guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied, on a temporary basis by guests.

“Motel” means a building or group of buildings containing guest or sleeping rooms used primarily for overnight or temporary accommodations of automobile travelers or tourists. Individual units shall have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building or from an inner court. (Prior code § 4-25.01)

5.44.020 Daily rates.
It is unlawful for any hotel or motel to charge less than the daily rate for the letting of any room or rooms, regardless of the time such room or rooms are actually occupied. (Prior code § 4-25.02)

5.44.030 Reduced rates.
It is unlawful for any hotel or motel to offer reduced rates or refunds on the basis that a room or rooms are occupied for less than a full day. (Prior code § 4-25.03)

5.44.040 Posting of rates.
Daily rates shall be conspicuously posted in each room or suite of rooms available for hire. (Prior code § 4-25.04)

Chapter 5.48
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

5.48.010    Findings and purpose.

5.48.020    Definitions.

5.48.030    Exceptions.

5.48.040    Business license/other permits required.

5.48.045    Floor plans required.

Article II. Massage Therapists and Practitioners

5.48.050    CAMTC certificate required.

Article III. Certificates of Operation, Operator and Work Permits

5.48.055    Certificate of operation and permit requirement.

5.48.060    Application – General provisions.

5.48.070    Certificate of operation.

5.48.080    Operator and work permits.

5.48.090    Changed information.

5.48.100    Suspension and revocation of permits and certificates.

5.48.110    Appeals to city manager.

5.48.120    Repealed by Ord. 1758.

5.48.130    Notices.

Article IV. Operation and Facility Requirements

5.48.140    Operational requirements.

5.48.150    Building and facility requirements.

5.48.160    Inspections.

5.48.170    Violation – Nuisance/remedy.

Article V. Previous Massage Technician Provisions

5.48.180    –

5.48.200    Repealed by Ord. 1758.

Article I. General Provisions

5.48.010 Findings and purpose.
The city council finds and declares as follows:

A. The requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, while recognizing massage as a legitimate business interest that provides benefits to its patrons in a therapeutic setting.

B. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the State Constitution, Sections 37100 and 51030 et seq. of the Government Code, Sections 460, 4600 through 4620 and Section 16000 of the Business and Professions Code, and Section 13 of the Chiropractic Act (initiative measure approved by the electors November 7, 1922, as amended) and AB 1147 (2014).

C. There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or educated massage technicians, and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.

D. There is opportunity for acts of prostitution, lewdness, and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments, as well as problems relating to human trafficking in massage establishments. Courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that massage establishments are often brothels in disguise. The establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public health.

E. The provisions of this chapter are intended to enhance the efficient processing of permits for massage establishments, operators, and employees, and the ongoing regulation of those permittees and certificate holders by the city of Gardena. The provisions of this chapter in no way limit the authority of the police department to inspect massage establishments or conduct investigations to ensure permittees are complying with applicable rules and regulations.

F. The California Massage Therapy Council (“CAMTC”) can better, and more efficiently, regulate massage technicians in order to best protect the public and it is in the public interest to require that all persons providing massage in the city have a certificate from CAMTC.

G. The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to be in addition to the requirement of a valid business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.04.

H. The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to discourage massage establishments that are fronts for houses of prostitution, to protect the public from improperly trained massage technicians, and to protect against human trafficking, and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved within the confines allowed by state law.

I. The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to stop the practice of businesses quickly changing ownership upon the discovery of criminal activity by the city.

J. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal service businesses. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

“California Massage Therapy Council” or “CAMTC” means the nonprofit organization created to regulate and issue massage practitioner and therapist certificates pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

“CAMTC certificate” means a massage therapist certificate or massage practitioner certificate issued by CAMTC.

“Certificate of operation” means the certificate issued by the chief of police entitling a business to operate as a massage establishment.

“Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of Gardena, or his/her designee.

“City” means the city of Gardena.

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of Gardena, or his/her designee.

“Compensation” means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value.

“Conviction” or “convicted” means a guilty plea or verdict, or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere, where the time for appeal has elapsed or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code allowing the applicant to withdraw his or her plea of guilty and to enter a plea of not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information.

“Employee” means any person who renders any service, with or without compensation, to a massage establishment relating to the day-to-day operation of the massage establishment, including a person who provides such services as an independent contractor.

“Main entry door” means a door from the outside of the establishment leading into the reception area.

“Manager” means the person(s) designated by the owner of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the owner in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding liabilities and responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has the power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must have a valid operator permit.

“Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose. “Massage” includes, but is not limited to, treatment by means of manual pressure, acupressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or any other manner of touching, with or without the aid of or by means of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, or with rubbing alcohol, liniments, aromatics, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. Massage specifically includes the application of any of these methods to the scalp, neck, or feet of any individual.

“Massage establishment” means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definition of “massage” in this section.

“Massage practitioner” means a person who is certified by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.

“Massage technician” means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certified by CAMTC.

“Massage therapist” means a person who is certified by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.

“Massage Therapy Act” means Chapter 406 of the 2013-2014 Legislative Session, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Operator” means all persons who own or manage a massage establishment.

“Operator permit” means the permit issued by the chief of police allowing a person to own or manage a massage establishment.

“Owner” means all of the following:

A. The sole proprietor of a massage establishment, i.e., where the owner is the only person employed by that establishment to provide massage services;

B. In the case of a general business, each owner of the business;

C. In the case of a corporation, each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the corporation and each officer and director of the corporation;

D. In the case of a partnership or limited liability corporation, each partner, excluding limited partners and owners, and where a partner or owner is a corporation, the provisions on owners pertaining to a corporate applicant in subsection C of this definition apply.

“Patron” means a person receiving the services of a massage establishment, a parent or guardian accompanying a minor receiving the services of a massage establishment, or a person helping an elderly or infirm person receiving the services of a massage establishment.

“Permit” includes an operator permit, work permit, or certificate of operation, unless the context indicates otherwise.

“Permittee” means any person who has obtained a certificate of operation, operator permit, or work permit from the city of Gardena.

“Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” means a person who:

A. Within ten years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

1. A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290; or

2. Conduct in violation of Penal Code Section 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22, or 653.23, or subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647; or

3. An attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses; or

4. Any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit; or

5. When the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of Penal Code Section 415 or 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes; or

6. Any crime committed while engaged in the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage; or

7. A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058; or

8. Any offense under a statute of any state or ordinance of any city or county, which is the equivalent of any of the aforementioned offenses, including Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a); or

B. Within ten years preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has had any massage establishment, operator, technician, practitioner, therapist or trainee certificate, license or permit issued by any state, local agency or other licensing authority denied, revoked or suspended, or has had to surrender such a license or permit as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said license or permit being suspended or revoked; or

C. Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the Penal Code as the same may be amended from time to time, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California; or

D. Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

1. Any crime, other than an infraction or those listed above, involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit himself or another, or substantially injure another; or

2. Any crime, other than an infraction or crimes relating to those offenses listed above, where the crime or act is substantially related to the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage, including a violation of the Massage Therapy Act; or

E. Has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with the same or similar type of business; or

F. Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has engaged in the exposing of specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person to view, or in touching the specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person, while providing massage services or while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment; or

G. Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been the owner, manager, or other similar position in an establishment where there is substantial evidence that disqualifying conduct described above has occurred by others on the premises, regardless of whether there was a conviction of such persons;

H. Disqualifying conduct does not include the failure to obtain a certificate of operation, operator permit or work permit without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such was required; provided, that the business and/or person cease operations immediately upon notification.

“Proof of bona fide employment” means proof of an employer-employee relationship between the operator of the massage establishment and any person working at the massage establishment. Satisfactory proof of bona fide employment must be shown by written payroll documentation evidencing the employer’s compliance with California Employment Development Department (EDD) requirements for the withholding of California income tax, unemployment insurance contributions and disability contributions from the employee and written payroll documentation of the employer’s compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements for the withholding of federal income taxes, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare contributions from the employee. Such written documentation can include, but is not limited to, W-2 wage and tax statements.

“Reception area” means an area immediately inside the main entry door of the massage establishment dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons and visitors of the massage establishment and which is not a massage room or otherwise used for the provision of massage services.

“Residence address” means the actual physical home address and shall not include a P.O. box, mailbox service, or other similar location.

“Sole provider” means a massage business where the owner owns one hundred percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active CAMTC certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors.

“Specified anatomical areas” means any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, without a health care referral and written consent of the patron.

“Visitor” means a nonemployee who has entered the massage establishment, for purposes other than receiving massage services.

“Work permit” means the permit issued by the chief of police allowing a person to work in a massage establishment in a capacity other than as an operator or massage technician. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.030 Exceptions.
A. The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to:

1. Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, or physical therapist licensed to practice such profession in the state of California within the scope of their license;

2. Any registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse, licensed to practice under the laws of the state of California, who is an employee of and working under the on-site direction of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, duly licensed to practice their respective professions in this state.

a. Any other person employed by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist shall be required to have a valid CAMTC certificate to administer a massage as well as work under the adequate supervision of such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist as required by state law or regulation. If no specific law or regulation applies, adequate supervision shall have the same meaning as set forth in 16 California Code of Regulations Section 312.

b. If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to provide massage therapy services to his or her clients by an individual(s) other than himself or herself, said individual(s) must have a valid CAMTC certificate and the office of the acupuncturist shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter as well as any other applicable provisions of the Gardena Municipal Code.

3. Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code when engaging in such practice within the scope of such license.

4. State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California, and the employees of such facilities while working on the premises of such state-licensed facilities.

5. Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.

6. Barbers, beauticians, or manicurists who are duly licensed by the state of California pursuant to the Barbering and Cosmetology Act set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 7300 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, while engaging in practices within the scope of such license, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or, in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves, and/or feet.

7. Schools of cosmetology or barbering which comply with the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7362 et seq. when instructors are acting within the scope of their employment or when students are working as unpaid externs pursuant to the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7395.1.

8. Any other business or professions exempt by state law.

B. The following businesses shall be partially exempt from this chapter and shall only have to follow the specific listed requirements:

1. Businesses that offer ancillary massage services shall only be subject to the requirements set forth below. Ancillary massage services shall be those services performed at a business where fifteen percent or less of the overall business operations are related to provision of massage services as measured by the percentage of gross sales or floor area devoted to provision of massage, whichever is greater, as documented in a floor plan provided to the police department. Businesses to which this exemption may apply include, but are not limited to, health clubs, spas and beauty salons. Any such business that exceeds the fifteen percent limitation shall be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other provisions of law.

a. Massage services must be performed by the holder of a valid CAMTC certificate.

b. Massages may only be performed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m.

c. The business shall comply with the following provisions of this chapter:

i. Section 5.48.140(C) relating to instruments, equipment and personnel;

ii. Section 5.48.140(D)(1) through (3) relating to personnel lists;

iii. Section 5.48.140(E) relating to prohibited conduct;

iv. Section 5.48.150(A) through (F) relating to building and facility requirements; and

v. Section 5.48.160 relating to inspections.

2. Any persons providing massages that (a) do not involve disrobing and (b) are not administered in a room separate and apart from the primary business activity at the business location, as documented in a detailed floor plan, subject to the requirements set forth below:

a. Massage services must be performed by the holder of a valid CAMTC certificate.

b. Massages may only be performed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m.

C. Any person claiming exemption under this section shall furnish satisfactory evidence upon request that he or she is entitled to such exemption, including proof of bona fide employment, or if applicable, a citation to the particular provision of state law upon which that person relies. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.040 Business license/other permits required.
A. Nothing herein relieves an individual or business from obtaining a city business license, conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 18.46, or other permit if otherwise required by law.

B. Any individual applying for a business license as a massage practitioner or a massage therapist shall provide proof of a current CAMTC certificate before being issued a business license. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.045 Floor plans required.
A. All massage establishments shall be required to submit a scaled floor plan as part of their application for a certificate of operation.

B. All businesses that claim a partial exemption from this chapter pursuant to Section 5.48.030(B) shall be required to submit a detailed and scaled floor plan in order to verify the applicability of the exemption.

C. No changes may be made to the approved floor plan without written approval from the community development department, which may require modification of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015)

Article II. Massage Therapists and Practitioners

5.48.050 CAMTC certificate required.
A. No person shall provide massage services from any location in the city without having been issued a CAMTC certificate, regardless of whether such person has an operator or work permit or the business has a certificate of operation.

B. No operator of a massage establishment shall hire as an employee or utilize as an independent contractor to provide massage services unless such person has been issued a CAMTC certificate.

C. Any person with a CAMTC certificate who desires to operate a massage establishment or work in a massage establishment in a capacity other than as a massage therapist or massage practitioner must file a permit application in accordance with Article III of this chapter for an operator permit or a work permit. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

Article III. Certificates of Operation, Operator and Work Permits

5.48.055 Certificate of operation and permit requirement.
A. No person shall own or manage any massage establishment in any location within the city without first having obtained an operator permit.

B. No massage establishment shall be allowed to operate within the city unless the business first obtains a certificate of operation. No certificate of operation shall be approved until each operator identified in the application has obtained an operator permit.

C. Work Permit. No person shall work as an employee in a massage establishment in a capacity other than operator, massage therapist or massage practitioner, without first having obtained a work permit and no operator of a massage establishment shall allow any such person to work without a valid work permit.

D. The provisions of Sections 5.48.045, 5.48.140, 5.48.150, 5.48.160 and 5.48.170 shall apply to any business that operates as a massage establishment, even if such business fails to obtain operator permits or a certificate of operation. The chief of police may immediately order a massage establishment that fails to have a certificate of operation or a permitted operator to cease operation. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015)

5.48.060 Application – General provisions.
A. Any person desiring to obtain a certificate of operation, operator permit and/or a work permit shall make application in accordance with the provisions of this article. A nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall accompany the submission of each application, to defray, in part, the costs of investigation and report.

B. All applications shall be dated and shall contain the following statements:

1. A certification under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct; and

2. An authorization for the city, its officers, agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and to ensure continual compliance with all applicable provisions of law.

C. Upon receipt of a completed application, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be conducted by the appropriate departments within the city, including state and local background checks to be conducted for operator and work permits, as specified herein.

D. Within thirty working days following receipt of a completed application, the chief of police shall either issue the certificate of operation or permit or mail a written statement of his/her reasons for denial thereof. Notwithstanding the above, failure of the city to act upon a completed application within the time frame set forth above shall not be deemed approval of the application pursuant to this chapter. Any certificate of operation or permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed conditional pending the city’s receipt of the California Department of Justice report on the applicant’s fingerprints. If the fingerprint report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter.

E. If the chief of police denies an application, a renewal for an application or suspends or revokes a permit, all massage activity at the massage establishment (in the case of a certificate of operation or an operator permit where there are no other valid operator permits) or all activities by an employee (in the case of work permit) must cease following issuance of such denial and no activity for which the certificate of operation or permit is required shall be conducted while any appeal of the denial may be pending.

F. The chief of police may condition applications or renewals to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.070 Certificate of operation.
A. Applications for a certificate of operation shall include the information set forth below:

1. The full name of the applicant;

2. The name under which the business is to be conducted, which name must match the name of the business under which the corresponding business tax certificate is issued under Chapter 5.04. No massage establishment shall operate under any business name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the certificate of operation. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as shown on the articles of incorporation;

3. The address of the proposed massage establishment;

4. A legal size copy of the floor plan approved as part of the conditional use permit, drawn to scale showing: entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including but not limited to closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and location of massage tables and chairs;

5. A description of any other business operated on the same premises;

6. A detailed description of the operation and type of services to be provided by the massage establishment, including other therapies to be provided, proposed days and hours of operation and number of massage therapists and practitioners and employees who will provide services at the establishment;

7. The name of each operator of the massage establishment; and

8. The name and business addresses and phone number of the owner of the premises, if other than the applicant, on which the massage establishment is to be located. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property.

B. The chief of police shall issue a certificate of operation, unless, after investigation, he or she makes any of the following findings:

1. The massage establishment would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to building, fire, zoning, health and safety regulations, and cannot be conditioned to so comply; or

2. Any operator of the massage establishment has failed to obtain an operator permit.

C. A sale or transfer of any reportable interest in a massage establishment, which interest would be required to be reported under subsection (A)(7) of this section in the first instance, shall be reported to the chief of police within ten calendar days of such sale or transfer. The new operator shall apply for and obtain an operator’s permit within sixty days of the date of reporting or the certificate of operation shall be null and void and subject to revocation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

D. A certificate of operation is not transferable to a new business at the same location, to a separate location of the same business, or the same business under different ownership at the same location.

E. Every massage establishment for which a certificate of operation has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall display the certificate in a conspicuous place so it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.

F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, where a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, or a notice of suspension or revocation, has been issued regarding a massage establishment, or the business has otherwise been required to close because of suspension or revocation proceedings against the operator, the chief of police shall not process or issue a new application for a certificate of operation for said location unless or until the suspension or revocation proceedings are dismissed or a final determination is made that the current certificate of operation should not be suspended or revoked, or a three-year period has passed since the occurrence of the activity which gave rise to the suspension or revocation or other criminal actions. This provision is not meant to prohibit the issuance of a certificate of operation to a business which initially failed to obtain a certificate of operation without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such was required; provided, that the massage establishment cease operations immediately upon notification by the city.

G. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, when a massage establishment has been closed due to criminal activity and such decision is final, no new massage establishment may open in such location and no certificate of operation shall be issued for such location for a period of three years from the date of such final determination. For purposes of this section, closure due to criminal activity includes voluntary closure of the business after there have been arrests at the location or other notices relating to criminal activity or notices relating to suspension or revocation proceedings. This provision is not meant to prohibit the issuance of a certificate of operation to a business which initially failed to obtain a certificate of operation without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such was required.

H. Where the applicant for the certificate of operation is not the record owner, as shown on the latest county assessment roll, then upon issuance of the certificate, the city shall send written notice to the property owner advising of the issuance of the certificate and the regulations applicable to the massage establishment and the property pursuant to this chapter; this may be accomplished by including a copy of this chapter with the notice. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.080 Operator and work permits.
A. Application – Contents. Applicants for operator and work permits shall submit the following information:

1. The full true name of the applicant;

2. A complete statement listing and explaining any and all aliases and fictitious names used by the applicant within the ten years immediately preceding the application;

3. The current residence and business address and telephone numbers of the applicant;

4. A list of all previous residential and business addresses for a minimum of ten years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address;

5. The applicant’s place of birth, and original documentation to verify both the applicant’s identity and employment authorization (if applicable), as listed under 8 USC 1324a(b)(1) and 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(1). Documentation to satisfy this requirement may include, but is not limited to, a California driver license, California identification card, Social Security card, resident alien (“green”) card, United States passport (unexpired or expired), unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp, or an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States Government in compliance with 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(1)(v)(A);

6. The history of the applicant as to any similar business or occupation within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, the names and addresses of any other massage establishments or similar businesses the applicant has owned, managed, provided massage technician or any other services at, or worked at, whether the applicant has had a permit or license to operate, manage, provide massage technician or any other services at, or work at a massage establishment denied, revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction; the reasons for any such denial, revocation or suspension; and the business, activity or occupation the applicant engaged in subsequent to such denial, revocation or suspension;

7. All criminal convictions within the last ten years, excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor;

8. A complete set of the applicant’s fingerprints taken by the Gardena police department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fee;

9. The name and address of the establishment where the applicant will be working and, if the applicant is claiming to be an employee of the establishment, proof of bona fide employment by the massage establishment; and

10. Such other reasonable identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matter specified as required to be set forth in the application.

B. All applicants for operator and work permits shall have their pictures taken by the Gardena police department.

C. The chief of police shall issue such permit as requested, unless after investigation he or she makes any of the following findings:

1. The applicant has failed to provide information, documentation and assurances required by this chapter or by the chief of police; has failed to reveal any fact material to qualification; or has supplied information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria; or

2. The applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or

3. There is substantial evidence that the applicant has engaged in disqualifying conduct, even if there is no conviction for such conduct; or

4. The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments. This provision is not meant to prohibit the issuance of an operator permit to a person who initially failed to obtain an operator permit or certificate of operation without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such permit or certificate of operation was needed; provided, that the massage establishment and/or person cease operations upon notification; or

5. The criminal history background check report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct; or

6. The applicant is not at least eighteen years of age; or

7. The applicant is delinquent in paying city fees or penalties owed in relation to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

D. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall remain in effect, unless revoked, for a period of three years. Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed on a form supplied by the city with the chief of police. Temporary permits shall not be issued and expired permits are not valid, unless the permittee has a written receipt showing that the renewal application was filed at least thirty days prior to expiration, without action having been taken by the chief of police. Any permittee allowing his or her permit to lapse shall be required to submit a new application and pay the corresponding original application fees. Applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in his/her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed, including all information required by subsection A of this section. Failure to provide this documentation shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the permit.

E. Automatic Issuance for CAMTC Certificate Holders.

1. Any person who holds a valid CAMTC certificate as a massage therapist or a massage practitioner shall only be required to provide the following information on a form that includes the statements set forth in Section 5.48.060(B), along with a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council:

a. The full true name of the applicant;

b. The current residence and business address and telephone numbers of the applicant; and

c. The name and address of the massage establishment for which the operator or work permit is sought.

2. A copy of the applicant’s CAMTC certificate and CAMTC identification card shall be provided with the application.

3. The applicant shall be required to have his picture taken as specified above.

4. The operator or work permit shall automatically issue upon verification of the CAMTC certificate by the police department. No background check shall be required.

5. Renewals shall be required, but such renewals shall be automatic and no fees shall be required as long as the applicant maintains a valid CAMTC certificate.

F. Every person to whom a permit has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall be issued an identification badge by the Gardena police department which shall contain the person’s name, photograph, expiration date and any other information deemed necessary by the chief of police. The badge shall be worn so as to be readily visible at all times while on the premises of the massage establishment.

G. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be assigned or transferred.

H. Operator Provisions.

1. Each operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors working on the premises of the business. Failure of the employees or independent contractors to comply with this chapter may result in the revocation of the operator’s permit.

2. The operator of the massage establishment is responsible for verifying that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC certificate or work permit as required by this chapter.

3. Any requirement of this chapter applying to an operator shall apply to each and every operator of a massage establishment. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.090 Changed information.
It is the duty of each operator and permittee to notify the chief of police whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in the application. Such notification shall be in writing and made within ten business days of the change. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.100 Suspension and revocation of permits and certificates.
A. Action of Chief of Police. Subject to the procedures set forth in this section, the chief of police may suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter whenever the chief of police determines that any of the following has occurred:

1. The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code;

2. The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance;

3. The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants;

4. There is substantial evidence of prostitution;

5. The permittee, or any employee or independent contractor working on the premises, has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or

6. The chief of police makes any of the findings that would have justified denying the application in the first instance.

B. If, in the discretion of the chief of police, an alleged violation is minor and capable of correction, then prior to suspension or revocation a written notice shall be given to the permittee of the alleged violation(s) involved to allow a period of time to correct the alleged violation(s), which period shall not exceed five business days, at the end of which period an inspection shall be conducted to determine whether the alleged violation(s) has been corrected. For purposes of this section, written notice may be in the form of a notice of violation or an administrative citation.

C. If the chief of police determines that an alleged violation is not minor or capable of correction, that an alleged violation(s) continues without correction, or that there have been previous violations of this chapter, even if for different reasons, then the chief of police may issue a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, along with an administrative or criminal citation. Examples of a violation which will be determined to be not capable of correction include but are not limited to substantial evidence of prostitution activity on the massage establishment premises or an immediate threat to health, safety or welfare.

D. Notice of Intent to Suspend or Revoke. A notice of intent to suspend or revoke shall contain a statement of an alleged violation(s) which constitutes the basis for the suspension or revocation, notice of the right of the permittee to respond to the charges either orally or in writing to the chief of police for a pre-appeal determination, notice of the right to appeal to the city manager, and notice that a failure to respond in the time specified shall constitute a waiver of the right to respond, but not the right to appeal. If an alleged violation is capable of correction, the notice shall also advise the permittee to correct an alleged violation(s) within the time to respond.

E. Response to Notice of Intent.

1. The time to respond and request a pre-appeal determination shall be five business days from the date of the service of the notice, regardless of whether the materials upon which the notice of intent is based are provided to the permittee at that time.

2. If there is no response, the permit shall be considered suspended or revoked upon expiration of time in which to respond and request a pre-appeal hearing.

3. If there is a response, the permit shall remain in effect until a determination is made by the chief of police. In no event shall the chief hold a hearing until at least five business days have passed from the time the city provides the materials upon which the notice of intent is issued to the permittee.

F. Suspension or Revocation.

1. If, after consideration of the permittee’s response, if any, the chief of police determines that the notice of intent to suspend or revoke should be upheld, then the chief of police shall issue a notice of suspension or revocation and serve it upon the permittee as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. Where all massage activity is required to cease, notice shall also be served on the owner of the property if different from the operator or certificate holder. The notice shall include information about the right to appeal.

a. Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of a certificate of operation, all massage activity at the massage establishment shall cease and no activity for which the certificate of operation is required shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending.

b. Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of an operator permit, the operator must cease all work at the massage establishment. If there is no other person who has an operator permit which is not the subject of a suspension or revocation proceeding, then all massage activity at the massage establishment shall also cease and no massage activity shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending.

c. Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of a work permit, all work activity by the subject employee shall cease and no activity for which the permit is required shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending.

G. Surrender of Certificate of Operation and Permits. Any permittee shall immediately surrender his or her permit or certificate to the chief of police upon its suspension or revocation. The operator shall immediately surrender the certificate of operation upon revocation of an operator permit if there is no other permitted operator. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.110 Appeals to city manager.
A. Appeals.

1. Appeals from a decision of the chief of police to deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit shall be in writing, shall clearly state the applicable basis for the appeal, and shall be filed within the following time frames:

a. Appeals from a decision to deny a permit shall be filed not later than ten calendar days following the notice of denial.

b. Appeals from a notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit where no response is filed in accordance with Section 5.48.100(E) shall be filed no later than ten calendar days following the expiration of the response period.

c. Appeals from a notice of suspension or revocation issued after a response is filed in accordance with Section 5.48.100(E) shall be filed no later than ten calendar days following the notice of suspension or revocation.

2. The city clerk shall not accept an appeal from a decision of the chief of police, and no hearing shall be held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.

3. The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as submitted pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section.

B. City Manager Action.

1. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city manager. The hearing shall be held not fewer than ten calendar days nor more than thirty calendar days from the date of the appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual consent of the parties. For the purposes of this section, “city manager” includes a hearing officer appointed by the city manager, in which case the city manager shall adopt the hearing officer’s decision as his own.

2. The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least seven calendar days prior to the hearing.

3. At the time of such hearing, the city manager shall review the records and files relating to the decision.

a. The city manager shall permit any interested person, including the chief of police and the appellant, to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter.

b. In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded.

c. In determining whether a person should be disqualified for meeting the definition of a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct, the city manager may consider: the nature and severity of the act(s) or crime(s); whether there were any additional subsequent act(s) or crime(s); the number of act(s) or crime(s); and how recent the act(s) or crime(s) were.

4. The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the requirements for issuing the permit in the first instance. The chief of police shall have the burden of proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew a permit.

5. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the city manager shall determine whether the decision by the chief of police should be affirmed, modified or reversed.

6. The city manager’s decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant within ten working days after the close of the hearing and submission of the matter to the city manager for decision. The city manager’s decision shall state whether the decision of the chief of police is affirmed, modified or reversed and shall state the reasons therefor. The city manager’s decision shall also state that it is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and that any action filed in the superior court shall be filed within ninety days following the city manager’s notice pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1726 § 9, 2011; Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.130 Notices.
A. All notices required to be given pursuant to this chapter shall be served on the responsible party (i.e., permittee, applicant or appellant) either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope postage prepaid addressed to such responsible party as the name and address appear in the most recent application on file with the city. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed on the date deposited in the mail.

B. In all cases where the certificate of operation holder is not the property owner, notices shall also be sent to the property owner of record where the notice relates to possible closure of the business due to suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

Article IV. Operation and Facility Requirements

5.48.140 Operational requirements.
A. Hours and Conditions of Operation.

1. No massage establishment shall operate nor shall any massage be administered in any massage establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the reception area within the massage establishment and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment.

2. During hours of operation, no person other than a valid permit holder under this chapter, a massage technician, or a patron shall be allowed beyond the reception area of the massage establishment.

3. Patrons and visitors shall only be permitted in the massage establishment during the hours of operation.

a. Visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the massage establishment.

b. Patrons shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at least one massage technician is on the premises.

4. The massage establishment shall be supervised during all hours of operation by the owner of the establishment or the manager specified in the permit application. The name and photograph (minimum size of four inches by six inches) of the on-duty operator shall be posted in a conspicuous public place in the reception area of the massage establishment at all times that the business is open. This provision shall not apply to sole providers.

5. No massage establishment shall be used for residential purposes. There shall be no massage tables, cots, or beds in the establishment other than as shown on the approved floor plan.

B. Posting Requirements. In addition to any other requirements for posting set forth in this chapter, the following shall also apply:

1. A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of this code shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment.

2. Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in a conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted.

C. Instruments, Equipment, and Personnel.

1. Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use.

2. Unless otherwise approved by a conditional use permit, massages shall be administered only on standard or portable massage tables or chairs which are covered with a durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material. Beds, mattresses, water beds, futons, sofa beds, any type of portable or convertible beds, and foam pads more than four inches thick or with a width of more than four feet shall not be permitted in the establishment.

3. No massage technician shall massage the genitals or anal area of any patron, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified areas.

4. No massage technician shall massage the breasts of a female patron without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified area.

5. A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of any massage establishment staff unless the patron’s genitals, and, if a female patron, the female patron’s breasts, are fully covered by a fully opaque, nontransparent covering.

6. Persons providing services in the massage establishment shall not be dressed in attire that: is transparent, see-through, substantially exposes the massage technician’s undergarments; exposes the massage technician’s breasts, buttocks or genitals; is in a manner which has been deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California; or in swim attire unless such person is providing a water-based massage modality which has been approved by CAMTC.

7. All massage establishments shall be so equipped, maintained and operated as to effectively control the entrance, harborage, and breeding of vermin, including flies. When flies or other vermin are present effective control measures shall be instituted for their control or elimination.

8. Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle.

9. All massage tables shall be at least two feet away from all walls at all times.

D. Personnel Lists.

1. Within seven calendar days of receiving a certificate of operation, the operator shall provide the police department with a complete list of all massage therapists, massage practitioners and other employees who are or will work, be employed or provide massage services in the massage establishment along with a copy of their CAMTC certificate and identification card, as well as the name and residence address of the manager principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment.

2. The operator shall have a continuing obligation to notify the chief of police in writing of any changes in employees and massage therapists and massage practitioners within seven calendar days of such change.

3. The operator shall maintain copies of each massage technician’s CAMTC certificate and identification card on file on the premises of the massage establishment which shall be available to any individual upon request, including but not limited to employees of the city. Additionally, the operator shall be required to file copies of each CAMTC certificate with the police department within seven days of a massage therapist or massage practitioner beginning to work at the massage establishment. Information required by this section shall be maintained at the massage establishment for a minimum of two years following the date that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment.

4. The operator shall maintain on the premises of the massage establishment a register of massage technicians and other non-state certified persons employed, working or providing services therein. The register shall be maintained for a minimum of two years following the time that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment. The operator shall at all reasonable times make the register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the police department, any health officer, or any other official charged with enforcement of this chapter. The register shall include but is not limited to the following information:

a. Name, nicknames and/or aliases;

b. Home address and relevant phone number, including but not limited to home and cell numbers;

c. Age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;

d. The date of employment, and termination, if any;

e. The duties of each person; and

f. In a separate portion of the register, Social Security numbers, which shall only be available for review by the Gardena police department or other law enforcement personnel, but not health officers or other officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter.

E. Prohibited Conduct.

1. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or furnished on the premises of any massage establishment without a valid alcoholic beverage license.

2. No storage of condoms or spermicides shall be permitted within the massage establishment.

3. No person shall use or possess, nor shall there be any storage of, any sexually-oriented implements or paraphernalia which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

4. No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be used by any massage establishment staff for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, or the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms or restrooms.

5. No massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons or clients that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required in this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter.

6. No arrangements for massage services to be performed shall be made in a room in the massage establishment used for the administration of massage, unless no other room exists in the establishment. No massage technician shall, after the commencement of any service for any patron, advise, suggest or otherwise indicate to such patron that any additional service is available, or ask or inquire of such patron whether such patron desires any additional service to be performed. No massage technician shall perform any service for any patron which was not ordered by such patron prior to the commencement of performance of any service rendered. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any massage technician, employee or operator, and no such person shall solicit any gratuity from any patron. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1726 § 10, 2011; Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.150 Building and facility requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to all massage establishments:

A. The building, or unit within the building where the massage establishment is located, shall comply with all applicable building code requirements.

B. All massage rooms and dressing rooms shall be screened off by hinged doors that can open inward. Swinging doors that can be opened inward, draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures in lieu of doors are acceptable on all inner dressing rooms and massage therapy rooms or cubicles. Except for bathroom doors and an office, no interior door may have a lock.

C. In addition to the minimum lighting required by the provisions of Title 15, all rooms in which massages are being provided shall be lit with a minimum of one light fixture emitting at least two hundred ten lumens for every one hundred fifty square feet of space during the administration of such services. No dimmer switches, strobe lights, flashing lights, colored lights, or any coverings or other apparatus other than a lampshade which changes the color or darkens the color of the primary light source shall be used in any room in which massage services are being provided.

D. Any locker facilities provided for the use of patrons shall be fully secured for the protection of the patron’s valuables and the patron shall be given control of the key or other means of access.

E. The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable mold-resistant surface.

F. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.

G. One main entry that enters into the reception area shall be provided for patron use. All patrons, and any persons other than those providing services at the massage establishment, shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the establishment.

H. All exterior doors (except rear exterior doors used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours, and the establishment shall comply with the provisions of the Gardena Municipal Code pertaining to the posting of signs stating that doors shall remain unlocked during business hours. Exits for fire safety purposes may be allowed where deemed necessary by the appropriate public safety agency. Notwithstanding the above, the front door may be locked if there is no staff available to assure security for the clients and massage staff who are behind closed doors, provided that the massage establishment is owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent contractors.

I. There shall be no buzzer, alarm or intercom system.

J. No massage establishment located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs or substantially darkens the view into the premises at any time. The interior of the business shall be plainly visible from the exterior of the business by passing vehicles and pedestrians. Translucent UV films or tints shall be allowed provided they do not violate these provisions and if a sample has been approved through the conditional use permit process or by the community development department. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.160 Inspections.
A. Representatives of the city’s community development department, business license office, and police department; agents for the city from the county fire department and health department; and representatives of any state or local agencies with regulatory authority over massage establishments shall have the right to enter massage establishments, from time to time, during regular business hours, or at any time that the massage establishment is occupied or open for business, to verify the massage establishment is in compliance with all applicable laws without a search or inspection warrant to make reasonable inspection to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter without the need for an inspection or abatement warrant.

B. The operator shall cause to be conspicuously posted so that the same may be readily visible to persons in the reception area of the massage establishment and in each room in which massage treatments are administered, in letters that are a minimum of one inch in height, a notice in English which provides substantially as follows:

THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY CITY AND HEALTH OFFICIALS WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE

C. No person shall refuse to permit, cause delay, or interfere with a lawful inspection or compliance check of the premises by the officials listed in subsection A of this section at any time. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.48.170 Violation – Nuisance/remedy.
A. It is unlawful for any person to engage in conduct that violates any provision of this chapter, to engage in conduct which fails to meet the standards set forth in this chapter, or to own, manage, or operate a massage establishment that is not fully in compliance with the operational standards set forth in this chapter.

B. Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, including any code enforcement procedures established pursuant to the laws of the state of California and the city of Gardena; and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. If an injunction is sought, attorney’s fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the party subject to said injunction.

C. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

D. Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor unless, in the sole discretion of the city prosecutor, it is charged or reduced to an infraction. Citations and warning notices may be utilized as determined appropriate to the circumstances by the enforcing personnel. (Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1714 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 5.52
TOBACCO RETAILERS – PERMIT PROCEDURES
Sections:

5.52.010    Definitions.

5.52.020    Tobacco retailer permit required.

5.52.030    Fixed location required for tobacco retailer permits.

5.52.040    Application procedure and fee proration.

5.52.050    Issuance of permit.

5.52.060    Permit renewal, delinquencies and expiration.

5.52.070    Permits nontransferable.

5.52.080    Permit fee cost recovery.

5.52.090    Other requirements and prohibitions.

5.52.100    Compliance monitoring.

5.52.110    Revocation of permit.

5.52.120    Tobacco retailing without a permit.

5.52.130    Settlement in lieu of hearing.

5.52.140    Nuisance/remedies.

5.52.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Arm’s length transaction” means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm’s length transaction.

B. “Cigar” means any roll of tobacco wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco, and includes all of the component parts of the cigar (including but not limited to tobacco, filters, or wrapping). For the purposes of this section, “cigar” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco products labeled “cigar,” “cigarillo,” “tiparillo,” “little cigar,” “blunt,” or “blunt wrap.”

C. “Person” means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

D. “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a fifty percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

E. “Self-service display” means the open display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

F. “Significant tobacco retailer” means any tobacco retailer for which the principal or core business is selling tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both, as evidenced by any of the following: twenty percent or more of the floor or display area is devoted to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both; sixty-seven percent or more of gross sales receipts are derived from tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or both; or fifty percent or more of completed sales transactions include tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia.

G. “Smoking” means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind), the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind), or the use of an electronic cigarette.

H. “Tobacco paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, electronic cigarettes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products.

I. “Tobacco product” means: (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) electronic cigarette cartridges and any other product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence.

J. “Tobacco retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia, or who distributes free or low cost samples of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. “Tobacco retailing” shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.

K. “Vending machine” means a machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated by currency, token, debit card, credit card, or any other form of payment that is designed or used for vending purposes, including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms.

L. “Electronic cigarette” or “e-cigarette” means a device, often shaped like a cigarette, cigar or pipe, that is designed to deliver nicotine or other substances to a user in the form of a vapor. Typically, e-cigarettes consist of battery-powered heating elements and replaceable cartridges that contain nicotine or other chemicals, and an atomizer that, when heated, converts the contents of the cartridge into a vapor that a user inhales. (Ord. 1753 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.020 Tobacco retailer permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer permit pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer permit is a public nuisance.

B. A tobacco retailer without a valid tobacco retailer permit, including, for example, a person whose permit has been revoked:

1. Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a permit and the tobacco retailer shall not be eligible to apply for or be issued a permit as set forth in Section 5.52.120.

2. Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer’s location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location.

C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer permit any status or right other than the right to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the permit. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including, but not limited to, any provision of this code including without limitation the zoning ordinance, building codes, and business license ordinance, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer permit does not make the retailer a retail or wholesale tobacco shop for the purposes of California Labor Code Section 6404.5. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.030 Fixed location required for tobacco retailer permits.
No permit may issue to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.040 Application procedure and fee proration.
A. The designated proprietor of the business proposing to conduct tobacco retail sales shall file a permit application with the community development department that shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The application shall be dated and signed under penalty of perjury by the designated proprietor or an authorized agent thereof.

B. In cases where a portion of the annual permit period has elapsed prior to the filing of the permit application, the fee amount shall be apportioned as follows:

1. If an application is filed in the first half of the calendar year, the entire annual permit fee shall be paid; and

2. If an application is filed in the second half of the calendar year, one-half of the permit fee shall be paid.

C. It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer permit. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a permit as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A permit issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.52.110(D). Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer permit any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law.

D. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the community development department and shall contain the following information:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business that is seeking a permit.

2. The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a permit is sought.

3. A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the “authorized address”) required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (D)(2) of this section.

4. Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer permit is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer license by the California Board of Equalization.

5. Whether or not any proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter or whose proprietorship has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter, and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous six years.

6. Proof of maintaining a current city of Gardena business license.

7. Such other information as the city deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter.

E. All information contained in the tobacco retailer permit application shall be updated by the proprietor during the life of the permit whenever the information changes. A tobacco retailer shall provide the community development department with any updates within thirty days of a change.

F. The information specified in subsections (D)(1) and (D)(3) of this section shall be subject to public disclosure pursuant to the California Public Records Act and all city policies adopted in accordance therewith. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.050 Issuance of permit.
Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer permit and the permit fee required by this chapter, the community development department shall issue a permit unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists:

A. The information presented in the application is incomplete, inaccurate, or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this chapter.

B. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which this chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer permits. However, this subsection shall not constitute a basis for denial of a permit if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm’s length transaction.

C. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a permit to be issued.

D. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this chapter, that is unlawful pursuant to this code including without limitation the zoning ordinance, building codes, and business license tax ordinance, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.060 Permit renewal, delinquencies and expiration.
A. Renewal of Permit. A tobacco retailer permit shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the business license for the permit location and shall be subject to annual renewal, unless otherwise noted. The renewal application shall be filed with the community development department accompanied by a renewal fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. Renewals shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. However, if there is no change in operations, no record of violations, and no conditions requested by any city department, the renewal application shall be processed for permit issuance by the community development director or designee. A tobacco retailer permit is due and payable on the first day of January of each year.

B. Delinquent or Expired Permit.

1. A tobacco retailer permit is invalid unless the renewal fee is paid in full prior to March 1st of each year.

2. A renewal fee unpaid on or after March 1st of the renewal year shall be delinquent and must be reinstated. A reinstatement fee of ten percent shall be added to the renewal fee and collected by the community development department. For each calendar month of delinquency following March of the renewal year, an additional ten percent of the original permit fee shall be added to the reinstatement fee, provided the total reinstatement fee does not exceed fifty percent of the original permit fee.

3. To reinstate a permit that has expired, or to renew a permit not timely renewed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the proprietor must:

a. Submit the renewal fee and the reinstatement fee due pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section.

b. Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor:

i. Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the permit expiration date and before the permit is renewed; or

ii. Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a permit, as set forth in Section 5.52.120(A), before seeking renewal of the permit. (Ord. 1738 § 63 (part), 2012; Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.070 Permits nontransferable.
A. A tobacco retailer permit may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. Whenever a tobacco retailing establishment has a change in ownership or location a new tobacco retailer permit is required.

B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and permit ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless:

1. The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and

2. The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired or are acquiring the location in an arm’s length transaction. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.080 Permit fee cost recovery.
The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer permit that is established by resolution of the city council shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost of both permit administration and permit enforcement, including, for example, issuing the permit, administering the permit program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this chapter. All fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.090 Other requirements and prohibitions.
A. Lawful Business Operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a permit has been issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a permittee, or any of the permittee’s agents or employees, to:

1. Violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing.

2. Violate any local, state, or federal law regulating exterior, storefront, window, or door signage.

B. Display of Permit. Each tobacco retailer permit shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the permitted location.

C. Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia.

D. Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing.

E. Self-Service Displays Prohibited. No tobacco retailer shall display tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia by means of a self-service display or engage in tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display.

F. Sale of Single Cigars Prohibited.

1. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no tobacco retailer shall sell, offer for sale, or exchange for any form of consideration:

a. Any single cigar, whether or not packaged for individual sale;

b. Any number of cigars fewer than the number contained in the manufacturer’s original consumer packaging designed for retail sale to a consumer; or

c. Any package of cigars containing fewer than five cigars.

2. This section does not apply to the sale or offer for sale of a single cigar or multiple individual cigars by a significant tobacco retailer. (Ord. 1740 § 2, 2012: Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.100 Compliance monitoring.
A. Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the police and community development departments. Any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter.

B. The police department shall conduct compliance checks of at least fifty percent of permitted tobacco retailers at least once per twelve-month period. The police department may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found to be in compliance a fewer number of times so that the police department may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found in violation of this chapter a greater number of times. Nothing in this subsection shall create a right of action in any permittee or other person against the city or its agents.

C. Compliance checks shall determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with tobacco laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing.

D. The city shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person’s age (hereinafter “youth decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when:

1. The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the city; or

2. The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health or the California Department of Health Services. (Ord. 1738 § 63 (part), 2012; Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.110 Revocation of permit.
A. Revocation of Permit for Violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer permit shall be revoked if the police department finds or any court of competent jurisdiction determines, after the permittee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the permittee, or any of the permittee’s agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or, in a different legal proceeding, has pleaded guilty, “no contest” or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in Section 5.52.090(A).

B. New Permit After Revocation.

1. After revocation for a first violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new permit may be issued for the location until thirty days have passed from the date of revocation.

2. After revocation for a second violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new permit may be issued for the location until sixty days have passed from the date of revocation.

3. After revocation for a third violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new permit may be issued for the location until ninety days have passed from the date of revocation.

4. After revocation for four or more violations of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new permit may be issued for the location until five years have passed from the date of revocation.

C. Appeal of Revocation. A decision of the police department to revoke a permit is appealable to the city manager or designee and must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of mailing of the police department’s decision. If such an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. An appeal to the city manager is not available for a revocation made pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. The appeal fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.

D. Revocation of Permit Issued in Error. A tobacco retailer permit shall be revoked if the police department finds, after the permittee is afforded reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a permit under Section 5.52.050 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the permit issued. The decision by the police department shall be the final decision of the city. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new permit application. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.120 Tobacco retailing without a permit.
A. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if the police department finds or any court of competent jurisdiction determines, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer permit, either directly or through the person’s agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for or be issued a tobacco retailing permit for that location as follows:

1. After a first violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new permit may be issued for the person at the location until thirty days have passed from the date of the violation.

2. After a second violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new permit may be issued for the person at the location until ninety days have passed from the date of the violation.

3. After of a third or subsequent violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period, no new permit may be issued for the person at the location until five years have passed from the date of the violation.

B. Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter are subject to seizure by any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the permittee and any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. The decision by the police department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.52.110(C). Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be destroyed.

C. For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this chapter:

1. Each day on which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this chapter; or

2. Each individual retail tobacco product and each individual retail item of tobacco paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter;

whichever is greater, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.130 Settlement in lieu of hearing.
For a first or second alleged violation of this chapter within any sixty-month period, the city attorney may engage in settlement negotiations and may enter into a settlement agreement with a tobacco retailer alleged to have violated this chapter without approval from the city council. Notice of any settlement shall be provided to the police and community development departments and no hearing shall be held. Settlements shall not be confidential and shall contain the following minimum terms:

A. After a first alleged violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period:

1. An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least one day;

2. A settlement payment to the city of at least one thousand dollars; and

3. An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for any future violations.

B. After a second alleged violation of this chapter at a location within any sixty-month period:

1. An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least ten days;

2. A settlement payment to the city of at least five thousand dollars; and

3. An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for any future violations. (Ord. 1738 § 63 (part), 2012; Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

5.52.140 Nuisance/remedies.
A. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

B. Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented.

C. Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the city prosecutor or the city attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars and not exceeding one thousand dollars per violation.

D. Violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of the city prosecutor, be prosecuted as misdemeanors.

E. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.

F. Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

G. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 1707 § 2 (part), 2008)

Chapter 5.60
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS
Sections:

5.60.010    Definitions.

5.60.020    Permit required.

5.60.030    Compliance with state laws.

5.60.040    Overlapping businesses.

5.60.050    Compliance with laws.

5.60.060    Revocation and suspension of permits.

5.60.070    Reports of purchases.

5.60.080    Filing of reports.

5.60.090    Records of purchases.

5.60.100    Exemptions from required reports.

5.60.110    Compliance with report and record requirements.

5.60.120    Sales of merchandise by dealers.

5.60.130    Signs.

5.60.140    Hours of business.

5.60.150    Overlapping businesses.

5.60.160    Claims to stolen property.

5.60.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Junk” shall have the same definition as set forth in Business and Professions Code section 21600, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Junk collector” means a person not having a fixed place of business in the city who goes from house to house or from place to place gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal or other articles commonly known as junk.

“Junk dealer” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code section 21601, as the same may be amended from time to time. “Junk dealer” also includes a “junk collector” as defined in Section 5.08.240 of this Code.

“Pawnbroker” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Financial code section 21000, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Pawnshop” means any room, store or place in which the business of a pawnbroker is carried on or conducted.

“Secondhand dealer” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code section 21626 et seq. as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Trade-ins, Tires and Batteries.” The acceptance, sale or disposal of used automobile tires or automobile batteries taken in part payment for new tires or batteries shall not be deemed to constitute the doing of any business defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1601 § 54 (part), 2000; prior code § 6-6.01)

5.60.020 Permit required.
A. No person shall engage in, conduct, manage, carry on or deal in any business defined in Section 5.60.010 without first obtaining a permit from the community development director in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.160 of this Code. However, the only department that the application shall be forwarded to shall be the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall direct that the permit be granted to any applicant who has not been convicted of an attempt to receive stolen property or any other offense involving stolen property.

B. The permit required by this section shall be in addition to any land use approval that may be required pursuant to Title 18 of the Gardena Municipal Code. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1601 § 54 (part), 2000; prior code § 6-6.02)

5.60.030 Compliance with state laws.
Once a permit is issued for any business defined in 5.60.010, the permittee shall comply with all applicable provisions of State law. (Ord. 1601 § 54 (part), 2000; prior code § 6-6.03)

5.60.040 Overlapping businesses.
If any person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on at the same time more than one of the businesses defined in Section 5.60.010, such person shall be deemed to be engaging in, conducting and carrying on each such business separately and apart from the other such business, and such person shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to each such business. (Ord. 1601 § 54 (part), 2000; prior code § 6-6.04)

5.60.050 Compliance with laws.
A. The council shall not grant any permit provided for in this chapter to persons who fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the laws relating to and regulating the business for which such permit is sought.

B. Persons applying for or obtaining permits pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6-6.05)

5.60.060 Revocation and suspension of permits.
A. Grounds. Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended upon the following grounds:

1. If persons holding permits under the provisions of this chapter shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any other law relating to or regulating any such business, or shall conduct or carry on such business in an unlawful manner, the chief of police, in addition to any other penalties provided by this code, shall revoke such permit issued to such person; and

2. Upon any showing that any person holding such permit is not conducting his business in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state or of the city, the chief of police may revoke or suspend such permit issued to such person.

B. Hearing. Any person whose license is revoked or suspended may, within ten days thereafter, apply to the council for a hearing thereon, or the council may, of its own accord, require such hearing. At any such hearing the council may approve the revocation or suspension ordered by the chief of police or it may make any order it deems proper with reference to the revocation or suspension of any permit.

C. Refunds. In the event of a revocation or suspension of a permit, there shall be no refund of any permit fee or license theretofore paid by the permittee.

D. Opinion Conclusive. The opinion of the council shall be conclusive with reference to any suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

E. Reissuance of Revoked Permits. No permit shall be granted to any person to conduct, manage, carry on, or deal in any business defined in Section 5.60.010 and whose permit has been revoked by the council until six months have elapsed after such revocation. (Prior code § 6-6.06)

5.60.070 Reports of purchases.
A. Required – Contents. All persons licensed by the provisions of this chapter shall secure blank report forms from the chief of police. Such reports shall be made out and delivered to the chief of police each day before ten a.m. and shall contain the following data:

1. A full, true and complete report of all goods, wares and merchandise or things received on deposit, pledged, purchased, or received during the day preceding the filing of such report;

2. The hour of the day such article was received, pledged or purchased;

3. The true name and address of the person making the sale, delivery or pledge as nearly as the same is known or can be ascertained, together with a description of such person which shall include his height, age, sex, complexion, style of dress and color of mustache, if any, and if lacking a mustache, such fact shall be noted;

4. The number of the pawn ticket if a pledge is involved and the amount loaned or pledged; and

5. The article pledged, received or purchased shall be described. If such article is engraved or contains any settings, the description thereof shall include such number, figure, word or initial engraved thereon and shall show the kind and number of settings.

B. Report Form. Such blank report forms shall bear a caption providing blank spaces in which shall be written or printed the date of such report, the name and place of business of the person making the report, and the hour of day when the report is received by the chief of police. Such forms shall be so printed and subdivided as to contain spaces with proper captions for the information required by the provisions of this subsection.

C. Scrap Metal Dealer’s Exception. Every junk dealer or person engaged in the business of purchasing scrap metals for the purpose of reselling, smelting, or refining such metal shall comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section except that when purchases are made from a junk collector, in lieu of the description required by subsection A3 of this section, the true name and city license number of such junk collector shall be sufficient. (Prior code § 6-6.07)

5.60.080 Filing of reports.
The chief of police shall file in a secure place in his office all reports and records received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the same shall be open to inspection only by members of the police department or upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction made for that purpose. Every such report and record required to be filed or kept shall be written or printed in a clear and legible manner entirely in the English language. (Prior code § 6-6.08)

5.60.090 Records of purchases.
All persons licensed by the provisions of this chapter shall keep a complete record of all goods, wares, merchandise, and things pledged to, purchased, or received by him, which record shall contain all of the matters required to be shown in the reports referred to and described in Section 5.60.070. Such records shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of any member of the police department. (Prior code § 6-6.09)

5.60.100 Exemptions from required reports.
The provisions of Section 5.60.070 of this chapter shall not apply to the receipt or sale by junk dealers or junk collectors of any rags, bottles, secondhand sacks or bags, barrels, cans, shoes, lamps, stoves or household furniture, with the exception of musical instruments or scrap iron when bought and sold for scrap, or to the purchase or sale of secondhand dealers of household furniture, with the exception of musical instruments, typewriters, accounting machines, adding machines, check writing machines, comptometers, or other similar equipment, or to the purchase or sale of sacks, bags, or rags. (Prior code § 6-6.10)

5.60.110 Compliance with report and record requirements.
No person engaging in, conducting, managing or carrying on any of the businesses defined in Section 5.60.010 shall fail, refuse or neglect to file any report in the form, manner, time and otherwise in all respects in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, or fail, refuse or neglect to keep records in the form and manner required by this chapter, or fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to a member of the police department immediately upon demand for inspection any record of any goods, wares, merchandise, articles, or things pledged to, purchased by, or received by such person. (Prior code § 6-6.11)

5.60.120 Sales of merchandise by dealers.
A. Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers. Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any article or thing within thirty days after such article or thing has been purchased or received by such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer.

B. Junk Dealers and Junk Collectors. Junk dealers and junk collectors shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any article or thing within seven days after such article or thing has been purchased or received by such junk dealer or junk collector.

C. Scrap Metal Dealers. Junk dealers and other persons engaged in the business of purchasing scrap metals for the purpose of reselling, smelting or refining the same shall retain and keep in a separate place on their premises the entire purchase of each day. Each day’s purchase shall be kept in such place in its original condition for a period of seven days after the purchase or receipt thereof and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police department. (Prior code § 6-6.12)

5.60.130 Signs.
All persons licensed by the provisions of this chapter shall maintain on the premises where their business is located a sign plainly printed in the English language of sufficient size so that the same may be easy to read from the sidewalk in front of such place of business. Such sign shall state the business in which such person is engaged. If the business is located in an office building, the sign shall be placed on the door of the office. If the business is located in a department of any building, the sign shall be placed at the entrance to such department. (Prior code § 6-6.13)

5.60.140 Hours of business.
No person operating, managing, or carrying on any business defined in Section 5.60.010 shall accept any pledge, loan money upon personal property, purchase or receive any article, or carry on or transact such business in any manner, nor shall any person carry on or transact any business of whatever character or buy or sell any article, new or used, at any place of business for which a junk dealer’s permit, pawnbroker’s or pawnshop permit, or secondhand dealer’s permit is issued, between 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, except that hours of business on Sundays shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (Ord. 1695 § 1, 2007; prior code § 6-6.14)

5.60.150 Overlapping businesses.
If any person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on at the same time more than one of the businesses defined in Section 5.60.010, such person shall be deemed to be engaging in, conducting and carrying on each such business separately and apart from the other such business, and such person shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to each such business. No person shall fail, refuse, or neglect otherwise to do so. (Prior code § 6-6.15)

5.60.160 Claims to stolen property.
A. In all cases where a claim is made to property pawned with or sold to a person holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter by a person claiming to be the owner thereof and asserting that property was stolen, the chief of police shall, after a hearing upon notice, determine the validity of such claim and the immediate disposition which should be made as to the possession of the claimed property as provided in this section.

B. If the chief of police shall determine that such property was stolen, that the claimant is the owner thereof, and that there is no collusion between the claimant and the person by whom such property was stolen, the chief of police shall direct that such property be returned forthwith to the claimant without compensation of any kind being paid therefor.

C. In the event such direction shall be disobeyed, the permit under which such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector is permitted to conduct his business may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police without further hearing.

D. The council may designate any member of the police department to hear the evidence at any or all hearings that may be held pursuant to this section and to report his findings thereon to the council, but in all cases the chief of police shall determine the disposition of the property.

E. If, prior to the determination by the chief of police upon any claim made pursuant to this section, an action at law is brought by or against the person in possession of the property to establish the ownership of, or the right to possession of, the property, the chief of police shall upon notice thereof suspend proceedings upon the claim. (Prior code § 6-6.16)

Chapter 5.64
PEDDLERS AND STREET VENDORS
Sections:

5.64.010    Permit required to peddle or sell in public street.

5.64.020    License peddling – Standing in one location; hours of operation.

5.64.030    Permit requirements.

5.64.040    Sales from human-powered devices prohibited.

5.64.010 Permit required to peddle or sell in public street.
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section and in Section 5.64.020, no person shall peddle, sell or offer for sale any food, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description from any stand located in or upon any public street or alley of the city, or from any wagon, cart, pushcart, truck, automobile, carriage or other vehicle standing on any public street or alley in the city.

B. Any person peddling or selling, or offering for sale, any food, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind in the public right of way shall first obtain a permit to do so from the community development director in accordance with Section 5.04.160 of this Code. A background check shall be conducted on the applicant. As used in this chapter, “public right of way” means any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, access easement, or similar public property which has been dedicated to public use and is maintained under public authority.” (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1691 § 1, 4-26-07; Ord. 1623 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1601 § 55, 2000; prior code § 4-10.01)

5.64.020 License peddling – Standing in one location; hours of operation.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or operate any vehicle or conduct any business for the purpose of causing the sale of or offering for sale, any goods or merchandise from any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon any public right of way except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this code, State and local laws, and in compliance with the following requirements:

A. No vending from any vehicle shall be permitted for a period of time in excess of ten minutes in any one location and said vehicle must be moved a distance of not less than one-hundred feet between consecutive stops at which vending occurs.

B. Any vendor conducting business pursuant to a permit required by this chapter shall be permitted to peddle or sell food, goods, wares or merchandise only during the hours from 12:00 p.m. (noon) to 6:00 p.m. during the months of July and August, and in all other months of a year, during the hours from 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.

C. No vehicle from which sales occur shall attach to or receive any utilities from private or public property.

D. All vendors conducting business pursuant to a permit required by this chapter, shall also comply with the restrictions of Sections 8.36.030 and 10.28.150.

E. The city business license and permit issued pursuant to Title 5 of this code shall be displayed in conspicuous view on the vehicle from which sales occur.

F. Any health permit required by law for the sale of any produce or other food item shall be displayed in conspicuous view on the vehicle from which sales occur.

G. Each vehicle from which sales are made shall be equipped with a trash receptacle of a size adequate to accommodate all trash and refuse generated by such sales. The vendor shall pick up and deposit in the trash receptacle on the vehicle any paper, cups, wrapper, litter or other refuse of any kind which were a part of the goods or merchandise supplied from the vehicle and which have been left or abandoned within twenty-five feet of such vehicle on any public property other than in a trash receptacle provided for such purposes. The vendor shall not deposit refuse in any public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle owned, operated or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor.

H. Each vehicle from which sales occur shall have the name, address, and telephone number of the permit holder permanently affixed on both the left and right sides of the vehicle. Such information shall be in letters and numerals not less than four (4) inches in height and shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which the letters are placed.

I. Each vehicle from which sales occur shall be maintained free of graffiti.” (Ord. 1691 § 2, 4-26-07; Ord. 1623 § 4, 2002; prior code § 4-10.02)

5.64.030 Permit requirements.
All permits granted by the community development director under the provisions of this chapter shall set forth the location(s) in which such street vendor, peddler, huckster or other person selling such food, goods, wares or merchandise shall be permitted, and shall designate the hours and length of time during which such street vendor, peddler, huckster or person selling shall be so permitted to stand at one location on any such street. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1623 § 5, 2002; prior code § 4-10.03)

5.64.040 Sales from human-powered devices prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise from any human-powered device parked, stopped or standing upon the public right of way. As used in this section, “human-powered device” means any device moved by human power, including, but not necessarily limited to, any pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle, shopping cart, or other wheeled container or conveyance.” (Ord. 1691 § 3, 4-26-07)

Chapter 5.68
TAXICABS
Sections:

5.68.010    Purpose of chapter.

5.68.020    Definitions.

5.68.030    Rule and regulation adoption.

5.68.040    Permits required – Impoundment.

5.68.050    Permit issuance.

5.68.060    Nontransferability of permits.

5.68.070    Permit denial, revocation, or suspension.

5.68.080    Fee.

5.68.090    Permit duration.

5.68.100    Failure to pay fare.

5.68.110    Taxicab operator permit – Application information.

5.68.120    Taxicab operator permit – Taxicab ownership – Identification – Inspection – Additional vehicles.

5.68.130    Taxicab operator permit – Qualifications.

5.68.140    Taxicab operator permit – Insurance.

5.68.150    Taxicab driver permit – Application.

5.68.160    Taxicab driver permit – Qualifications.

5.68.170    Taxicab driver permit – Mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program.

5.68.180    Operating regulations – Route requirements.

5.68.190    Appeals.

5.68.200    Operating regulations – Misrepresentation prohibited.

5.68.210    Operating regulations – Receipt for fare.

5.68.220    Operating regulations – Taxi stands.

5.68.230    Application to existing permittees.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 403, 406, 643, 749, 771, 790, 799, 819, 914, 958, 1152, 1426.

5.68.010 Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations governing the operation and permitting of taxicab companies and taxicab drivers, including regulation of rates. The further purpose of this chapter is to serve as the policy for entry into the business of providing taxicab transportation service, and to impose a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program as required by section 53075.5(b) of the California Government Code.

5.68.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

“Driver” means a person who drives or attends a taxicab.

“Operate” means to use a taxicab to either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the city.

“Operator” means a person engaged in the business of providing transportation services through the use or dispatch of taxicabs or who causes a taxicab to be operated for the purpose of either soliciting or picking up passengers for hire in the city.

“Owner” means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab and does not include a person holding only a security interest in a taxicab.

“Person” includes a natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.

“Street” means any place publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel.

“Taxi stand” means a portion of a street designated by the city council for the use of any taxicab while awaiting employment.

“Taxicab” means a motor vehicle operated within the city, capable of carrying not more than eight (8) persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire over the streets of the city, irrespective of whether passengers are carried beyond the boundary limits of the city, at rates for distance traveled or for waiting, standby, or traffic delay time, or for any combination of such rates, and not operating over a defined route, but routed under the direction of such passengers. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Public Utilities Commission.

“Taximeter” means a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or for waiting time, or for both, and upon which the charges shall be indicated by means of figures.

“Traffic authority” or “authority” means the chief of police of the city or his or her designee. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.01)

5.68.030 Rule and regulation adoption.
The city council and traffic authority shall have the authority to adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the service and safety of the operation of taxicabs. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.040 Permits required – Impoundment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator or driver of a taxicab within the city limits without first obtaining an operator or driver permit. A taxicab shall be deemed to be operated or driven within the city if the point of origin of travel is within the city limits. A taxicab operated or driven within the city in violation of this chapter shall be subject to impoundment pursuant to Government Code section 53075.61. For purposes of this chapter, any Gardena Police Officer shall be considered a “transportation inspector” authorized to cite a taxicab operator or driver for operating or driving a taxicab without a permit and authorized to impound a taxicab operated or driven without a permit. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.04)

5.68.050 Permit issuance.
The city council shall grant permits required or authorized by this chapter when, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, it determines that the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this chapter relating to the granting of the permits. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.05)

5.68.060 Nontransferability of permits.
No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle identified in such permit. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.06)

5.68.070 Permit denial, revocation, or suspension.
A. The city council may deny a permit or the renewal of a permit applied for pursuant to this chapter or revoke said permit, and the traffic authority may suspend any permit granted pursuant to this chapter, upon proof that the permittee has:

1. Not complied with the provisions of this chapter; or

2. Been convicted within the previous five years of the commission of a felony; or

3. Been convicted within the previous five years of any offense involving: the unlawful operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or drugs; reckless driving; pandering; possession, use, sale, or transportation of narcotics; assault or battery; any crime while driving a taxicab; or any offense involving moral turpitude; or

4. Had his or her driver license suspended or revoked or has surrendered said driver license pursuant to sections 13352, 13954, 23152, 23153, 23536, 23660 of the California Vehicle Code, or any other section of the California Vehicle Code relating to driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances; or

5. Registered, or is required to register, as a sex offender pursuant to section 290 of the California Penal Code; or

6. Charged fares other than those listed in the authorized fare schedule approved by the city council; or

7. Violated any of the rules and regulations of the city council or traffic authority pertaining to the operation of, and the extent, character and quality of the services of taxicabs; or

8. Provided incomplete or untruthful information when applying for a permit pursuant to this chapter.

B. From the time of the revocation or during the suspension of any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person whose permit is revoked or suspended to be the driver or operator of any taxicab, or to cause or to permit the taxicab for which the permit has been suspended or revoked to engage in the carrying of passengers for hire, or to allow the taxicab to stand while awaiting employment at a designated taxi stand or at any other location within the city, until a new permit has been procured or until the period of suspension has expired.

C. A denial, revocation or suspension of a permit pursuant to this section shall be subject to the notice, hearing and appeal procedures set forth in chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1601 § 57, 2000; prior code § 6-7.07)

5.68.080 Fee.
At the time of applying for any permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay those fees as provided for by section 5.08.430 of this code. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.08)

5.68.090 Permit duration.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.09)

5.68.100 Failure to pay fare.
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the same. Any person who shall hire a taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.10)

5.68.110 Taxicab operator permit – Application information.
An applicant for an operator permit shall submit an application in a form provided by the city, which application shall include at least the following information:

A. Applicant’s name, age, residential address and telephone number, and all business addresses and telephone numbers.

B. If the applicant is a corporation, the names, residential addresses and residential telephone numbers of each of the officers, directors and each shareholder owning more than 10 percent of any stock of the corporation.

C. If the applicant is a partnership, firm, association, or other legal entity that holds a beneficial interest in a taxicab, the natural persons comprising such entity, including their names, residential addresses, residential telephone numbers, business addresses, and business telephone numbers.

D. Applicant’s prior experience as an operator including, but not limited to, the names and addresses of any taxicab or transportation service businesses the applicant has owned or managed, and whether the applicant has had a permit or license to operate such a business denied, revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction, and the reasons therefor.

E. Proof of financial responsibility as required by section 5.68.140.

F. Taxicab insignia and color scheme, including a color photograph depicting such insignia and color scheme.

G. Service standards proposed to be provided in the city, including the estimate of response time between placement of a telephone order and the arrival of the dispatched taxicab as well as the method applicant proposes to record and evaluate actual performance under the service standards.

H. Applicant’s operating procedures (including record keeping, safety standards, maintenance schedules, dispatching procedures, and disciplinary rules).

I. A list of drivers authorized to operate the taxicabs identified in section 5.68.120.A.

J. A Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) Pull Notice Program Requester Code Number issued to applicant, as defined in Vehicle Code Section 1808.1. Operators are required to immediately notify the traffic authority if they receive a DMV Pull Notice that would affect a driver permit issued under this chapter. In the event a driver’s DMV record indicates he/she no longer qualifies for a driver permit, operator shall require the driver to turn over his/her permit to operator. Operator shall return the driver permit to the traffic authority. DMV Pull Notice records shall be made available to the traffic authority upon request.

K. Special programs (including but not limited to driver training and community services) applicant intends to implement in the City.

L. Description and location of applicant’s operational facilities and the locations of any taxi stands for which applicant is requesting approval. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1601 § 57, 2000; prior code § 6-7.02)

5.68.120 Taxicab operator permit – Taxicab ownership – Identification – Inspection – Additional vehicles.
A. An applicant for an operator permit shall submit with the permit application a list composed of the vehicle identification number, license plate number, model, year, and body style for each taxicab to be operated along with proof that the applicant is the owner of each taxicab to be operated. The applicant shall also submit a copy of the current California Department of Motor Vehicles registration for each taxicab listed pursuant to this section. No taxicab shall be operated within the city limits unless it has been listed pursuant to this section, an operator permit has been issued, and said permit is current and has not been suspended.

B. Each taxicab listed pursuant to subparagraph A of this section shall be submitted for an inspection to be conducted by the Gardena Police Department to determine whether the taxicab meets the equipment and condition requirements specified in this section and the California Vehicle Code. Certain equipment must be present and fully functional as OEM (original equipment manufacture), as specified in this section. Taxicabs must be maintained to the following standards at all times:

1. Body Condition.

a. No body damage, frame damage, tears or rust holes in the taxicab body and/or loose pieces hanging from the taxicab body are permitted. Front and rear fenders, bumpers, hood, trunk, and trim shall be securely fixed and shall be in correct alignment to the taxicab as OEM. Body damage shall be defined as an unrepaired dent, distortion, depression, bulge, tear, hole, or disfigurement.

b. The exterior of the taxicab shall be maintained in a reasonably clean condition and shall be free of excessive dirt, tar, oil, and rust.

c. The taxicab paint shall not be faded, blistered, cracked, chipped, peeled, or scratched.

d. Each operator shall paint vehicles in one primary color scheme. The traffic authority may approve one secondary color scheme for special vehicles.

e. The color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used upon operator taxicabs shall not be in conflict with and shall not imitate any other color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used by any other operator. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applied to require any change or modification of any color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia continuously used by any operator authorized prior to January 1, 2002.

2. Brake System: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 26453.

3. Climate Control.

a. The defroster must be operational pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 26712.

b. The air conditioning/heating units shall be functional at all times. The air discharged from the air conditioner interior vent system shall be continuously cool. All air conditioning temperature controls and functions shall operate as originally designed and manufactured with no knobs or components broken or missing. Systems shall operate on all OEM speeds with no excessive noise.

4. Exhaust System: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 27153.

5. Fuel Tank Cap: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 27155.

6. Horn: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 27000.

7. Hubcaps: Hubcaps or wheel covers shall be of like style and shall be on all wheels for which hubcaps are standard equipment.

8. Interior Condition.

a. Passenger compartment, driver compartment, and trunk or luggage area shall be clean and free of foreign matter, offensive odors and litter.

b. Seat upholstery shall be clean. Interior walls, carpet and/or flooring, and ceiling shall be kept reasonably clean. No rips or tears are permitted. All repairs shall be done so as to reasonably match the existing interior.

c. Door handles and doors shall be intact, clean and operational. Each door shall be capable of being unlocked and opened from the interior of the taxicab.

d. Dashboards shall be maintained in a manner that is clean and free of loose articles. Dashboards shall be free of: cracks, holes, and tears.

9. Interior Information.

a. A 4” x 6” information card shall be displayed in plain view of all passengers at all times that the taxicab is in operation.

b. The information card shall contain the following information: name, business address and telephone number of the operator and taxicab driver; the city’s address and phone number, and the authorized fare schedule.

c. The valid driver permit issued to the driver shall be in plain view of all passengers at all times that the taxicab is in operation.

d. One city-issued customer information sticker shall be displayed in plain view of all passengers at all times that a taxicab is in operation. The sticker shall be placed on the outside, rear, passenger-side window. The sticker shall indicate that the taxicab has been safety inspected and indicate a telephone number to call for information.

10. License Plates: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 5202.

11. Lights and Lenses.

a. Headlights shall be operational on both high and low beams (California Vehicle Code § 24400).

b. Taillights shall be operational and the light emitted be red in color (California Vehicle Code § 24600).

c. Emergency flashers shall be operational (California Vehicle Code § 24252).

d. Reverse lights shall be operational (California Vehicle Code § 24606(a)).

e. Turn signal lights shall be operational (California Vehicle Code § 24951(b)(1)).

f. Brake lights shall be operational (California Vehicle Code § 24603(b)).

g. License plate light shall be operational (California Vehicle Code § 24601).

h. Interior lights shall be operational.

i. Light lenses must be intact and contain no holes or large cracks.

12. Markings.

a. Exterior markings shall consist of Operator’s company name, phone number, body number and other city approved logo. Such exterior markings shall be properly and neatly placed and easy to read (in contrasting colors).

b. Operator’s company name shall be placed on each side of taxicab in letters not less than 3 inches in height (in contrasting colors).

c. Taxicab number shall be placed on each side and rear of the taxicab in numbers not less than 3 inches in height.

13. Mirrors: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 26709.

14. Muffler: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 27150(a).

15. Parking Brake: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 26451.

16. Proof of Insurance: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 16020 through 16028.

17. Radio: Taxicabs shall be equipped with a two-way radio or cellular phone in working order.

18. Seat Belts: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 27315. Additionally, taxicab restraint system shall be maintained to OEM specifications and shall be in good working order.

19. Steering and Suspension System: Steering and suspension system shall be in good mechanical order. (California Vehicle Code § 24002(a)(b)).

20. Taximeter and Meter Seals.

a. A taximeter in working order.

b. Taximeter shall have an intact meter seal.

c. Taximeter shall be certified by the County of Los Angeles Bureau of Weights and Measures. The date on the seal shall not be more than 13 months old.

d. Taximeter shall be placed in the taxicab so that the reading dial showing the amount of fare to be charged shall be well lighted and easily read by the passenger.

e. A taxicab shall be placed out of service if the taximeter is not working, the seal is broken or missing, or the authorized fare is not being charged.

f. Taximeter shall not charge a fare other than the authorized fare.

21. Tires.

a. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 27465(b).

b. A jack, tire changing tool, and an inflated spare tire. An operator may be exempted from this requirement upon proof that the operator has a contract with a towing company and a policy in place to send another taxicab for the stranded passengers.

22. Windows.

a. Front and rear windshield per California Vehicle Code § 26710.

b. Safety glass shall be in all windows.

c. Windows shall be operational as originally designed.

23. Windshield Wipers: Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 26707.

24. Footpedal Pads: OEM rubber pads on all foot controls. Pads shall not be worn or deteriorated to the point that metal is showing.

25. California Vehicle Registration.

a. A valid registration per California Vehicle Code § 4462.

b. Registered as commercial Taxicabs per California Vehicle Code § 260.

c. Registered to the operator showing the same operator’s name and address.

26. Vehicle Age: Effective January 1, 2003, the city shall not issue a taxicab permit for any vehicle older than ten (10) model years measured from the current calendar year (example: during calendar year 2003 vehicle must be model year 1993 or later). Vehicles older than ten (10) model years shall not be eligible to operate as a taxicab under any condition.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph B of this section, the traffic authority may waive the requirement that a taxicab be inspected, provided the traffic authority finds that (1) the taxicab is duly licensed by another city in the County of Los Angeles and that the inspection procedure of such other city is adequate to insure the accuracy of the taximeter and safety of the taxicab being operated in the City of Gardena or, (2) the taxicab has been inspected within the previous year by a vehicle inspection facility approved by the traffic authority for performance of vehicle safety and taximeter accuracy inspections. The city council may by resolution prescribe an annual fee for such waiver, which fee shall be paid to the city.

D. Random inspections.

1. In addition to the initial and annual taxicab inspection, all taxicabs operated in the city shall submit to on the road or random inspections by city peace officers or code enforcement officials when so requested. Failure to submit to an inspection may result in suspension of the taxicab permit. The inspecting official shall complete an inspection report at the time of inspection which shall indicate what repairs, if any, need to be made to the taxicab. One copy of the report shall be given to the driver. City shall mail a copy of the report to the operator to whom the vehicle is registered.

2. If the inspection report indicates the need for repairs to a taxicab, the operator is required to present the taxicab to the city for re-inspection within the time frame provided in the report to verify that the required repairs have been made. A re-inspection fee shall be required at time of re-inspection.

3. If a taxicab fails any inspection, the inspecting official may order such taxicab out-of-service pending repairs and re-inspection. The inspecting official may suspend the taxicab permit by removing the taxicab permit sticker.

4. In the event that repairs have not been made to a taxicab within the time frame provided for in the report, the taxicab permit shall be suspended or revoked until all corrections have been made to the satisfaction of the traffic authority.

5. Upon correction and passing re-inspection, the traffic authority shall re-instate the taxicab permit by issuing a replacement taxicab permit using the original expiration date.

E. Upon issuance of a taxicab operator permit and upon passing inspection (or having such requirement waived pursuant to subparagraph C of this section), the city shall issue a nontransferable taxicab permit sticker for each approved taxicab. The taxicab permit sticker shall be affixed to the left-hand corner of the rear of the taxicab for which the sticker is issued. The sticker shall be valid for one (1) year, after which time the taxicab must be submitted for re-inspection pursuant to this section. Operator shall cause any expired stickers to be removed before affixing a newly issued sticker to a taxicab.

F. Prior to placing into service a taxicab not previously listed in an operator permit application, a permittee shall submit to the city the information required by this section and shall comply with the inspection requirements set forth in subparagraphs B and C of this section. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.12)

5.68.130 Taxicab operator permit – Qualifications.
In addition to the criteria set forth in subsection A of section 5.68.070, the city council, in determining whether a permit applied for pursuant to this article shall be issued, may take into consideration any and all facts and conditions which the council may deem pertinent or proper, including, but not limited to a consideration of:

A. The financial responsibility of the applicant;

B. The effect of the granting of the permit applied for on the businesses and operations of prior permittees, then operating;

C. Whether or not prior permittees, then operating are:

1. Under efficient management earning a fair and reasonable return on their capital devoted to the service; and

2. Under normal conditions adequately serving the public; and

D. Whether the location from which the applicant proposes to operate, if such location is within the city limits, complies with the provisions of the city’s zoning ordinance, including but not limited to those provisions pertaining to repair, storage, and parking of vehicles.

E. To assist the city council in making its determinations pursuant to this section, each operator shall, on a quarterly basis, submit to the traffic authority the following information for the reporting period: (1) the number of trips handled by the operator’s company in the city, (2) average call response time, (3) average trip distance, (4) logs describing pick-up and drop off locations for each trip, and (5) complaint logs. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6-7.13)

5.68.140 Taxicab operator permit – Insurance.
A. Before any operator permit is issued, the permit applicant shall be required to file with the city evidence of insurance, in full force and effect, issued by a solvent and responsible company licensed to do business in the State of California, insuring the applicant against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons, including taxicab passengers, or property, from the negligent operation or maintenance of a taxicab. Applicant shall provide a Certificate of Insurance and Insurance Policy Binder showing that the applicant is insured for a minimum combined single limit of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for the injury or death of one or more persons in the same accident, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for injury or destruction of property. In addition, the applicant shall direct the insurance company to provide to City certified copies of Endorsements to the insurance policy 1) naming the City of Gardena, its officers, elected officials, employees, and agents as additional insureds; and 2) indicating that coverage shall not be reduced, terminated or cancelled without thirty (30) days prior written notice to city. Certified copies of the insurance policies shall be provided to city within ninety (90) days of the policy issuance. At least ten (10) business days prior to the expiration of the current policies, an operator shall submit insurance binders evidencing insurance coverage for the policy period subsequent to the expiration of the current policies. No self-insured retention shall be allowed. Deductibles shall not exceed $2500 per occurrence.

B. The city manager may, based on an increase in the Consumer Price Index or by reason of the number or types of claims which have or might result from the applicant’s operation of a vehicle for hire within the city, require such applicant to increase the limits of the insurance coverage required by this section; provided that the city manager shall serve such applicant with a notice of any required increase in its insurance coverage at least thirty days prior to the date that such insurance coverage must be in effect. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1601 § 58, 2000; Ord. 1566 §§ 1, 2, 1999; prior code §§ 6-7.14, 6-7.18)

5.68.150 Taxicab driver permit – Application.
An applicant for a driver permit shall submit an application in a form provided by the city, which application shall include at least the following items or information:

A. Applicant’s name, age, residential address and telephone number, and all business addresses and telephone numbers.

B. A written statement of the applicant’s experience as a taxicab driver.

C. A copy of the applicant’s valid California driver license and driving record as compiled by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

D. A copy of any other taxicab driver licenses or permits held by the applicant.

E. Affiliation with operator.

F. A written statement that applicant is familiar with the City of Gardena and the surrounding area, the operating procedures of any taxicab operator with whom the applicant is affiliated, and the provisions of this chapter.

G. Any other information as the city council or traffic authority may require. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1601 § 58, 2000; Ord. 1566 §§ 1, 2, 1999; Prior Code § 6-7.14)

5.68.160 Taxicab driver permit – Qualifications.
In addition to satisfying the criteria set forth in subsection A of section 5.68.070, each applicant for a driver permit must meet the following minimum qualifications:

A. Be eighteen years of age or over; and

B. Comply with the Mandatory Controlled Substance and Alcohol Testing Certification Program set forth in section 5.68.170. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.170 Taxicab driver permit – Mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program.
A. An applicant for a driver permit shall test negative for each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations, before employment or issuance of a driver permit. Drivers shall test negative for these controlled substances and for alcohol as a condition of permit renewal or at such other times as the city shall designate. As used in this section, a negative test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent.

B. Testing procedures shall comply with Part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations, except that the applicant or driver shall show a valid California driver license at the time and place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in this section. Requirements for rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and follow-up testing and other requirements are as specified in Part 382 (commencing with section 382.101) of Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations.

C. Evidence of compliance with a controlled substance or alcohol testing certification program conducted by another jurisdiction that meets the requirements set forth in section 53075.5(b)(3) of the California Government Code shall be accepted as meeting the requirements of this section. Any negative test result shall be accepted for one year as meeting a requirement for periodic permit renewal testing if the driver has not tested positive subsequent to a negative result. However, an earlier negative result shall not be accepted as meeting the pre-employment testing requirement for any subsequent employment, or any testing requirements under the program other than periodic testing.

D. In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the test results shall be reported directly to the city, which shall notify the driver and the taxicab leasing company of record, if any, of positive results. In all other cases, the results shall be reported directly to the employing taxicab operator, who shall notify the city of positive results.

E. Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves. Employing operators shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with respect to their employees and potential employees, except that an operator may require employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up testing.

F. Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, the city shall give the driver a list of the consortia certified pursuant to Part 382 (commencing with section 382.101) of Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations that the city knows offer tests in or near the city.

G. All test results shall be confidential and shall not be released to any party, other than the operator or the city, without the consent of the driver or applicant. No evidence derived from a positive test result obtained through a test conducted pursuant to this section shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful possession, sale or distribution of controlled substances. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.180 Operating regulations – Route requirements.
Any taxicab driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely, lawfully and expeditiously to their destination. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.190 Appeals.
Any decision made pursuant to the authority of this chapter shall be appealable to the City Manager.

Decisions of the City Manager shall be final unless appealed to the City Council within ten days of the mailing of notice of such decision to the applicant.

All appeals made pursuant to this section shall be in writing, set forth in detail the specific grounds of such appeal, and be accompanied by the required appeal fee established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1629 § 3, 2003; Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.200 Operating regulations – Misrepresentation prohibited.
It is unlawful for any operator, driver or agent soliciting patronage for any taxicab to misrepresent by word, sign, insignia or badge the true identity of the taxicab for which the patronage is sought. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.210 Operating regulations – Receipt for fare.
It is unlawful for the operator of any taxicab upon receiving full payment for a fare as indicated by the taximeter to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any passenger making the payment. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.220 Operating regulations – Taxi stands.
It is unlawful for a taxicab to be parked while awaiting employment in any place except a taxi stand designated pursuant to this code, or from a private garage or parking space on private property. Taxi stands shall be designated by resolution of the City Council and shall be available for the exclusive use of taxicabs authorized to operate in the city pursuant to permits issued in accordance with this chapter. Designated taxi stands shall be in operation twenty-four (24) hours of every day, unless otherwise provided by the city council. It is unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to leave a taxicab unattended at a taxi stand for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

5.68.230 Application to existing permittees.
Any permittee lawfully operating on the effective date of this chapter shall, no later than ninety (90) days from the effective date of this chapter, comply with all the requirements of subsection 5.68.170. Said permittee shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter upon the first anniversary of the effective date of this chapter and thereafter. (Ord. 1625 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 5.72
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMERS
Sections:

5.72.010    Definitions.

5.72.020    Adult performer permit required.

5.72.030    Application for an adult performer permit.

5.72.040    Investigation.

5.72.050    Police chief’s decision – Notice.

5.72.060    Granting or denial of adult performer permit.

5.72.070    Permit – Term – Continuing duty to supply information.

5.72.080    Notice of revocation.

5.72.090    Appeals.

5.72.095    Notices.

5.72.100    Moratorium on reapplying after revocation or denial.

5.72.110    Violations – Penalties.

5.72.120    Existing adult performers.

5.72.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained herein shall have the following meaning unless another meaning is otherwise apparent from the context:

The definitions contained in Chapter 18.62 of this code shall apply to this chapter.

“Adult performer permit” or “permit” means a permit issued by the chief of police which allows a person to engage or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business.

“Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city or his designee.

“Permittee” means the person to whom an adult performer permit is issued.

“Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” means a person who within the two years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or the date of the revocation notice provided pursuant to Section 5.72.090, has been convicted of any offense which is classified as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual battery or abuse, rape, distribution of material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or lewd conduct, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.020 Adult performer permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business without first obtaining an adult performer permit from the city. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.030 Application for an adult performer permit.
Applicants for an adult performer permit shall file a written application, signed under penalty of perjury, on a form provided by the license collector. The applicant shall be required to show proof of identification. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. The application shall contain the information specified below:

A. Applicant’s legal name and any other names, including stage names and aliases, used by the applicant;

B. The birth date and birth place of the applicant;

C. Height, weight, hair and eye color;

D. Fingerprints and thumbprints of the applicant;

E. The residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant;

F. Two passport-sized photographs taken within the last six months;

G. Whether the applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct as defined in Section 5.72.010 and if so, the dates and details relating to the disqualifying conduct; and

H. The name of the adult-oriented business(es) where the applicant intends to perform. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.040 Investigation.
Upon receipt of an application properly filed, the chief of police shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.050 Police chief’s decision – Notice.
Notice. The chief of police shall give notice of his decision to the applicant within ten days of receipt of a completed application and shall state the reasons for a denial or conditional approval of the permit. The notice shall state that the decision is final absent a timely appeal to the City Manager in accordance with Section 5.72.090. (Ord. 1601 § 60, 2000; Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.060 Granting or denial of adult performer permit.
The police chief shall grant an adult performer permit unless he or she finds at least one of the following conditions present:

A. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application;

B. The applicant has engaged in disqualifying conduct as defined in Section 5.72.010;

C. The applicant is under eighteen years of age. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.070 Permit – Term – Continuing duty to supply information.
A. Adult performer permits shall be subject to renewal every three years. The procedure for renewal shall be the same as for the issuance of a new permit, except that no fingerprints shall be required. The renewal application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council.

B. Every person to whom an adult performer permit is granted shall be issued an identification badge which shall contain the person’s legal name and the photograph submitted with the application along with the expiration date. The permittee shall have the identification badge readily available at all times the permittee is performing.

C. Permittees shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the police department, shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1601 § 61, 2000; Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.080 Notice of revocation.
The Chief of Police shall give notice to the permittee of the violation(s) involved and set forth a period of time for the correction of the violation(s) if correction is possible. If the Chief finds that the violation(s) continue without correction, or if correction is not possible, then the Chief shall issue a notice of revocation which shall contain a statement of the violation(s). The Chief shall serve the notice of revocation on the permittee, the employer, and any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and conclusive in the absence of a timely appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.72.090. If the permit is being revoked due to an immediate danger to the public health, the notice shall specify the danger and provide that an appeal will not stay the revocation. (Ord. 1601 § 62, 2000; Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.090 Appeals.
A. Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, within ten consecutive calendar days from the date of the notice, file a written appeal with the City Manager.

B. The matter shall be set for hearing no more than twenty-one days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as all relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. This time period may not be extended and the hearing may not be continued without written authorization of the appellant.

C. At the time hearing, the appellant, City staff and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as they may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D. Based upon the submission of such evidence, the review of the city’s files the City Manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying, or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken and if appropriate, specifying the time period in which corrective actions must be taken. The notice shall be given within three working days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8.

E. A timely appeal shall stay the order from which the appeal is being taken, unless the notice so provides that a permit has been revoked or other order made due to an immediate danger to the public health and safety.

F. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1601 § 63, 2000; Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.095 Notices.
Any notice required by this chapter shall be delivered by personal service or sending the same, certified mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, to the address listed in the application or the appeal. (Ord. 1601 § 63, 2000)

5.72.100 Moratorium on reapplying after revocation or denial.
If an adult performer permit has been revoked or denied, the applicant shall not be issued a new adult performer permit for a minimum period of two years from the date of revocation or denial, unless the city manager finds that the basis for such revocation or denial has been corrected. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.110 Violations – Penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

5.72.120 Existing adult performers.
All adult performers engaging or participating in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business shall be required to apply for an adult performer permit within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1498 § 13 (part), 1996)

Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapters:

6.02    Animal Control Services

6.16    Noisy Animals and Fowl

6.20    Pigeons and Doves

6.24    Sales of Fowl as Novelties

Chapter 6.02
ANIMAL CONTROL SERVICES
Sections:

6.02.005    Animal control.

6.02.010    Adoption of Title 10 of County Code.

6.02.020    Violations.

6.02.030    Repealed by Ord. 1722.

6.02.040    Cats – No license required.

6.02.050    Dogs – Public parks.

6.02.060    Deleted.

6.02.005 Animal control.
A. The chief of police shall serve as the poundmaster for the city.

B. It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to enforce the provisions of the animal control regulations for the city of Gardena either through city forces or by contract with another agency. (Ord. 1722 § 1, 2010)

6.02.010 Adoption of Title 10 of County Code.
A. Subject to the additions, amendments and deletions set forth in this chapter, the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions set forth in Title 10, “Animals,” of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended through Ordinance 2016-0040 passed on October 6, 2016, are hereby established as the rules, regulations and provisions of and for the city relating to animal control. Title 10 of the County Code and the remaining provisions of this title shall be referred to as the animal control regulations of the city of Gardena.

B. In cases of conflict between this chapter and any other provisions of Title 6 of the Gardena Municipal Code, this chapter shall prevail.

C. In cases of conflict between this chapter and Section 18.42.020 of the Gardena Municipal Code, Section 18.42.020 shall prevail.

D. For purposes of application of Title 10, all references to “county,” “county of Los Angeles,” or “county unincorporated area” shall mean the “city of Gardena.”

E. The provisions of the animal control regulations of the city of Gardena may be enforced by appropriate personnel of both the city and the county. (Ord. 1783 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1731 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1728 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1722 § 2 (part), 2010: Ord. 1662 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1610 § 2, 2001; Ord. 1515 § 1 (part), 1997)

6.02.020 Violations.
In accordance with Government Code Section 50022.4, the following penalty clauses are contained in Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code and are hereby adopted:

10.04.060    Violation--Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this title is guilty of an infraction, unless another penalty is stated. Misdemeanors are punishable under Penal Code section 19.

10.12.190    Refusing to Show License or Certificate Unlawful.

A person who refuses a request by an authorized Department employee to produce a dog or cat rabies vaccination certificate, license or tag is guilty of a misdemeanor.

10.12.200    Interfering with Department Officers Prohibited.

A person who interferes with, opposes, or resists the Director or an employee of the Department, while the Director or employee is performing his or her duties is guilty of a misdemeanor.

10.12.210    Right of Entry for Inspection.

A. An authorized County employee or a law enforcement officer may enter a building or property to inspect the premises only if: 1. The owner or occupant of the building or property consents to the entry and inspection after the authorized County employee or law enforcement officer presents his credentials and explains the reasons for the entry and inspection; or 2. The authorized County employee or law enforcement officer obtains a warrant for the entry and inspection of the building or property under sections 1822.50 to 1822.57 of the Code of Civil Procedure; or 3. The authorized County employee or law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping of an animal on the property is so hazardous, unsafe, or dangerous that an immediate inspection is necessary to safeguard an animal or public health and safety. Under these circumstances, the employee or officer may use reasonable means to immediately enter and inspect the building or property after presenting his credentials to the owner or occupant and requesting entry, if possible under the circumstances.

B. This section does not prohibit an authorized County employee or law enforcement officer from entering property in the Department’s jurisdiction for the purpose of capturing an animal running at large in violation of this Division 1 or other applicable law. A person who prevents or obstructs the capture of an animal running at large is guilty of a misdemeanor.

10.20.120    Fees payable annually--Delinquency charge.

License fees must be paid annually. A delinquency charge will be applied when the license fees provided for in this chapter are not paid within 10 days after the license fee is due.

10.20.280    Licensing of Dogs Used for Protection.

Every business or person using a guard or attack dog must license each dog with the Department; failure to license a guard or attack dog is a misdemeanor.

10.20.310    Sign Required on Premises--Contents.

Clear and legible signs must be posted at each of the entrances to the premises where dogs are licensed under this Part 3, stating that the dog and the location are licensed with the Los Angeles County Department of Animal Care and Control and the location and telephone number of the nearest County animal care center. Failure to post the required sign is a misdemeanor.

10.20.375    Penalties.

The penalties for violations of any provision of this part 4 are as follows:

A. First violation. A first violation shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of up to $250. If the owner or custodian fails to correct the underlying cause of the violation within 30 days after being notified of the violation, it shall be deemed a second violation.

B. Second violation. A violation within a year of a first violation shall be deemed a second violation. A second violation is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of up to six months or by a fine of up to $1,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each subsequent violation within one year is an additional misdemeanor.

10.28.020    Initial license--Application required.

A person who seeks to operate an animal facility or to keep a wild animal under Section 10.28.060 must file an application with the Department and pay the required fee. A person who possessed or owned a wild animal or who operated an animal facility without the required license must pay the penalty owed under Section 10.90.010, in addition to the license fee. When a person applies for licenses for different purposes for animals at the same premises at the same time, the cost of the licenses will be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.90.010.

10.28.060    License--Required for Certain Activities and Animals--Certain Animals Exempt.

A person, including a new owner of an existing organization or business, cannot conduct or operate an animal facility or keep a wild animal within the Department’s jurisdiction without first obtaining a license from the Department and any other applicable agency. Failure to obtain a license for an animal facility or a wild animal is a misdemeanor. A license is not required for the keeping of the following animals as pets:

1. Birds;

2. Domestic rodents (pet mice, rats, guinea pigs, hamsters, and chinchillas);

3. Fish;

4. Non-venomous reptiles less than six feet in length;

5. Rabbits.

10.28.280    Display of Grading Card--Violation.

A. The facility is required to post the Animal Facility Grade Card at the animal facility as follows:

1. Posted in the front window of the facility within five feet of the front door or;

2. Posted in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the facility within five feet of the front door; or

3. Posted in a location as directed and determined in the discretion of the Director to ensure proper notice to the general public and to patrons.

B. If an animal facility is operated in the same building or space or shares a common customer entrance as a separately licensed or permitted business, the facility must post the Animal Facility Grade Card(s) in the initial customer contact area, or in a location determined by the Director.

C. The Animal Facility Grade Card must not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden, or removed. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, it is unlawful to operate an animal facility unless the Animal Facility Grade Card is displayed as required by this Section. A violation of this subsection C is a misdemeanor punishable under Penal Code Section 19.

D. The Director may waive posting of the Animal Facility Grade Card when the animal facility consists of animals maintained solely as personal pets that are not used to breed, show, sell, adopt, or transfer ownership or custody of the animals by any other method.

10.32.040    Livestock and Wild Animal at Large--Misdemeanor.

It is unlawful for an owner or custodian of a wild animal or livestock to allow:

A. Such an animal to run at large on public property; or

B. Such an animal to enter or remain in or upon any private property owned by a person, other than the owner or custodian of the animal, without the written consent of the property owner or lessee.

C. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.

10.32.080    Wild Animal(s).

A person who owns a wild animal or operates a wild animal facility must properly confine the animal(s) on the premises and must not allow the animal(s) to be at large. A wild animal is not allowed to be taken to any place where it would endanger any person. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.

10.37.150    Compliance with Conditions and Consequences of Violation of Conditions.

A. The hearing officer or judicial officer who heard the petition to determine if a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious may schedule follow-up hearing dates to ensure compliance with all conditions imposed.

B. Consequences that may result from the failure of an owner or custodian of a dog released after a hearing pursuant to Section 10.37.110 or Section 10.37.120 to comply with any of the conditions imposed under Section 10.37.130 or Section 10.37.140 include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. The failure to comply with any condition is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both the fine and imprisonment;

2. A violation of any part of an administrative decision or court order may be the subject of a civil action for injunctive relief to enjoin the person who violated the decision or order. The filing and prosecution of an action for injunctive relief does not limit the authority or ability of the County to take any other action permitted by law;

3. A violation of an administrative decision or court order following a determination that a dog is potentially dangerous, may result in the filing of an action to determine if the dog is vicious under Section 10.37.030.C.

10.37.180    Infraction/misdemeanor penalty for dog bites.

An owner or custodian of a dog who allows a dog to be uncontrolled or at large on public property, on the private property of another person, or on common areas of private property is guilty of an infraction, or a misdemeanor if the dog injures a person or a domestic animal or livestock.

10.40.010    Animal Care--Requirements for Animal Owners and Animal Facilities.

A person who owns an animal or who owns or operates an animal facility, must comply with each of the following conditions, the failure of which is a misdemeanor:

A. Housing facilities for animals must be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, contain the animals, and restrict the entrance of other animals.

B. All animals must be supplied with sufficient food and water suitable for the age, species, and nutritional requirements of the animal. Animals must have access at all times to potable water, unless otherwise directed by a veterinarian. All animal food must be properly stored to prevent contamination, infestation by vermin, and exposure to the elements.

C. Animals must be groomed and kept in a manner that is not injurious to their health. All animal buildings or enclosures must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition to control odors and prevent the spread of disease.

D. All animals must be maintained in a manner to eliminate excessive and nighttime noise.

E. No animals may be without attention for more than 12 consecutive hours; whenever an animal is left unattended at a commercial animal facility, the telephone number of the Department, or the name, address, and telephone number of the responsible person, must be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property. Animal facilities that breed dogs must comply with the applicable minimum staffing requirements set forth in Section 10.40.200.

F. Animals may not be neglected, teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented, or in any manner made to suffer.

G. No condition may be maintained or permitted that is or could be injurious to the animals.

H. Tethering of animals is prohibited except as permitted under California Health and Safety Code section 122335.

I. Animal buildings and enclosures must be constructed and maintained to prevent escape of animals. All reasonable precautions must be taken to protect the animals and the public.

J. An animal facility must isolate sick animals so as to not endanger the health of other animals.

K. A building or enclosure for animals must be kept in a sanitary condition and in good repair, and must be constructed of material easily cleaned. The building must be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling must be provided to meet the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of the animals and proper sanitation. An animal facility must be equipped with working smoke alarms and have means of fire suppression, such as a sprinkler system in each room where animals are kept, or functioning fire extinguishers.

L. An animal must be taken to a veterinarian for examination or treatment if the Director orders the owner or custodian to do so.

M. All animal enclosures, including, but not limited to, rooms, cages, and kennel runs, must be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for the animals housed there. An enclosure with a wire bottom may be used temporarily for dogs, and only if it complies with Health and Safety Code sections 122065 and 122065.5. If enclosures, such as crates and other mobile enclosures, are stacked upon one another, or on a surface other than the floor, the crates/enclosures must be securely fastened and designed and arranged so that: there is no danger of an enclosure falling; the animals do not have direct access to one another; and waste from one enclosure cannot be transmitted to another enclosure. Food and water containers must be secured to prevent spillage. Crates may be stacked no more than two crates high.

N. A violation of an ordinance must be corrected within the time specified by the Director.

O. Proper shelter and protection from the weather must be provided at all times.

P. An animal must not be given any alcoholic beverage, unless prescribed by a veterinarian.

Q. Animals that are natural enemies, temperamentally unsuited or otherwise incompatible, must not be housed together, or so near each other as to cause injury, fear, or torment. Two or more animals can be housed together if they do not harm each other.

R. Any tack, equipment, device, substance, or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to any animal may not be used.

S. Working animals must be given adequate rest periods. Confined or restrained animals must be given appropriate exercise.

T. An animal that is weak, exhausted, sick, injured, lame, or otherwise unfit may not be worked or used.

U. An animal that the Department has suspended from use may not be worked or used until released by the Department.

V. Animals bearing evidence of malnutrition, ill health, unhealed injury, or having been kept in an unsanitary condition may not be displayed.

W. An animal whose appearance is or may be offensive or contrary to public decency may not be displayed.

X. No animal may be allowed to constitute or cause a hazard, or be a menace to the health, peace, or safety of the community.

Y. A person may not violate any condition imposed by the Director on any license issued by the Department.

10.40.40    Animal Facilities--Records Required for Each Animal.

A. A person who has an animal facility license must keep available for inspection on the premises the following records:

1. The name and current contact information of the owner of each animal kept at the animal facility;

2. The date the animal entered and left the animal facility, including any animal that died while at the facility;

3. The reason that the animal was at the facility, such as for boarding, sale, breeding, or grooming;

4. The description of the animal, including its age, breed, sex, color, and other available identifying information, such as an animal license number, tattoo, or microchip registration number.

B. A current, valid rabies certificate must be maintained for every dog and cat older than four months of age while the dog or cat is kept at the animal facility.

C. Any animal facility selling dogs and/or cats to the public must post a notice containing the breeder’s name, address, and license number on each dog or cat’s cage. If the breeder’s name is not known, the name and address of the person from whom the dog or cat was obtained must be displayed.

D. A violation of any requirement of this section is a misdemeanor.

10.40.065    Animal Nuisance.

A. Definition. An animal nuisance arises when an animal bites or otherwise injures a person, attacks other animals, is repeatedly at large, damages and/or strays on private or public property, or otherwise interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.

B. Violation. When the Department receives a complaint of an animal nuisance, it will issue a written notice to the owner or custodian of the animal advising of the nuisance, and ordering the owner to correct the nuisance. An animal owner or custodian who fails to immediately correct the animal nuisance after receiving written notice from the Department is guilty of a misdemeanor.

10.40.200    Breeding License, Restrictions and Requirements.

A. General Requirements.

1. Dog Breeding License. A dog breeding license is an animal facility license issued to a person who breeds dogs commercially. A person, as defined in Section 10.08.190, applying for a dog breeding license must comply with all licensing requirements set forth in Section 10.28.050, all other applicable ordinances, and all federal and state laws, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code section 122045, et seq. Approval from the public health officer may be required, if necessary, because of health concerns. The size category of the dog to be bred (Adult size: 1-20 lbs.; 21-50 lbs.; 51-100 lbs.; and 101+ lbs.) and the number of dogs to be housed at the facility will be stated on the license. A change in the size category of dogs bred requires re-inspection and a new license application.

2. Breeding Facilities Housing 50 or Fewer Sexually Intact Dogs Over the Age of One Year. An animal facility may not have more than a total of 50 sexually intact dogs over the age of one year, unless it meets the requirements of Subsection A.3. below. An animal facility having 50 or fewer dogs must have adequate staffing on the premises of the animal facility to attend to the dogs at least eight hours in every 24-hour period, so long as the dogs are not left unattended for longer than 12 continuous hours. Whenever the dogs are left unattended, the telephone number of the Department of animal care and control, or the name, address, and telephone number of the responsible person, must be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property.

3. Breeding Facilities Housing 51 or More Sexually Intact Dogs Over the Age of One Year. The Director may approve an application for 51 or more dogs if the applicant complies with the following additional requirements:

a. Facilities with 51 or more sexually intact dogs over the age of one year will be re-inspected more frequently. The number of re-inspections per year is determined by the number of dogs housed in the facility:

51-75 dogs:

one annual re-inspection;

76-100 dogs:

two annual re-inspections;

101-125 dogs:

three annual re-inspections;

126-150 dogs:

four annual re-inspections;

151 + dogs:

five annual re-inspections.

b. The animal facility demonstrates that it is able to house and care for the number of dogs in compliance with the requirements of this section and all applicable requirements of Title 10;

c. The animal facility provides a written medical program, approved by a California licensed veterinarian, to prevent and control illness and parasitism. The program must include a regular de-worming schedule and a regular vaccination schedule against commonly transmitted canine diseases, and must be updated annually;

d. The animal facility maintains records on site, demonstrating that an annual veterinary examination has been performed on each intact male or female dog over one year of age. The record of each exam must reflect that a physical exam consisting of auscultation and palpation, and a visual evaluation of the dog including eyes, ears, mouth and general body condition was performed. The record of each exam must also include the weight, temperature, heart rate, respiration, any significant medical findings relating to the dog’s condition, and any recommendations for treatment;

e. The animal facility obtains approval from the Director of an emergency response plan, which is updated annually; and

f. The animal facility maintains adequate staffing at the facility 18 hours a day to attend to the animals. Whenever an animal is left unattended, the telephone number of the Department of animal care and control, or the name, address and telephone number of the responsible person, must be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property.

B. Health of Breeding Dogs.

1. A female unaltered dog must be at least 12 months old before being bred. Records of litters birthed are required to be maintained pursuant to Subsection D. below;

2. Offspring may not be removed from the premises earlier than eight weeks of age except for medical reasons ordered by a California licensed veterinarian. The order must be in writing, state the medical reason for early separation, and be provided to the Department, if requested, up to two years after its issuance.

C. Housing Requirements.

1. The housing for the animals must comply with Section 10.40.010;

2. Each pregnant dog must be housed separately at least three (3) days before giving birth and be monitored at reasonable intervals;

3. A dog who has just given birth must be provided with a contained nesting area and housed with her litter in their own run or enclosure until the newborns are weaned.

D. Dog Identification and Recordkeeping.

1. The following current records must be maintained and produced upon request to determine licensing compliance or for any other purpose relating to the public health, safety, or welfare. These records must be provided to a purchaser of any dog sold or transferred to another person by the facility:

a. All dogs must be microchipped or tattooed upon reaching the age of four months or prior to sale or transfer, whichever is earlier. Microchip and tattoo records must be kept for all dogs.

b. In addition to the records required by California Health and Safety Code sections 122050 and 122055 relating to dogs, breeding facilities must keep the following records for all dogs: the date and from whom the dog was acquired; the date of each litter birthed by each female animal; veterinary records; and the cause of death and the method of disposal.

c. Knowingly providing false information or records relating to any animal is a misdemeanor.

E. Reasonable Restrictions on the Breeding of Animals Other Than Dogs. Breeders of animals, other than dogs, that are normally kept as pets for sale or exchange in return for consideration, must comply with all applicable requirements of Section 10.40.010. In addition, the Director may impose reasonable conditions on a breeding license, including a limitation on the number of animals permitted at a facility, and may impose recordkeeping requirements, in the interest of the health and safety of the public and of the animals.

F. Noncompliance—Penalties. The penalties for violations of any provision of this Section 10.40.200 are as follows:

1. First Violation. A first violation is an infraction punishable by a fine of up to $250. If the owner or custodian fails to correct the underlying cause of the violation within 30 days after being notified of the violation, it is a second violation.

2. Second Violation. A violation within a year of a first violation is a second violation. A second violation is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County jail for up to six months or by a fine of up to $1,000, or both. Each subsequent violation within one year of the first violation is an additional misdemeanor.

G. Noncompliance--Injunctive Relief. Any act or failure to act in violation of this Section may be the subject of a civil action to ensure compliance. The filing and prosecution of an action will not limit the authority or ability of the County to enforce the requirements of Section 10.40.200 or to impose penalties or take any other action permitted by law.

10.48.060    Violation of Division 2 provisions--Penalty.

Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of the ordinance codified in Division 2 of Title 10 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

10.72.040    Violation--Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

10.76.050    Violation deemed misdemeanor.

Every person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

10.80.010    Transporting Dogs in Open Vehicles Prohibited When.

It is unlawful for a person to transport any dog in or on the back or bed of any open truck or other open vehicle while traveling on any County road, street, highway, lane, or alley, unless the dog is cross tethered to a harness or the back or bed of the vehicle is partially enclosed by stakes, racks, or other similar devices that rise at least two feet, nine inches above the tops of the sides and back of the vehicle, and are designed to prevent the dog from falling or escaping from the vehicle. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.

10.84.010    Providing Food for Certain Rodents or Predator Animals Prohibited.

A. It is unlawful to feed a nondomesticated rodent or nondomesticated mammalian predator as defined in this section, unless:

1. The person is the owner of the animal and the animal is kept in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of Fish and Wildlife; or

2. After notifying the responsible agency to pick up the animal, the person provides food to a trapped or injured animal.

B. For purposes of this chapter:

1. “Rodent” includes ground squirrels;

2. “Mammalian predators” include coyotes, raccoons, foxes, and opossums.

C. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.

10.90.010 II.A.2

Penalty for operation of an animal facility without license. A penalty equivalent to the cost of the license will be added to the license fee if a facility operates without a license.

(Ord. 1783 § 2, 2017: Ord. 1731 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1728 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1722 § 2 (part), 2010: Ord. 1662 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1610 § 3, 2001; Ord. 1515 § 1 (part), 1997)

6.02.040 Cats – No license required.
Notwithstanding any provision of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, there is no requirement to license a cat in the City of Gardena. The licensing of cats is strictly voluntary. (Ord. 1610 § 5, 2001)

6.02.050 Dogs – Public parks.
Section 10.32.010 of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code is amended by adding an additional sentence to read as follows:

Nothing herein allows dogs or other animals on park premises in violation of section 11.04.260.

(Ord. 1515 § 1 (part), 1997)

6.02.060 Kennel fees.
Deleted. (Ord. 1662 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1629 § 4, 2003; Ord. 1540 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 6.16
NOISY ANIMALS AND FOWL
Sections:

6.16.010    Noisy animals and fowl in residential districts prohibited.

6.16.010 Noisy animals and fowl in residential districts prohibited.
No person shall keep or maintain, or cause or permit to be kept or maintained, upon any premises in any residential district of the city any animal, rooster or fowl which by any sound, crow or cry shall disturb the peace and comfort of any neighborhood or interfere with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (Prior code § 5-1.301)

Chapter 6.20
PIGEONS AND DOVES
Sections:

6.20.010    Pigeons – Residential zone restrictions.

6.20.020    Pigeons and doves – Housing.

6.20.030    Pigeons – Confinement periods.

6.20.040    Pigeons – Flying at large.

6.20.050    Pigeons – Capture and detention.

6.20.010 Pigeons – Residential zone restrictions.
No person shall keep any kind of pigeon within the city, other than pedigreed homing, high-flying, or air-performing pigeons, in Zones R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4, as established by the zoning laws of the city. (Prior code § 5-1.401)

6.20.020 Pigeons and doves – Housing.
A. No person shall erect or maintain any pigeon house or dove cote or other structure or place where pigeons or doves are kept or keep any pigeons or doves within twenty-five feet of any dwelling house; provided, however:

1. Pigeons and doves may be kept in such pigeon houses, dove cotes or other structures within not less than twenty-five feet of the dwelling house of the owner of such pigeon house, dove cote or other structure;

2. Pigeons and doves may be kept in a pigeon house, dove cote or other structure, or in any cage or other enclosure if it shall be enclosed in such manner as to prevent the escape of any pigeons or doves therefrom and if situated not less than twenty-five feet from the nearest dwelling house; and

3. Carrier and homing pigeons which are not raised or kept for the market or other commercial purposes may be kept and liberated for exercise or racing within not less than twenty feet from any door, window or other opening of any dwelling if a permit in writing, authorizing the keeping and liberation for exercise and racing of such carrier and homing pigeons, shall be first applied for and obtained from the council.

B. Liberation of pigeons and doves shall only be allowed in accordance with the following conditions:

1. The lofts or pigeon houses for keeping of such carrier and homing pigeons shall be elevated at least eighteen inches above the ground or other foundation, upon postlegs or pillars; and

2. The entire floor and sides for at least two feet extending upwards from the bottom of the floor of the lofts or pigeon houses shall be covered or protected by galvanized iron, or its equivalent, concrete or eighteen gauge wire mesh of not more than one-half inch of mesh dimension.

C. Sanitation. Pigeon lofts and houses wherein such carrier or homing pigeons are kept must be scraped or cleaned at least three times each week. (Ord. 1722 § 4, 2010: Ord. 1629 § 5, 2003; prior code § 5-1.402)

6.20.030 Pigeons – Confinement periods.
Homing and air-performing pigeons shall be confined within lofts or flypens during periods not to exceed one and one-half hours in the morning and during a like period in the afternoon. (Prior code § 5-1.403)

6.20.040 Pigeons – Flying at large.
High-flying pigeons may be permitted to fly at large at the discretion of their owner provided the flights are continuous and that such pigeons return to their loft immediately upon completion of such flight. (Prior code § 5-1.404)

6.20.050 Pigeons – Capture and detention.
No person, except the owner thereof, shall catch, kill, capture or detain any homing, high-flying or air-performing pigeon which at the time of its capture or detention has upon its leg a seamless numbered band as issued by any national pigeon organization or by the United States Army, Navy or Marine Corps; or which has upon its leg a band bearing the name or initials of its owner; or which has the name of its owner stamped upon a tail or wing feather. No person shall molest a pigeon of the above description which has been grounded by injury or bad weather. (Prior code § 5-1.405)

Chapter 6.24
SALES OF FOWL AS NOVELTIES
Sections:

6.24.010    Sales of fowl as novelties in public places.

6.24.020    Sales of dyed and colored fowl.

6.24.030    Care of fowl for sale.

6.24.040    Age and quantity of fowl for sale.

6.24.050    Sales of fowl for food purposes.

6.24.060    Sales of small animals and fowl on streets and sidewalks.

6.24.070    Sales of animals and fowl by licensed dealers.

6.24.010 Sales of fowl as novelties in public places.
It is unlawful for any person to display, sell, offer for sale, barter or give away upon any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl as pets or novelties, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated. (Prior code § 5-1.801)

6.24.020 Sales of dyed and colored fowl.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or display any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color. (Prior code § 5-1.802)

6.24.030 Care of fowl for sale.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl unless such person provides proper brooder facilities for the care of such baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl during the time they are in the possession of such person. (Prior code § 5-1.803)

6.24.040 Age and quantity of fowl for sale.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl under four weeks of age in any quantity less than six. (Prior code § 5-1.804)

6.24.050 Sales of fowl for food purposes.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of rabbits, natural chicks, ducklings or other fowl in proper facilities by dealers, hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same to be raised for food purposes. (Prior code § 5-1.805)

6.24.060 Sales of small animals and fowl on streets and sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person to display, sell, offer for sale, barter or give away upon any street or sidewalk of the city as pets or novelties:

A. Any fish, turtles, snakes, lizards, chameleons or other reptiles; and

B. Any birds, cats, dogs, fowl, guinea pigs, rodents or other animals. (Prior code § 5-1.806)

6.24.070 Sales of animals and fowl by licensed dealers.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of animals, birds, fish or reptiles legally for sale in licensed pet shops, kennels, aviaries or fish hatcheries. (Prior code § 5-1.807)

Title 7
(Reserved)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters:

8.04    County Health Code

8.08    Fire Code

8.16    Fireworks

8.20    Solid Waste and Recyclable Collection and Disposal

8.28    Garbage and Market Refuse

8.36    Noise

8.40    Oil Wells

8.44    Private Alarm Systems

8.56    Graffiti Prevention and Removal

8.64    Abatement of Real Property Nuisances

8.68    Swimming Pools

8.70    Stormwater and Runoff Pollution Control

Chapter 8.04
COUNTY HEALTH CODE
Sections:

8.04.010    County Health Code – Adopted.

8.04.020    County Health Code – Deletions.

8.04.030    Section 8.04.752 – Amended.

8.04.035    Section 11.15.030 – Amended.

8.04.036    Section 11.15.040 – Amended.

8.04.040    Penalty clauses adopted.

8.04.010 County Health Code – Adopted.
A. Subject to the additions, amendments and deletions set forth in this chapter, the city adopts Title 11, “Health and Safety,” of the Los Angeles County Code by reference, including all amendments thereto through June 30, 2010, and Chapter 8.04, “Public Health Licenses,” of the Los Angeles County Code by reference, including all amendments thereto through October 19, 2010, and together these provisions shall be referred to as the Gardena health code.

B. The adoption of Title 11 and Chapter 8.04 of the Los Angeles County Code does not authorize any use not otherwise authorized by Title 18 of the Gardena Municipal Code.

C. For purposes of the adoption of the County Health Code, references to the county or to unincorporated areas of the county shall mean the city of Gardena.

D. The provisions of the Gardena health code may be enforced by appropriate personnel of both the city and the county. (Ord. 1767 § 1, 2016: Ord. 1721 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.04.020 County Health Code – Deletions.
The following provisions of the County Health Code set forth in Title 11 of the County Code shall be deleted:

A. Chapter 11.19 – Alcoholic Beverage Warning Signs.

B. Chapter 11.35 – Tobacco Retailing.

C. Sections 11.38.620 through 11.38.680 – Water Conservation Requirements.

D. Chapter 11.48 – Oil Well Sumps, Sand and Gravel Pits and Similar Excavations.

E. Chapter 11.50 – Swimming Pools.

F. Chapter 11.51 – Barriers for Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs. (Ord. 1721 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.04.030 Section 8.04.752 – Amended.
Section 8.04.752 of the County Public Health Licenses Code is amended to read as follows:

8.04.752    Posting Requirements – Penalty for Non-Compliance Documents Available for Public Review.

A. Upon issuance by the county health officer, the health officer shall post at every food establishment the Letter Grade Card, the Inspection Score Card, or both, as determined by the county health officer, so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the establishment. “Clearly visible to the general public and to patrons” shall mean conspicuously posted in public view along with all other business licenses.

B. The Letter Grade Card and the Inspection Score Card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the Letter Grade Card, the Inspection Score Card, or both, as determined by the county health officer, is or are in place as set forth hereunder. Removal of the Letter Grade Card, the Inspection Score Card, or both, is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 8.04.930 of the County Code.

C. Every food establishment shall post a legibly lettered sign which displays the following information so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the establishment:

“Any public health concerns regarding this establishment should be directed to the County of Los Angeles, Environmental Health Office located at: (local office address and telephone number to be provided by the county health officer).”

D. The Food Official Inspection Report upon which the Letter Grade Card, the Inspection Score Card, or both, are based and all subsequent reports issued by the county health officer shall be maintained at the food establishment and shall be available to the general public and to patrons for review upon request. The food establishment shall keep the Food Official Inspection Report and all subsequent reports until such time as the county health officer completes the next routine inspection of the establishment and issues a new Food Official Inspection Report.

(Ord. 1721 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.04.035 Section 11.15.030 – Amended.
Section 11.15.030 of the County Public Health Code is amended to read as follows:

11.15.030 – Eating Establishment Smoking Prohibitions.

A. It shall be unlawful to smoke in the following places:

(i) within an outdoor dining area of an eating establishment, or

(ii) within twenty (20) feet of the entrance, exit, open window or outdoor dining area of an eating establishment.

B. No owner, operator or manager of an eating establishment shall knowingly or intentionally allow smoking in an outdoor dining area, within twenty (20) feet of an outdoor dining area or within twenty (20) feet of the entrance, exit or open window of the eating establishment, provided however that such prohibition shall not apply to areas that are outside the control of the owner, operator or manager.

(Ord. 1745 § 1, 2013)

8.04.036 Section 11.15.040 – Amended.
Section 11.15.040 of the County Public Health Code is amended to read as follows:

11.15.040 – Posting of Eating Establishment Smoking Prohibitions.

Every business that owns or controls an outdoor dining area shall post one or more prominent signs in conspicuous locations to apprise users of the prohibition of smoking in that outdoor dining area and within 20 feet therefrom. If the outdoor dining area is shared with other dining establishments each business owner shall be jointly and severally responsible for the posting of the signs required by this section.

(Ord. 1745 § 2, 2013)

8.04.040 Penalty clauses adopted.
In accordance with Government Code Section 50022.4, the following penalty clauses are contained in Chapter 8.04 and Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code and are hereby adopted:

8.04.930.1.1 – Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, makes such violation a separate offense.

8.04.934 – Operating without a public health license or permit – Deemed misdemeanor – Penalty.

Violation of Section 8.04.932 is a misdemeanor punishable by fine, or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or both. Such fine shall not be more than $500.00, and shall:

A. For the first violation, not be less than $100.00; and

B. For the second and any subsequent violation, be $500.00.

8.04.936 – Operating without a public health license or permit – Injunctive relief.

Any person violating Section 8.04.932 may be enjoined from such violation by any court of competent jurisdiction. The remedy provided by this section is cumulative to any other remedy provided by law.

8.04.938 – Violation of injunction – Civil penalty.

Any person who intentionally violates any injunction issued pursuant to Section 8.04.936 shall be liable for a civil penalty collected by the county health officer not to exceed $500.00 for each violation.

11.02.050    Arrests for violations – Penal Code provisions adopted.

The director, and his delegated subordinates pursuant to the provisions of Section 836.5 of the Penal Code, may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is a violation of any statute or ordinance referred to by Section 11.02.030. Upon making such an arrest, the director or his subordinate may release the person arrested pursuant to the provisions of Section 853.6 of the Penal Code, the provisions of which are hereby adopted by reference as part of this section.

11.02.080    Violation – Penalty.

Violation of Division 1 of Title 11 is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Division 1 is committed, continued or permitted makes such violation of a separate offense.

11.04.380    Noncompliance with county health officer – Injunctive relief.

Any act or failure to act which is a violation of this Part 3 may be the subject of a civil action to enjoin the person so acting or failing to act to conform his or her conduct to the provisions of this Part 3. The filing and prosecution of such an action shall, in no way, limit the authority or ability of the county health officer to enforce the requirements of this Part 3 or impose penalties or take any other actions enumerated herein.

11.20.420    Posting requirements – Penalty for noncompliance.

A. The owner of a house court, as defined in Section 11.20.110 of this chapter, shall be responsible for posting in a common area, accessible by all tenants and the general public, a placard, as provided by the health officer. “Common area, accessible by all tenants and the general public” means:

1. Posted in a conspicuous location within five feet of the main entrance of the housing court; or

2. Posted in or near the outside of the door of the housing court manager, if one exists; or

3. Posted in a location as directed and determined in the discretion of the county health officer to ensure proper notice to all tenants and the general public.

B. The placard shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. Removal of the placard is a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as specified in Section 11.02.080.

C. The placard shall legibly display the following information so as to be clearly visible to all tenants and the general public entering the housing court:

“This building is inspected by the Department of Health Services, Environmental Health. All public health questions/concerns regarding this property should be directed to: (local office address and telephone number to be provided by the county health officer)

Please contact the office listed above to report health code violation or concerns. Copies of inspection reports may be requested from this office.”

D. The placard must also list the web site address and toll free telephone number for the department of health services, environmental health, housing inspection program, which shall be provided by the county health officer.

11.34.060    Certification – Application and fees – Penalty for late application.

A. Every person desiring certification as a swimming pool service technician or as a swimming pool service technician apprentice shall file with the director an application for certification, and shall then pay an application fee to the treasurer-tax collector of $110.00 to cover the cost of giving the examination and processing the application. No portion of said fee is refundable. The applicant shall pay a penalty equal to 25 percent of the fee if application is not made within 31 days after commencement of the activity. A new application fee of $110.00 shall be paid each time the applicant takes the examination.

B. The applicant shall designate upon his application, by address, the principal office of the applicant which is located within the County of Los Angeles, State of California, and if the applicant has no office within the County of Los Angeles, then he shall designate upon his application his principal office, wherever located.

11.36.770    Civil fines.

In addition to any other penalty provided for under this chapter, consistent with the process set forth herein for notice and administrative review, the department may impose a fine on persons violating any provision of this chapter or any law, regulation or standard incorporated into this chapter. The department may impose a fine upon such violators in an amount not to exceed $500.00 per violation, as appropriate. The imposition of such fines shall, in no way, limit the authority or ability to impose other requirements of this chapter or seek other remedies against alleged violators.

11.40.070    Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this Division 2 is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Division 2 is committed, continued or permitted constitutes such violation a separate offense.

11.58.180    Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation, or any partner or officer, agent or employees thereof violating the provisions of this chapter or of the Standards for Electrical Materials, Devices and Appliances hereby adopted, or of any of the rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.

11.62.330    Violation – Penalty.

A. A person shall not erect, construct, enlarge, alter, remove, demolish, use, operate or maintain any small dam in the unincorporated portion of the county, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

11.64.060    Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any provision of this Part 1 by smoking in a posted no-smoking area, or by failing to post or cause to be posted a no-smoking sign required by this Part 1, or otherwise violates any provision of this Part 1, is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00.

11.64.090    Violation of Part 2 provisions – Penalty.

Violation of the provisions of this Part 2 is an infraction punishable by:

A. A fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation;

B. A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a second violation within one year;

C. A fine not exceeding $250.00 for each additional violation within one year.

11.64.120    Violation of Part 3 provisions – Penalty.

A. Violation of Part 3 of this chapter is an infraction punishable by:

1. A fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation;

2. A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a second violation within one year;

3. A fine not exceeding $250.00 for each additional violation within one year.

B. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted is a separate offense.

11.65.040    Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500) dollars for each offense or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

11.68.050    Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

11.86.010    Civil penalties.

A. Any operator of an underground storage tank shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500.00 or more than $5,000.00 for each underground storage tank for each day of violation for any of the following violations:

1. Operating an underground storage tank which has not been issued a permit, in violation of this division;

2. Violation of any of the applicable requirements of the permit issued for the operation of the underground storage tank(s);

3. Failing to maintain records, as required by this division;

4. Failing to report an unauthorized release, as required by Section 11.76.010;

5. Failing to properly close an underground storage tank in accordance with the provisions of this division;

6. Violation of any applicable requirement of this division or any requirements of California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 6.7 or any regulations promulgated thereunder;

7. Failure to permit inspection or to perform any monitoring, testing, or reporting required pursuant to this division;

8. Making any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, or other document submitted or required to be maintained pursuant to this division.

B. Any owner of an underground storage tank(s) shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500.00 or more than $5,000.00 per day for each underground storage tank, for each day of violation, for any of the following violations:

1. Failure to obtain a permit as specified by this division;

2. Failure to repair or upgrade an underground tank in accordance with the provisions of this division;

3. Abandonment or improper closure of any underground tank subject to the provisions of this division;

4. Knowing failure to take reasonable and necessary steps to assure compliance with this division by the operator of an underground tank(s);

5. Violation of any applicable requirement of the permit issued for the operation of the underground tank(s);

6. Violation of any applicable requirement of California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 6.7, and any regulations promulgated thereunder;

7. Failure to permit inspections or to perform any monitoring, testing, or reporting required pursuant to this division;

8. Making any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, or other document submitted or required to be maintained pursuant to this division.

C. Any person who intentionally fails to notify the CUPA or the director when required to do so by this division or who submits false information in a permit application, amendment, or renewal, pursuant to Chapter 11.80, is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000.00 for each underground storage tank for each day for which notification is not given or false information is submitted.

11.86.020    Violation a misdemeanor.

A. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this division, or who fails to take corrective action upon becoming aware of an unauthorized discharge, or who fails to comply with a notice of noncompliance within the time specified or who continues to operate a facility upon suspension or revocation of a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the director may cause such person, firm or corporation to be prosecuted as a violator of this code. Each day that the conditions in this section continue to exist shall be a separate violation.

B. Any person, firm, or corporation who falsifies any monitoring records required by this division, or knowingly fails to report an unauthorized release, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $5,000.00 or more than $10,000.00, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed one year, or by both that fine and imprisonment.

11.86.030    Penalties not exclusive.

Each civil penalty or civil fine imposed pursuant to this chapter for any violation shall be separate, and in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other civil penalties or criminal fines imposed pursuant to this chapter or any other provisions of law.

(Ord. 1767 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1721 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 8.08
FIRE CODE
Sections:

8.08.010    Adoption of the County Fire Code.

8.08.020    Los Angeles County Fire Code version.

8.08.030    Fire fighting, EMS services and hazardous materials.

8.08.035    Amendment of Section 7802.3.

8.08.040    Fire fighter contract.

8.08.010 Adoption of the County Fire Code.
Subject to the particular additions, amendments and deletions set forth in this chapter, the city of Gardena hereby adopts the most current version of the Los Angeles County Fire Code by reference. (Measure A § 5, adopted March 2, 1999, amended August 26, 2003)

8.08.020 Los Angeles County Fire Code version.
Pursuant to Section 8.08.010, which requires the city to adopt the latest version of the Los Angeles County Fire Code by reference, the version of the Los Angeles County Fire Code for the city shall be the version of Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code as set forth in Ordinance No. 2017-003, adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on January 24, 2017.

A. Persons who shall violate a provision of the Los Angeles County Fire Code adopted by reference in the Gardena Municipal Code, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless such violation is declared to be an infraction by Chapter 82 of the Fire Code, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. For the purposes of this section, a forfeiture of bail shall be equivalent to a conviction. (Ord. 1791 §§ 6, 7, 2018: Ord. 1752 § 1, 2014: Ord. 1724 § 1, 2011: Ord. 1723 § 1, 2010: Ord. 1700 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1689 §§ 1, 3, 2007; Ord. 1624 § 1, 2002; Measure A § 4, 1999)

8.08.030 Fire fighting, EMS services and hazardous materials.
A. Responsibility for providing fire protection, EMS services, and protection from hazardous materials in the city of Gardena is hereby transferred from the Gardena Fire Department to the Los Angeles County Fire Department subject to the provisions of this section.

B. The Gardena city council shall take all necessary steps to carry out the provisions of subsection A of this section. All actions taken by the Gardena city council shall be in the manner authorized by California Government Code Section 55632 and provided for by California Government Code Section 56848.3.

C. The transfer of fire fighting and EMS services from the Gardena fire department to the Los Angeles County Fire Department shall take place on the effective date of annexation as determined by the Board of Supervisors in coordination with the Los Angeles County Fire Department and the City of Gardena.

D. At the conclusion of a twelve-month period following the transfer of fire fighting and EMS services from the Gardena fire department to the Los Angeles County Fire Department, the Gardena city council shall undertake a review with respect to the performance of fire fighting and EMS services. In addition, the review shall examine any cost savings to the city of Gardena which have occurred.

E. Any savings realized as a result of the transfer of fire fighting and EMS services from the Gardena fire department to the Los Angeles County Fire Department which occur shall be used to balance the city budget and prevent city employee layoffs.

F. Once the transfer of fire fighting and EMS services from the Gardena Fire Department to the Los Angeles County Fire Department occurs, any city general fund monies that were previously utilized to pay fire fighter pensions shall be used to balance the city budget and prevent city employee layoffs. (Measure A § 6 (part), adopted March 2, 1999, amended August 26, 2003)

8.08.035 Amendment of Section 7802.3.
Section 7802.3 of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by Section 8.08.010 is amended to read, as follows:

Section 7802.3. Except as provided in Chapter 8.16 of Title 8 of this code, the storage, use, and handling of fireworks are prohibited.

Any provision of the Uniform Fire Code or of any subsequent revised edition of the Uniform Fire Code, related to prohibiting the storage, sale, handling and discharge of fireworks, as adopted in accordance with Section 8.08.010, is hereby amended to add an exception for safe and sane fireworks which shall be regulated in accordance with Chapter 8.16, as that Chapter 8.16 may from time to time be amended by the city council. (Ord. 1785 § 1, 2018: Measure 03-A, March 2003; Ord. 1564 § 1, 1999)

8.08.040 Fire fighter contract.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Gardena Municipal Code, in the event that fire fighting and EMS services are transferred from the Gardena Fire Department to the Los Angeles County Fire Department, any contract entered into between the City and the Los Angeles County Fire Department shall include all necessary or appropriate provisions relating to salary and fringe benefits, medical benefits, and retirement benefits for fire fighters. (Measure A § 6 (part), adopted March 2, 1999, amended August 26, 2003)

Chapter 8.16
FIREWORKS
Sections:

8.16.010    Definitions.

8.16.020    Permit – Required.

8.16.030    Permit – Application.

8.16.040    Permit – Prerequisites to issuance.

8.16.050    Permit applications – Notice of acceptance or rejection.

8.16.060    Revised and renumbered as 8.16.040.

8.16.070    Suspension of permit – Appeal procedure.

8.16.080    Fireworks stand – Operation.

8.16.090    Fireworks stands – Requirements.

8.16.100    Deleted and revised as 8.16.090.

8.16.110    Deleted and revised as 8.16.030(E).

8.16.115    Fee imposed upon distributors.

8.16.120    Temporary sales tax permit – Requirements.

8.16.130    Dates and hours of sale and use.

8.16.140    Permissible locations for discharge.

8.16.150    Prohibitions on discharge.

8.16.160    Storage.

8.16.170    Violation – Penalty.

8.16.180    Financial reporting.

8.16.190    Concurrent authorities.

8.16.220    Provisions supplementary.

8.16.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, are defined as follows:

A. “Dangerous fireworks” means dangerous fireworks as set forth in California State Fireworks Law (Sections 12505 and 12561 of the Health and Safety Code and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6) which are hereby incorporated by reference.

B. “Safe and sane fireworks” (a.k.a. “state-approved fireworks) means safe and sane fireworks as set forth in California State Fireworks Law (Sections 12529 and 12562 of the Health and Safety Code and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6) which are hereby incorporated by reference.

C. “Person” means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, state, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group of combination acting as a unit.

D. “Nonprofit organization” means (1) any nonprofit association, charity, church, corporation, club, or society, organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic, benevolent, betterment, youth activities, or charitable purposes, or (2) a group which is an integral part of a recognized nonprofit national organization, or (3) an organization affiliated with and officially recognized by an elementary, junior high, high school, school district, and/or college that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of Gardena, and has obtained a nonprofit status with either the California Franchise Tax Board or the Internal Revenue Service.

E. “Principal and permanent meeting place” means and includes, but not be limited to, a permanent structure, playing field, geographic area, or service population which resides in or is located within the city of Gardena.

F. “Gardena city clerk” or “city clerk” means the Gardena city clerk and/or his or her designee or designees.

G. “Residents of the city” or “city residents” means and includes owners of businesses and/or property in the city as well as occupants of residential dwellings.

H. “Director” shall mean the community development director or his or her designee(s).

I. “Fire Chief” shall mean the Fire Chief of the County of Los Angeles and/or his or her designee or designees. (Ord. 1726 § 11, 2011; Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.020 Permit – Required.
A. Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to offer for sale or sell at retail “safe and sane fireworks” without having first applied for and been issued a permit therefor, in the manner set forth in this chapter.

B. Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be issued only to nonprofit organizations, and such fireworks shall be sold only at the outdoor sales stands, as more specifically set forth hereinafter. No more than eight such permits shall be issued and be outstanding at any time.

C. The city council may, by resolution, suspend the issuance of permits for sale of safe and sane fireworks in the city in any given year. (Ord. 1785 § 2, 2018: Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999. Formerly 8.16.030)

8.16.030 Permit – Application.
A. All applications for a permit to sell fireworks shall be filed with the community development department between March 1st and March 31st of each year, and accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

B. Any application packet which is not properly completed and submitted to the community development department before the close of business on March 31st will not be considered for the issuance of a permit.

C. The application for the permit shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the city. A completed permit application package shall include, but not be limited to:

1. Proper identification and signature of the permit applicant.

2. The proposed location of the fireworks sales stand.

3. The dates and hours the applicant proposes the stand to be open.

4. Detailed statement of each and every kind of fireworks proposed to be sold.

5. Written consent of the owner of record and/or lessor of the property, whichever is the controlling party, upon which the proposed sales stand will be located.

6. The plan for staffing the stand during the proposed days and hours of operation.

7. Fireworks distributor’s (the “company”) name, address, telephone number, and point of contact.

8. Proof of a temporary sales tax permit from the State Board of Equalization or proof of application.

9. Proof of insurance to include one million dollars public liability, property damage, and product liability insurance policies with riders attached to the policies designating the city as an additional insured.

10. Proof of a State Fire Marshal retail fireworks license.

D. At the time of filing the application for a permit to sell fireworks, pursuant to subsection C of this section, the fireworks distributor (“company”) involved with the applicant must simultaneously file an application for temporary use permit (TUP), and pay the requisite fees.

E. Each applicant shall file with the city, at the time of filing their permit application, a refundable cash deposit, certificate of deposit, or a surety bond made payable to the city in the amount as set by resolution of the city council as to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such deposit or certificate shall be refundable upon compliance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to the removal of the stand, cleaning of the site, and full compliance by the permittee to pass the city’s site inspection. (Ord. 1738 § 61, 2012: Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999. Formerly 8.16.040, 8.16.100, 8.16.110, 8.16.120)

8.16.040 Permit – Prerequisites to issuance.
Each applicant must meet the following qualifications for a permit issued under this chapter:

A. A permit shall only be issued to a Nonprofit organization. Such Nonprofit organization must conduct its activities primarily for the benefit of the city and its residents, or must serve more city residents than non-city residents, to be eligible to receive a permit.

B. Each such Nonprofit organization must have a principal and permanent meeting place in the city and have been organized and established in the city’s corporate limits for a minimum of one year continuously preceding the filing of application for the license permit, and must have a bona fide membership of at least twenty-five members, the majority of whom are residents of the city.

C. No Nonprofit organization may receive more than one permit for fireworks sale during any one calendar year. One permit may be issued to two or more qualifying applicants as a joint venture. The maximum number of permits, which may be issued pursuant to this chapter during any one calendar year, shall not exceed eight.

D. If the number of applications exceed the number of permits to be issued, the permittees during the preceding year shall have first priority for the available permits. A permittee shall retain its priority from year to year only so long as the permittee continues to represent each and all of the participating organizations, which operated under the permit during the preceding year. Each participating organization shall be deemed to be a co-permittee claiming first priority and shall have the same duties and liabilities under the permit. Any change in organizations within the joint venture shall constitute a change causing that joint venture to lose its priority. If there are any additional permits available after priority organizations have been considered, such additional permits shall be granted by a lottery supervised by the city clerk held on or before April 16. In the, lottery, joint ventures shall receive one lot for all Nonprofit organizations that comprise the joint venture, and individual applicants shall receive one lot. Any prior permittee, the permit of which has been suspended under the provisions of Section 8.16.070, shall lose its priority, and shall be eligible for the lottery only upon satisfying the Fire Chief that suitable arrangements have been made to preclude future violations. If the Fire Chief certifies his satisfaction, such permittee shall be permitted to compete with other additional applicants for such additional permits as may be available through the lottery.

E. Each Nonprofit organization must have one fireworks stand salesperson, per sales shift, attend an operator safety seminar administered by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999. Formerly 8.16.060)

8.16.050 Permit applications – Notice of acceptance or rejection.
Applicants for any such permits shall be notified by the community development director, or their designee, by May 15th of the granting or rejection of such applications for fireworks stand and Temporary Use Permits. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.060 Revised and renumbered as 8.16.040.
(Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.070 Suspension of permit – Appeal procedure.
A. The Fire Chief or his designee shall be authorized to suspend immediately and without notice or formal hearing the permit of any permittee which violates any rule, regulation or ordinance while operating or preparing to operate a fireworks stand during or immediately preceding any period of sale. If the Fire Chief or his designee establishes that a violation has occurred during, immediately preceding, or immediately following the authorized period of sale, he shall have power to suspend the permittee from future permits, or suspend the priority of the permittee.

B. The decision of the Fire Chief or his designee to suspend the permit of any permittee shall be subject to review by the community development director forthwith. In view of the limited sales period each year, for suspensions affecting the sale period, such hearing shall be held at the earliest possible time that the permittee, community development director or his designee, and the representative of the Fire Chief can schedule a meeting for such review for suspensions after the sale period. The hearing shall be within one month after the request for hearing, which request must be made within fifteen days after notice of the suspension. The community development director or his designee is authorized to set aside the suspension, or to modify the suspension by limiting its effect to only one or more days, or to make a determination regarding application for permit in future years. The decision of the community development director or his designee shall be final. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.080 Fireworks stand – Operation.
A. It is unlawful for the permitted Nonprofit organization to permit any person other than the permitted Nonprofit organization to operate the stand for which the permit is issued or to otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand.

B. It is unlawful for the permitted Nonprofit organization to permit any person other than the individuals who are members of the permitted Nonprofit organization, or the spouses or adult children of such members, to sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand.

C. It is unlawful for the permitted Nonprofit organization to pay any consideration to any person for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand.

D. Each stand must have an adult in attendance and in charge thereof while fireworks are stored therein. Sleeping or remaining in the stand after close of each business day is forbidden. All unsold fireworks must be securely stored in a locked container during non-sale periods.

E. Each stand must have on duty at all times during the sales period, at least one salesperson who attended the Los Angeles County Fire Department operator safety seminar.

F. The sale of fireworks shall conform to restrictions under Section 8.16.130 below.

G. All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five p.m. on July 5 of each year. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.090 Fireworks stands – Requirements.
All retail sales of “safe and sane fireworks” shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and sales from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:

A. Fireworks stands must be dropped off no earlier than eight a.m. on June 26 of each year.

B. No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building structure, five feet of a curbline, or within one hundred feet of any gasoline pump.

C. No weeds or other combustible materials shall be permitted within 25 feet of a stand.

D. All fireworks stands shall be pre-assembled metal stands only with no more than two hundred fifty-six square feet. All fireworks stands will be pre-wired for interior and exterior lighting. All stands will have attached metal floors to enhance security and water proofing.

E. All electrical shall be in conduits. The breaker boxes will consist of GFI breakers. The manufacturer must have installed all wiring. All stands shall meet the approval of the City’s building and safety division, and must be in accordance with the safety requirements of the City, prior to the beginning of sale.

F. No generators shall be allowed within twenty-five feet of the fireworks stand.

G. “No Smoking” signs must be displayed on and in the fireworks stand.

H. Each stand must have at least three exits, approximately equal distance apart and in no case shall the distance between exits exceed twenty-four feet.

I. There shall be no signs displayed in the public right-of-way, except for the signs dispensed by the City described in subsections 8.16.090.G above, 8.16.090.O below, and those that come with the pre-assembled stands.

J. Each stand shall be provided with two, two-and-one-half gallon soda-and-acid or water pressure type fire extinguishers, underwriter approved, in good working order, and easily accessible for use in case of fire.

K. The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by twelve noon on July 6 of each year and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from the location by said time and date.

L. In the event the permittee does not so comply or remove the stand or clean the site in a manner required by the director of the building and safety division, the city may do so, or cause the same to be done by other persons, and the reasonable cost thereof shall be charged against the permittee and his surety and the deposit. Any permittee found to be in violation of this section shall be fined at an amount equal to the deposit, assessed on a per day basis, for each violation.

M. The permit to sell fireworks shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand.

O. In addition to any other administrative procedures set forth by the City, it shall be the responsibility of each holder of a permit under this chapter to display a poster measuring 18” x 32” which shall be posted at the point of sale of the fireworks to notify purchasers of all applicable restrictions established by the Gardena Municipal Code. The city shall provide the posters, which shall be returned to the city after use. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.100 Deleted and revised as 8.16.090.
(Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.110 Deleted and revised as 8.16.030(E).
(Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1629 § 9, 2003; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.115 Fee imposed upon distributors.
A. Each fireworks wholesaler or distributor providing safe and sane fireworks to organizations permitted under this chapter shall pay an annual regulatory fee to the city in an amount equal to twenty thousand dollars, or such other amount as may subsequently be established by resolution of the city council, multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of which is the number of permittees under permits issued by the city under this chapter, adjusted in accordance with subsection D of this section, and the numerator of which is the number of such permittees supplied by the wholesaler or distributor upon whom the fee is imposed.

B. The fee required by this section shall be payable within five days from the date that the community development director or designee notifies applicants that their permit has been approved pursuant to Section 8.16.050.

C. No fireworks wholesaler or distributor may supply a permittee with safe and sane fireworks, and no permittee may offer for sale or sell such fireworks, unless and until the fee imposed by this section has been paid to the city.

D. In the event a permittee is unable to operate under a permit issued under this chapter due to the failure of a wholesaler or distributor to pay the fee imposed herein, that permittee shall not be counted in the denominator for purposes of computing the spread of the fee under subsection A of this section.

E. Said annual regulatory fee was established not to generate revenue for the city, but to attempt to offset hard costs associated with police, public works, and recreation department staffing during the fireworks sale and discharge period, as well as other costs associated with ensuring community safety. (Ord. 1726 § 28 (part), 2011; Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1571, 1999; Ord. 1564 § 2, 1999)

8.16.120 Temporary sales tax permit – Requirements.
A. Nonprofit organizations permitted for the selling of fireworks are required to obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the State Board of Equalization.

B. The temporary sales tax permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.130 Dates and hours of sale and use.
Except in years in which sale of safe and sane fireworks is suspended in accordance with Section 8.16.020, safe and sane fireworks may be sold or displayed within Gardena between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. during the period between June 28th and July 4th of each year. Safe and sane fireworks may be possessed during the period from June 28th to 10:00 p.m. on July 4th of each year. All sale, display and possession shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and not otherwise. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any safe and sane fireworks except during the hours between 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. on July 4th of each year in any area of the city. (Ord. 1785 § 3, 2018: Ord. 1749 § 1, 2014: Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999. Formerly 8.16.020)

8.16.140 Permissible locations for discharge.
The use of fireworks in the city shall be limited to private property except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No fireworks shall be discharged on public, semipublic, or private open areas such as parking lots, vacant properties, or in a public street or right-of-way, except in public parks and those areas approved by the fire chief. (Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.150 Prohibitions on discharge.
It is unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use any fireworks, or permit the ignition, explosion or projection thereof, upon or over onto the property of another without his/her consent, or to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or make use of any fireworks within ten feet of any residence dwelling or other structure used as a place of habitation by human beings.

It is unlawful for individuals under eighteen years of age to sell, purchase, possess, use, or discharge safe and sane fireworks. Proof of age shall be required.

It is unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of a minor (under eighteen years old) to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire or set off any dangerous, illegal fireworks, at any time, or to permit such minor to discharge or set off any “safe and sane fireworks” unless such minor does so under the direct supervision of a person over eighteen years of age and during the hours and on the days permitted by this chapter.

It is unlawful, in any year in which the city council, by resolution, has suspended issuance of permits for sale of safe and sane fireworks, for any person to possess, use, or discharge safe and sane fireworks in the city. (Ord. 1785 § 4, 2018: Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999. Formerly 8.16.160)

8.16.160 Storage.
Wholesale storage of “safe and sane fireworks” by fireworks wholesalers, licensed by the Office of the California State Fire Marshal, shall be in a building meeting the requirements of a Group H-3 occupancy as defined in the Uniform Building Code, unless said requirements have been modified to permit a Group S-l occupancy as defined in the Uniform Building Code, and can store year-round in Los Angeles County by a fireworks wholesaler licensed by the Office of the California State Fire Marshal, so long as said fireworks wholesaler has not been found to be in violation of the terms of this chapter as set forth in Section 8.16.090B. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999. Formerly 8.16.150)

8.16.170 Violation – Penalty.
Any person found to be in violation of California Health and Safety Code Sections 12500 – 12726 shall be subject to the punishments, fines and penalties set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 12700 – 12702, inclusive.

Any person found to be in violation of Section 8.16.140 or 8.16.150 of the chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of the Gardena Municipal Code.

Any person violating any other provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction which upon conviction thereof is punishable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of the Gardena Municipal Code.

Any person violating any of the provisions of state law or this chapter set forth in this section shall have his permit to sell fireworks revoked. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.180 Financial reporting.
All Nonprofit organizations will be required to disclose detailed financial reports to the City, pursuant to procedures set forth in the fireworks stand application packet. Information required will be listed on forms provided by the City as part of said application packet. Failure to comply will result in a disqualification from operating a fireworks stand in the next calendar year. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.190 Concurrent authorities.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation for fireworks within the City of Gardena. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, regulations and ordinances heretofore and hereinafter enacted by the city of Gardena, the State of California or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1564 § 2 (part), 1999)

8.16.220 Provisions supplementary.
The provisions of this chapter are supplementary to the provisions of the Fire Code of the County of Los Angeles. In case of direct conflict between the provisions of the Fire Code of the county, and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Except with respect to such direct conflict, the provisions of the Fire Code of Los Angeles County shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1671 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 8.20
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Sections:

8.20.010    Purpose.

8.20.020    Definitions.

8.20.030    Authorization required to collect.

8.20.035    Transfer or processing stations and solid waste recovery facilities.

8.20.040    Licensing.

8.20.050    Revocation and suspension of franchise, license or permit.

8.20.060    Solid waste disposal and diversion.

8.20.065    Special events and venue facility operations.

8.20.070    Solid waste charges – Payment.

8.20.080    Charges – Nonpayment.

8.20.090    Disposal.

8.20.100    Collection vehicles.

8.20.110    Containers/bins.

8.20.120    Other prohibited activities.

8.20.130    Time and frequency of collections.

8.20.140    Noise.

8.20.150    Indemnification and insurance.

8.20.160    Reporting requirements.

8.20.170    Recycling services.

8.20.180    Violations – Misdemeanors.

8.20.010 Purpose.
The collection and disposal of solid waste is a matter requiring the control and regulation by the city in the manner set forth in this chapter in order to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the citizens. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set forth below. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed by Public Resources Code Section 40105 et seq.

“Bins or commercial bin” means those containers provided for temporary accumulation and collection of multifamily/commercial solid waste from multifamily/commercial premises. Bins include solid waste containers with capacity of at least one and one-half cubic yards, compactor bins, compactor boxes and roll-off service boxes.

“Collect” or “Collection” shall mean to take physical possession, transport, and remove solid waste within and from the city.

“Commercial collection” means collection from commercial premises.

“Commercial premises” means all premises in the city, other than residential and multifamily, where solid waste is generated or accumulated and includes all premises used for industrial purposes.

“Construction and demolition waste or C&D waste” is a solid waste that is a portion of the municipal waste stream defined as:

1. Discarded materials generally considered to be water insoluble and nonhazardous in nature including but not limited to steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, metal, masonry, rock, stone, slate, gravel, soil, or otherwise inert material from the construction or demolition of a structure as part of a construction and/or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, and including rocks, soils, trees, brush, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project.

2. Clean cardboard, construction paper, plastics (including but not limited to sheeting, molding, and shrink wrap), wood, lighting and piping fixtures, and metal scraps from any construction and/or demolition project.

3. Plant materials resulting from construction work when commingled with dirt, rock, and other inert materials.

4. De minimis amounts of other nonhazardous wastes that are generated at construction and demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry.

“Construction work” means construction, remodeling, repair, demolition or deconstruction of building, other structures, roads, parking lots and similarly paved or covered surfaces.

“Containers” shall mean any and all types of solid waste receptacles, including cans, carts, compactors, bins, roll-off boxes, and customer-provided receptacles.

“Contractor” means any person or entity holding or required to hold a contractor’s license of any type under the laws of the state of California or who performs, whether as a contractor, subcontractor, or building owner, any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping service relating to building or accessory structures in the city.

“Diversion” means a reduction in the amount of waste being disposed in landfill by any of the following methods:

1. Use of new construction method(s) as described by the city that reduces the amount of waste generated.

2. On-site reuse of waste.

3. Delivery of waste from the site to a recycling center or salvage or reclamation facility.

4. Other methods as approved by the City.

“Food facility” means any operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption.

“Franchise” means the right and privilege: (1) to make arrangements for the collection of and to collect; (2) to transport to landfills, transformation facilities or other licensed solid waste management facilities; and/or (3) to recycle from collected solid waste and recyclable solid wastes all solid waste, including recyclable solid waste and green waste, kept, generated and/or accumulated within the city. Any franchise is subject to all of the provisions and to any right held by any other solid waste enterprise which may hold rights pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 49520.

“Good faith effort” means the documented efforts of a franchisee, firm, person, or entity to meet its requirements to divert waste from disposal to the maximum extent practicable as stipulated by its city-approved permit, franchise, plan or other approved mechanism.

“Green waste” means leaves, grass clippings, brush and branches generated from landscapes or gardens, separated from other solid waste. “Green waste” includes holiday trees put out for collection by service recipients, but does not include stumps or branches exceeding eight inches in diameter or six feet in length.

“Hauler” means any person, commercial or public entity which collects, hauls, or transports solid waste for a fee by use of any means, including, but not limited to, a dumpster truck, roll-off truck, side-load, front-load, or rear-load garbage truck, or a trailer.

“Hazardous waste” means any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as “hazardous substances” or “hazardous wastes” pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (“CERCLA”), 42 U.S.C. Sections 96-1 et seq., and all future amendments to either of them, or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board. Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term “hazardous waste” shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition.

“Multifamily” means those residential establishments containing five or more dwelling units. Multifamily does not include hotels or motels.

“Nonseparated solid waste” means that solid waste which may contain recyclable materials which have not been source separated by the customer.

“Operator” means a person authorized by the city, pursuant to this chapter, to operate a disposal site, transfer or processing station or collection system within the city, including those persons authorized by Public Resources Code Section 49520. “Operators” are city-authorized haulers.

“Organic waste” means food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food-soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food waste.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, property owner, occupant, tenant or any other entity or enterprise.

“Post collection diversion programs” means those diversion efforts that do not require pre-collection separation, but rather depend upon the processing of mixed refuse at a permitted transfer station and/or materials recovery facility. In this case, commercial and industrial premises are allowed to place all recyclable and nonrecyclable wastes in the same container, and the franchised solid waste hauler hauls the mixed refuse to an approved facility for recovery of recyclable wastes. The approved facility must meet a minimum of fifty percent recovery of the recyclable fraction.

“Pre-collection diversion programs” means those diversion efforts that involve separation of recyclables from refuse by the commercial and/or industrial premises, and storage in a separate container for collection by solid waste franchisees and/or third party recyclers for recycling or reuse. No third party recyclers may charge or levy a fee for collection; but no law shall prohibit the sale or donation of recyclables to a third party. Any recyclable wastes for collection by a third party cannot contain more than ten percent disposable residue by weight.

“Recyclable materials” shall mean residential, commercial or industrial source separated by-products of some potential economic value, set aside, handled, packaged, or offered for collection in a manner different from other solid waste.

“Recyclable solid waste” means recyclable materials which have been source separated before having been discarded into the solid waste stream. Recyclable solid waste is a part of the solid waste stream which can be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture.

“Recycle” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

“Recycling container” means any container for the temporary accumulation and collection of source separated recyclable solid wastes. The term “recycling container” also includes commercial bins or any other containers designed to be used for collection and temporary accumulation or recyclable solid wastes.

“Residential collection” means collection from residential premises.

“Residential premises” means all single-family residential units, residential units of two to four units, and trailer and mobile home parks which use individual containers for collection.

“Roll-off service” means those commercial bins supplied by operator for the temporary storage of solid waste resulting from temporary activities on a premise, such as the demolition or construction of a building.

“Scavenging” shall mean the uncontrolled pickup of solid waste from any location within the city by an unauthorized collector.

“Self-haulers” means a business or person that transports its own waste and/or recyclables rather than contracting with a hauler for that service. Self-haulers include, but are not limited to, roofers, demolition contractors, grading contractors, gardeners, and landscape contractors.

“Solid waste” means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, as more specifically defined in Public Resources Code Section 49503, as the same may be amended from time to time. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste, low-level radioactive waste or medical waste.

“State required percentage” in relation to the diversion of construction and demolition waste means that percentage of diversion required by Part 11, California Green Building Standards Code, as adopted by the city of Gardena.

“Transfer or processing stations and facilities” means those facilities utilized to receive solid wastes, temporarily store, separate, convert, or otherwise process the materials in the solid waste, or to transfer the solid waste directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport, and those facilities utilized for transformation.

“Vehicle” or “collection vehicle” means any truck, trailer or other conveyance or equipment including bins, used to collect, haul or transport solid waste or recyclable material.

“Waste stream” means any solid waste or other material which has been entered into a process whereby its ultimate disposition results in depository into a certified landfill. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1653 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1649 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1648 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.030 Authorization required to collect.
No person shall collect, carry, convey or transport solid waste from or at any location within the city, unless such person is authorized to do so by a franchise granted by the council pursuant to subsection A of this section, or is otherwise exempt from the franchise requirement pursuant to subsection B of this section.

A. The council may award one or more franchises, for the collection of solid wastes from all or a portion of the residential and commercial premises in the city. Franchises shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the council shall establish in its sole discretion. At a minimum, franchises shall provide:

1. The franchisee shall comply with the provisions of this chapter;

2. The franchisee shall be required to protect, defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability, on a form provided by the city attorney in connection with granting of this franchise;

3. The franchisee shall be required to cooperate with the city in solid waste generation studies and the preparation of waste stream audit, and to submit information required by city to meet the reporting requirements of AB 939 and to implement measures consistent with the city’s source reduction and recycling element in order for the city to reach the diversion and other goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time;

4. The franchisee shall be required to pay a franchise fee in an amount to be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council; and

5. The franchisee shall not transfer, sell, sublet or assign the franchise, nor shall any of the rights or privileges therein be leased, assigned, sold in whole or in part, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, either by act of the franchisee or otherwise, unless authorization for such transfer, sale, subletting or assignment is obtained from the council.

B. Exceptions. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a person may collect solid waste in the city without a franchise if that person:

1. Repealed;

2. Is an officer, employee or agent of the city in the course of official duty;

3. Is the owner or occupant of any premises within the city; provided, that the owner or occupant may transport only solid waste generated on the premises to a site where disposal or processing is permitted pursuant to applicable law and only on an occasional basis; or

4. Is a self-hauler, provided they comply with the provisions of this subsection. Self-haulers shall obtain a city self-hauler permit and operate in accordance with this chapter. In order to obtain the permit, the self-hauler shall pay the fee established by resolution of the city council. Self-haulers are only permitted to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste generated by the self-hauler. Under no circumstances may a self-hauler collect, transport or dispose of solid waste not generated by the self-hauler. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, self-haulers shall not be permitted to share, place solid waste in, or to otherwise use the bin, cart, roll-off box, or other container of another person or business. (Ord. 1797 § 2, 2018: Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.035 Transfer or processing stations and solid waste recovery facilities.
A. No person shall operate a transfer or processing station, a material recovery facility or any other facility covered under the provisions of the Public Resources Code Section 40100 through Section 44017, from or at any location within the city, unless such person is authorized to do so by a franchise granted by the council pursuant to subsection B of this section.

B. The council may award one or more franchises, for the operation of a transfer or processing station, material recovery facility, or other facility covered under the provisions of the Public Resources Code Section 40100 through Section 44017.

C. The franchise shall comply with the provisions of this chapter as well as those provisions set forth in the Public Resources Code.

D. The franchise shall be required to pay a franchise fee in an amount to be determined by resolution or ordinance of the council.

E. All facilities subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Title 18 of the Gardena Municipal Code.

F. Each person who, on the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter, is conducting a business under an existing license or permit issued by the city that is now required by this section to obtain a franchise, shall be required to obtain a franchise on or before such effective date or at such later date as may be established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.040 Licensing.
Each operator exercising rights under this chapter, in addition to obtaining a franchise from the council, shall possess a current city business license and shall display a current city-issued decal on each collection vehicle operating within the city. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.050 Revocation and suspension of franchise, license or permit.
A. Any franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter is subject to revocation or suspension for cause.

B. Should the city manager determine that there is sufficient reason to authorize the suspension or revocation of a franchise, the city manager shall revoke or suspend the franchise by issuing a written order to the operator clearly stating the reasons for such suspension or revocation.

1. Unless the operator supplies proof of correction to the city manager within ten days of the written order, the permit may be revoked or suspended by the city manager within fifteen days after the mailing of such order. The order shall be mailed by certified mail to the operator.

2. Should any franchise be revoked or suspended in accordance with this chapter, said operator shall have the right to appeal the decision to the council by means of a written request made within fifteen calendar days of the effective date of the suspension or revocation. All requests shall be mailed by certified mail to the city. The decision of the council shall be final.

3. Should a franchise issued to an operator be revoked, said operator shall not be issued a franchise to collect solid waste within the city until such time as the operator is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the council that the operator is able to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter.

4. The rights of an operator pursuant to Section 8.20.030(B)(1) may be suspended or revoked by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.060 Solid waste disposal and diversion.
A. Residential and Multifamily Premises. Each owner and each occupant of residential and multifamily premises shall dispose of solid waste through the services of a city-authorized waste hauler.

1. Residential Services. For design and planning purposes, all residential structures shall include adequate storage capacity to accommodate three standard ninety-six-gallon roll-out carts per unit.

2. Multifamily Dwellings. Consisting of five or more units with once-a-week collection provide fifty gallons or one-quarter cubic yard (cy) of container capacity for each bedroom. The bins shall be allocated based on the following proportions: forty percent for refuse; forty percent for recyclables; and twenty percent for organics.

B. Commercial Premises. Each owner and each occupant of a commercial premises shall dispose of solid waste through the services of a city-authorized waste hauler.

1. The size of the bin shall be dependent on the use or uses on the commercial premises and the frequency of services.

2. Service levels and the number of containers and enclosures required shall be based on Table 1 below.

3. Businesses including shopping centers with multiple businesses that generate four cubic yards of organic waste per week shall arrange for organic waste recycling services.

Table 1 

LAND USE

SIZE OF BIN

COMMERCIAL PREMISES

 

Office Buildings

1.00 CY/5,000 SF/Day

Supermarkets

1.00 CY/1,250 SF/Day

Drugstores/Convenience Stores

1.00 CY/2,000 SF/Day

Banks/Financial Institutions

0.25 CY/1,250 SF/Day

Shopping Center

1.00 CY/2,000 SF/Day

Vehicle/Appliance/Furniture Stores

4.00 CY/8,000 SF/Day

Restaurants/Food Service Establishments

1.00 CY/250 Meals/Week – at least 50% of volume must be for organics

Hotels/Motels (food service in hotels/motels will be separately calculated)

0.25 CY/Room/Week

 

 

INDUSTRIAL/
MANUFACTURING

 

Auto Repair/Lube Shop

4.00 CY/8,000 SF/Day

Warehouse

4.00 CY/30,000 SF/Day

Multi-Tenant Industrial Park

4.00 CY/2 Tenants/Day

Single-Occupancy Industrial Use

4.00 CY/8,000 SF/Day

 

 

INSTITUTIONS

 

Nursing Homes

1.00 CY/20 Persons/Day

Retirement Homes

1.00 CY/20 Persons/Day

Personal Care/Assisted Living

1.00 CY/20 Persons/Day

 

 

SCHOOLS

 

Grade School

1.00 CY/8 Rooms/Day

High School

1.00 CY/10 Rooms/Day

Adult Training

Audit Required

C. Self-Haulers. Persons disposing of solid waste pursuant to the exceptions contained in Section 8.20.030(B) shall deposit such solid waste only at a lawfully permitted disposal or green waste facility.

D. Self-haulers and owner/occupants of any premises undergoing construction projects shall be required to report to the city the type, quantity, value, weight, and destination of all solid waste, green waste and recyclable material removed and/or disposed of on forms provided by the city.

E. All construction and demolition projects are subject to a waste diversion performance standard in the percentage amount required by the state of the total wastes generated. Waste diversion is calculated by dividing the total weight of waste diverted by the total weight of waste generated. Documentation of waste diversion, disposed and generated, must be based solely upon weight receipts or other documentation as approved by the city and based on approved guidelines or protocol of the California Integrated Waste Management Board and CalGreen. Each construction and demolition project for which a building and/or demolition permit is applied for and approved must achieve the waste diversion performance standard or show a good faith effort to achieve that standard.

F. Diversion Deposit Requirement. As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit for a building or demolition project that involves the production of solid waste that may be delivered to a landfill, the applicant shall post a cash deposit in an amount in accordance with the scale set in Section 8.20.070(C), and shall pay an administrative fee set forth in Section 8.20.070(D). The deposit is refundable in whole, if the state required percentage of waste diversion requirement is fulfilled, or partially, if the diversion requirement is fulfilled in part, or a good faith effort to comply is documented, or the city exempts the project from this requirement based on extenuating circumstances, infeasibility, or emergency. Any deposit for which a refund request has not been timely received, and the balance of deposits remaining after a partial refund, shall be retained by the city for use in paying the cost of waste diversion efforts. The city shall be the sole authority to determine the extent of refund based on the following criteria:

1. A full refund based on a deposit erroneously paid or collected.

2. A full refund when a building permit is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun.

3. A full refund, not including the administrative fee, when the state required percentage by weight of the waste generated by the project was diverted from disposal.

4. A partial refund, not including the administrative fee, when less than the state required percentage by weight of the waste generated was diverted from disposal and a good faith effort to conform to the requirement is documented, pro-rated on the basis of the percent of diversion attained.

5. No refund in whole or part shall be authorized unless, within twelve months of the receipt of the certificate of occupancy for the construction or demolition project, or within twelve months of the date that the permit application is withdrawn or cancelled on a project on which work has begun, the original building permit applicant files a written request for refund and provides documentation satisfactory to the city in support of the request.

6. Demolition and construction projects less than fifty thousand dollars are exempt from the C&D deposit requirements, but not exempt from recycling reporting requirements.

G. Requirement for Collection of C&D Wastes. All construction and demolition waste as defined by this chapter that result from construction work shall be collected by a solid waste collection enterprise duly authorized by the city of Gardena. No C&D wastes can be carted by a nonauthorized firm or individual unless the materials carted are recyclable solid waste as defined by this chapter, and collected without fee, or sold or donated by the owner/occupant. One hundred percent of organic waste must be diverted. One hundred percent of asphalt, concrete, dirt and rock must be diverted.

H. All commercial and industrial premises are hereby required to implement either a pre-collection or post-collection diversion system, or a combination thereof, as this chapter defines each. Pre-collection systems may be implemented with an independent third party or with the solid waste collection franchisee; but under no circumstances may the independent third party charge a fee for the service. Post-collection systems shall only be implemented with a solid waste collection franchisee. Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, commercial and industrial premises may sell or donate materials to any firm or agency in accordance with state law. (Ord. 1797 § 4, 2018: Ord. 1741 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1649 § 3, 2004; Urg. Ord. 1648 § 3, 2003; Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.065 Special events and venue facility operations.
A. Special Events. Any applicant seeking permission for the temporary or periodic use or occupancy of a public street, publicly owned site or facility, or public park within the city for a civic, commercial, recreational, or social event that requires a city permit which generates solid waste such as, but not limited to, paper, beverage containers, or food shall develop a waste reduction and recycling strategy approved by the city of Gardena as part of the permit application. The waste reduction and recycling strategy shall include an estimate of the amount and types of waste anticipated from the event, proposed actions to reduce the amount of waste generation related to the event, and arrangements for separation, collection and diversion from landfills of reusable and recyclable materials. For large venues and special events of more than one thousand persons, the applicant shall ensure the implementation of the waste reduction strategy by the deposit to be determined by the city, which shall be refunded upon presentation within sixty days of the event of a weight or cubic yardage receipt for the recyclables from the receiving waste hauler, service charity, recycling center, or other such entity verifying that the materials will not be disposed in a landfill and a description of all other steps taken to reduce or prevent waste generated as a result of the event. Alternative documentation of diversion from the landfill may be acceptable if approved at the time of permit application.

B. Venue Facility Operations.

1. All venue facilities such as, but not limited to, stadiums, museums, concert halls, and parks and attractions located within the city shall separate and arrange for recycling all materials on the city’s list of commercial recyclables. In addition, the facility shall prepare and adopt a waste prevention strategy approved by the city of Gardena to reduce the amount of waste material generated by facility operations. Where a venue facility owner provides space for a tenant, event management subcontractor, or permitted use of the facility, that owner shall also be responsible for the recycling and waste prevention performance of the facility user. In fulfillment of this requirement, venue waste generators may utilize, but are not limited to, drop-off and buy-back centers, independent recyclers, nonprofit social and charitable service organizations, or the recycling services of a city approved waste contract collector.

2. Any venue facility must participate in the recycling services offered by city approved waste contract collectors and may be subject to periodic waste audits. In addition, at the request of the city, venue facilities not participating in the recycling services offered by city approved waste contract collectors or found to not be implementing their waste reduction strategy shall submit to the city, at their own expense, annual reports which provide information on, but are not limited to, the waste prevention policies being implemented, and the type, amount, and destination of all solid waste disposed and each recyclable material sold or donated. The city may exempt certain venue facility generators from some of the requirements of this Section because they do not generate significant amounts of solid waste or recyclables at a particular event, or because of localized market conditions for a particular recyclable material.

C. Venue Facility Design, Construction And Demolition.

1. All construction, demolition, and renovation (C&D) projects within the City at venue facilities such as stadiums, museums, concert halls, and parks and attractions are subject to all of the requirements of the City’s Construction and Demolition (C&D) Waste Diversion program, in accordance with Gardena Municipal Code section 8.20 and shall submit a Waste Management Strategy (Strategy) to the City prior to beginning any construction, demolition, or renovation activities. Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued and shall be considered as partial satisfaction of the solid waste portion of the environmental mitigation requirements for the project. Submission and approval of a Strategy shall not be required, however, where emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety.

2. The completed Waste Management Strategy shall include:

a. The estimated volume or weight of project C&D debris, by major material types, to be generated; the maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted by deconstruction or salvage for reuse or source separated for collection and recycling; and the vendor or facility that the Applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material.

b. The estimated volume or weight of C&D materials that will sent to the landfill.

c. The estimate volume or weight of reused or recycled-content materials to be used in construction, and any other actions or redesign/reengineering considerations made to reduce the amount of new construction materials used or extend the useable design-life of the facility.

d. The amount or volume of any additional disposed materials that will be generated by post-construction operations resulting from the construction or renovation; and the proposed design, engineering, and operational features such as, waste reduction policies, dedicated space for collection containers, and recyclable materials flow paths that will reduce wastes and support the ongoing recycling of materials generated by facility operations, and an estimate of the volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be recycled or otherwise diverted from landfill.

3. In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the Strategy, the applicant shall use the material types and standardized conversion rates approved by the City for this purpose.

4. If an applicant experiences unique circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirements, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time of Strategy submission by including the specific circumstances that make it infeasible to comply and the maximum rate of diversion believed to be feasible for each material.

5. The applicant for any covered project shall submit with the strategy a performance security, defined as the lesser of three percent of total project cost or an amount to be determined by the city. (Acceptable forms of performance security include: performance bonds, surety bonds, money orders, letters of credit, and certificates of deposit.) The city shall only approve a completed strategy if it meets the state required percentage for C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted from disposal through waste prevention, recycling, reuse, or other waste reduction activities; the project has made all feasible efforts to use recycled-content materials and sustainable design principles; the project provided for waste reduction and recycling of materials generated by post-construction facility operations; and the performance security is sufficient. If the director determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirements due to unique circumstances, the city may approve alternate diversion rates for one or more targeted materials.

6. Within [30] days after the completion of the covered project, the applicant shall submit to the City receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received the C&D material showing the actual weight or volume of each material diverted and to the landfill, receipts for reused or recycled-content materials purchased for the project, the description and amount of any on-site materials reused, a description of all other steps taken to reduce or prevent the waste generation, and a description of the construction and post-construction sustainability policies and actions taken as referenced in the strategy. The City shall review the information and determine whether the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirements or made all feasible efforts to comply, considering the original waste reduction strategy and factors such as the availability of markets for the C&D debris, the size of the project, and the documented efforts to provide sustainable building and operations practices.

7. If the City determines that the applicant has not fulfilled the requirements or made a good faith effort to comply, or the applicant fails to submit the documentation required within the required time period, then the Performance Security shall be forfeited to the City. All forfeited Performance Securities shall be used for the purposes of promoting waste reduction, recycling, and environmentally sustainable construction within the City of Gardena.

8. Applicants for venue facility construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city of Gardena shall be required to follow the policies and procedures of the city’s C&D program, in accordance with this chapter, and divert at least the state required percentage of all project-related construction and demolition debris, purchase recycled content materials, and provide for environmentally sustainable design and operation of the facilities. (Ord. 1797 § 5, 2018; Ord. 1678 § 1, 2006)

8.20.070 Solid waste charges – Payment.
A. Residential Premises.

1. A charge fixed by resolution of the council for services rendered in the normal collection, removal and disposal of solid waste shall be collected from the owner of each property in the city improved with residential premises. Each such owner shall be liable for the collection charge whether or not collection services are utilized. The charge shall be billed and collected with property taxes by the office of the county auditor controller-tax collector and/or other appropriate county offices.

2. Charges for special services provided to owners or occupants of residential premises, such as roll-off service or bin service, shall be billed by and paid directly to, the operator of the solid waste collection service.

3. The city may refund any fee, or portion thereof, paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, provided the fee is found and determined to have been entered, charged or paid illegally, or more than once, or through clerical error, or through the error or mistake of the city. No order for a refund shall be made except on a claim verified by the person who paid the fee, or the legal representative of such person, filed with the city clerk within one year after the payment sought to be refunded was paid. Refund claims shall be processed in accordance with Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3 of the Government Code.

4. Repealed.

5. Exceptions. The monthly residential charges shall not apply to the following:

a. Any property which has been vacant for the month for which the charges are imposed. The burden shall be on the property owner to prove the vacancy;

b. Any property from which the solid waste is self-hauled to a landfill authorized to take such solid waste for the month the charges are imposed. Receipts showing the landfill, the dates, the amount of material self-hauled, and the amounts paid shall be required as proof;

c. If a property owner applies to the city for an exception, and such an exception is verified prior to the city sending the tax assessor’s roll to the county tax assessor, the roll shall be adjusted accordingly. Otherwise, the fee may be refunded in accordance with subdivision (3) of this subsection.

6. Senior citizens receiving supplemental security income benefits (SSI) from the United States Social Security Administration shall receive a fifty percent reduction in rates. Persons who believe they qualify for such a reduction in rates shall show evidence of eligibility to staff of the senior citizens bureau of the city’s human services division who shall certify as to the eligibility and shall notify the city manager who shall adjust the billings accordingly.

B. Commercial and Multifamily Premises. The owners and occupants of commercial and multifamily premises shall pay for solid waste collection services at rates not in excess of maximum amounts and not less than minimum amounts, if any, as may be specified by resolution of the council, which amounts shall be billed by and paid directly to the operator of the solid waste collection service.

C. For regulated C&D projects, upon approval of the C&D waste diversion plan and prior to issuance of any permit, the contractor shall deposit the applicable amount with the city. The deposit shall be in cash, check, performance bond, cash bond, or credit card, payable to the city of Gardena in an amount according to the following schedule:

Value of Job

Recycling Deposit Requirement

Under $100,000

$5,000

$100,000 – $249,999

$7,500

$250,000 – $499,999

$10,000

$500,000+

$15,000

Funds received by the city as diversion deposits shall be used only for:

1. Payment of diversion deposit refunds.

2. Costs of administration of the program established by this chapter.

3. Cost of programs whose purpose is to divert C&D wastes from landfill disposal.

4. Costs of programs whose purpose is to develop or improve the infrastructure needed to divert C&D wastes from landfill disposal.

D. For a C&D project, a nonrefundable administrative fee of one percent of the project value shall be paid to the city, which fee shall not exceed five thousand dollars.

E. In the event that recyclable solid wastes are not donated or sold, commercial and industrial premises shall pay for collection and processing services in accordance with rates not in excess of maximum amounts and not less than minimum amounts, if any, as may be specified by resolution of the city council, which amounts shall be billed by and paid directly to the operator of the solid waste collection service. (Ord. 1797 §§ 6, 7, 2018; Ord. 1649 § 4, 2004; Urg. Ord. 1648 § 4, 2003; Ord. 1544 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1520 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.080 Charges – Nonpayment.
A. Charges for residential premises shall constitute a debt due the city for which the owner and tenant or occupant of the premises shall be jointly and severally liable, except as hereinafter provided, and no person liable therefor shall wilfully fail, neglect, or refuse, after demand by the city, to pay such charges as prescribed by this chapter. Failure to pay such charges shall constitute a lien upon the property for which the charge is assessed. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.090 Disposal.
A. All solid waste collected in the city shall be disposed of at a suitable site legally empowered to accept such material for disposal.

B. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, dumping or depositing any solid waste upon any property located within the city without first having obtained a special permit pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.100 Collection vehicles.
A. Collection vehicles used by operators within the city shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall conform to the highest industry standards.

B. Annual inspection by the California Highway Patrol is required for all collection vehicles. Inspection certificates for each collection vehicle shall be filed with the city manager.

C. Collection vehicles shall at all times be kept clean, in good repair and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the city and shall comply with all measures and procedures promulgated by agencies having jurisdiction. Additionally all vehicles shall be disinfected on a regular basis.

D. Each vehicle shall be so constructed and used so that solid waste, oil, grease or other liquid will not blow, fall or leak out of the vehicle onto the street. All solid waste shall be transported by means of vehicles equipped with water-tight bodies fitted with close-fitting metal covers. Should any solid waste be dropped or spilled in collecting, transferring or transporting, it shall be immediately cleaned up. A broom and a shovel shall be carried on each vehicle at all times for such purpose.

E. The operator’s name and telephone number shall be printed or painted in legible letters, not less than six inches in height and four inches in width and shall be prominently displayed on each side of the vehicle in a color sharply contrasting with the color of the vehicle.

F. The noise level generated by compaction vehicles using compaction mechanisms during the stationary compaction process shall not exceed a single-event noise level of seventy-five decibels (dba) at a distance of twenty-five feet from the collection vehicle measured at an elevation of five feet above ground level. Each operator shall submit to the city, upon request, a certificate of vehicle noise level testing by an independent testing entity approved by the city.

G. Each vehicle used for the collection, hauling and disposal of solid waste shall be equipped with an audible warning device that is activated when the vehicle is backing up.

H. Should the city at any time give notification in writing to the operator that any designated vehicle does not comply with the standards of this chapter, such vehicle shall forthwith be removed from service by the operator and not again so used hereunder until inspected and approved in writing by the city. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.110 Containers/bins.
A. Containers. Every person occupying or in possession of any premises in the city shall provide sufficient portable containers for solid waste to accommodate the amount of solid waste generated by those particular premises, as follows:

1. Residential. Residential customers shall use the containers provided by the city’s franchised waste hauler. Placement of such containers shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 18.42.130.

Upon the request of a residential premises owner or occupant, the operator shall provide roll-off service and other services reasonably related to the collection of solid waste.

2. Commercial. Containers shall be constructed of metal with tight-fitting lids constructed so as not to permit the contents to shift or pass through any opening therein, other than the top thereof. All containers/bins shall be stored in a refuse enclosure and shall be sized for waste, recycling, and organic bins in the size and amount as specified in Section 8.20.060. The minimum enclosure area size shall accommodate: two three-cubic-yard bins (one for waste and one for recycling); and one one-cubic-yard bin (for organics). Placement of said containers shall comply with the provisions as set forth in Section 18.42.130.

3. Food Facilities.

a. Food facilities shall maintain a FOG bin (fats, oils, grease), and the enclosure area should be sized to accommodate the access to and service of those bins. The size of waste and FOG bins varies by hauler. At a minimum, sufficient space must be provided to accommodate a one-and-one-half-cubic-yard bin for FOG waste or the amount of FOG generation rates anticipated to be created, whichever is larger.

b. Trash enclosures shall have smooth surfaced interior walls (no exposed cinder block or brick work – putty coat plaster is acceptable), and a smooth surfaced concrete floor slab for cleaning ability. Gates installed for the enclosure shall be sealed surfaces.

B. Placement of Containers – Residential. Each container shall be kept on the premises except on the collection day for that premises. The containers shall be placed for collection on the curb of a public street adjacent to the premises or where the premises are adjacent to a paved alley of sufficient width to allow the easy passage of the collection vehicles and emergency vehicles. For residences that take collection from an alley, the containers may be placed within two feet of the rear property line of the premises provided the placement does not conflict with other provisions of the Gardena Municipal Code. Each container shall be placed for collection not later than the hour upon which the collection is scheduled to commence in the area in which the premises are located and shall not be placed for collection earlier than twenty-four hours prior to the time the collection is scheduled to commence. All containers shall be removed within twenty-four hours after collection. Except, during the time a container is placed for curbside collection, containers shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.

C. Placement of Containers – Commercial/Multifamily. Each container shall be placed in a manner that is accessible for collection and does not constitute an obstruction to public areas, right-of-way, or cause or contribute to littering or a nuisance and does not conflict with an area specifically designated for collection by the community development department, other city departments or Section 18.42.130. Waste containers and storage areas shall be screened from public view, including when placed in an alley.

D. Removal of Containers. An operator who has been notified by a commercial or multifamily solid waste service recipient that commercial solid waste service is to be discontinued shall remove all of its commercial bins from the premises of the service recipient who is discontinuing service within one week following the receipt of notification that service is to be discontinued.

E. Securing of Containers. All solid waste containers left outdoors, whether residential or commercial, shall be stored with the tops closed or otherwise securely fastened and shall be maintained so that no solid waste or recyclable material placed therein shall be permitted to escape from the container.

F. Container Enclosure.

1. If a container enclosure is required, a concrete block wall shall be constructed on three sides, with a twelve-foot clear gate opening, a twelve-foot interior pad width and a twelve-foot interior pad depth. The wall shall have a minimum height of seven feet with a maximum height of ten feet.

2. Gates shall be made of solid metal. Gated openings for ingress/egress of bins must be a minimum of twelve feet wide with no posts in the middle. A separate, additional pedestrian entrance is encouraged from the backside. Gates shall be secure to the poles or walls through the use of bolts or welds, screws shall not be permitted. The gate shall have latches to hold the gate in the open position. All latches shall be installed on the exterior of the gates and latch rods shall be a minimum of thirty-six inches above ground level. Latch rods shall be a minimum of three-quarters inch in diameter. The receiver shall be three inches deep, one-inch inside diameter and flush with the ground. Hung gates must have a four-inch clearance off the finished pad or apron. Gates in the opened position shall not infringe on the traffic aisles and shall open to at least one hundred eighty degrees when secured open.

3. For enclosures where more than one container will be required, the enclosure design shall be submitted to the community development division of the general services department for approval.

4. Where a concrete block container enclosure is installed, vertical and horizontal steel reinforcement shall be required in accordance with the general services department guidelines.

5. Curbs. Six-inch curbs shall be placed on the inside walls to protect the walls from bin impact.

6. Gate stops shall be installed to prevent enclosure gates from closing while bin is being cycled. All gates shall open one hundred eighty degrees and the latch rod shall have the same one-inch inside diameter receiver as the closed position requires.

7. Accessing the Enclosure. When a straight on approach cannot be accomplished to access the trash enclosure, a parallel approach shall be utilized and the service will be conducted by a side-load unit. Only in the event where a front-load service must be utilized, and a straight approach cannot be achieved, a radius of not more than thirty-one and nine-tenths degrees shall be used to make the approach into the trash enclosure.

8. Enclosures shall be screened with plant material whenever practical.

G. Stormwater Pollution Prevention. Trash enclosures shall be covered to prevent rain from falling on containers, compactors, or the enclosure floor and carrying contaminants to the stormwater system. Stormwater runoff from the roof of the enclosure area shall drain away from the enclosure area and shall drain to landscaping or other stormwater treatment system before discharging to the municipal storm sewer system. Trash enclosures shall be plumbed to the sanitary sewer so that waste spills, leaks, and wastewater from bin washouts does not run out of the enclosure area and into storm drains. Food service facilities (such as bakeries, restaurants, take-outs, and businesses with cafeterias) shall include a sanitary sewer connection in the enclosure area. If FOG is stored in the enclosure, the sanitary drain shall discharge to a grease interceptor. A trap primer is required in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. (Ord. 1797 § 8, 2018: Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.120 Other prohibited activities.
A. It is unlawful for any person to deposit or bury, or cause or permit to be deposited or buried, within the city, any solid waste upon any premises, public or private.

B. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the collection, conveyance, or disposal of solid waste.

C. No person, except the lawful operators as defined in this chapter, shall gather, collect, or transport solid waste/recyclable material within the city and exact charges for such services.

D. It is unlawful to deposit solid waste within or upon another person’s property or to use a container or bin for solid waste not attributable to the property upon which placement is based pursuant to this chapter.

E. It is unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow solid waste and debris to be scattered or accumulate upon public right-of-way abutting his property.

F. It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit solid waste to accumulate at any place or premises under his charge or control for a period in excess of one week.

G. No person shall accumulate solid waste for more than seven consecutive days; nor shall any person keep upon any premises in the city any solid waste which is offensive, obnoxious or unsanitary.

H. No person shall burn any solid waste within the city, except in an approved incinerator or transformation facility or other device for which a permit has been issued by the city, and which complies with all applicable permit and other regulations of air pollution control authorities, and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, rules and regulations.

I. No person shall dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose into the environment any liquid or solid waste upon any premises within the city, or cause the same thereto except in an authorized or permitted solid waste container or at an authorized or permitted solid waste facility.

J. No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility including but not limited to a materials recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing station, composting facility, a buy-back or drop-off center, disposal facility or recycling center without first satisfying all city requirement for land use, environmental and other approvals.

K. No person, other than the owner thereof or his agents or employees, or an officer or employee of the city, or operator, shall tamper or meddle with any container, or the contents thereof, or remove the contents of the container, or remove the container from the location where the container shall have been placed by the owner thereof or his agent.

L. No operator shall transfer the load from one collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is essential to the method of operation and is approved by the city manager, or is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle.

M. Commingling of solid waste materials collected within the city with solid waste collected from outside of city shall be prohibited. The provisions set forth in this subsection, shall not be applicable to any transfer or processing station, or material recovery facility, operating under a franchise granted pursuant to Section 8.20.180 of the Gardena Municipal Code.

N. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any person from engaging in the collection of material for the sole purpose of the implementation of composting or other green waste recycling programs. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.130 Time and frequency of collections.
A. Residential. Collection shall be made between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday. In the case of a holiday, collection shall be made on the day following the regularly scheduled day of collection. During those weeks in which a holiday occurs, collection shall be made on the following Saturday.

B. Commercial. Collection from commercial premises where noise from collection vehicles may be audible in residential areas shall be made between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday. Site and route-specific exceptions may be made to this limitation by the city manager if requested by operator. If collections are not made on holidays, the collection shall be made on the day following the regularly scheduled day of collection.

1. Solid waste within commercial zones shall be collected at least one time per week or as often as deemed necessary to protect the health and safety of persons within the area.

2. Commercial food preparation establishments shall cause all food waste to be collected and removed from the premises not less frequently than twice per week or as often as deemed necessary to protect the health and safety of those persons within the area. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.140 Noise.
All collections shall be made as quietly as possible and in conformance with applicable city laws. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.150 Indemnification and insurance.
A. Indemnification of City. Each operator shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless city, its elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and agents from and against any and all losses, fines, penalties, claims, damages, liabilities or judgments, including attorneys fees, arising out of or resulting in any way from the operator’s conduct of business in the city or the city granting the operator the right to conduct such business.

B. Hazardous Substances Indemnification. Each operator shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and agents from and against any and all losses, fines, penalties, claims, damages, liabilities or judgments, including attorneys fees, arising from or attributable to any repair, cleanup or detoxification, or preparation and implementation of any removal, remedial, response, closure or other plan (regardless of whether undertaken due to governmental action) concerning any hazardous substance in any solid waste collected, transported, stored or disposed of by operator or its activities resulting in a release of hazardous substances into the environment. This indemnity is intended to operate as an agreement pursuant to Section 107(e) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, “CERCLA,” 42 U.S.C. Section 9607(e), and California Health and Safety Code Section 26364, to defend, protect, hold harmless and indemnify city from all forms of liability under CERCLA, other statutes or common law for any and all matters addressed in this section and shall be limited to the extent of the city’s liability. This provision shall survive the expiration of the period during which collection services are provided. The city may require, as a condition to issuance of a franchise or business license to an operator, that the operator sign and deliver to the city an agreement, on a form approved by the city attorney, to effectuate the indemnification provisions of this subsection. The city may further require that the operator pay a proportionate share of insurance premiums or self-insurance retention to insure city against the liability for which indemnification is required by this subsection.

C. CERCLA Defense Records. Each operator shall maintain data retention and preservation systems which can establish where solid waste collected in the city was landfilled (and therefore establish where it was not landfilled) with a copy or summary of the reports required by sections of this code, for fifty years after the term during which collection services are provided or to provide copies of such records to city. Operator agrees to notify city’s risk manager and city attorney before destroying such records. This provision shall survive the expiration of the period during which collection services are to be provided.

D. AB 939 and Other Applicable Legislation Indemnification. Each operator shall meet the requirements of city’s source reduction and recycling element with respect to the solid waste it collects within the city including but not limited to, compliance with the requirements set forth in the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, any and all source reduction programs including recycling, composting, special waste, education and public information programs. Operator shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents or employees against all fines or penalties imposed by the California Integrated Waste Management Board in the event that: (i) the diversion, source reduction and recycling goals of AB 939 or other applicable legislation are not met by the city with respect to operator’s waste stream; or (ii) operator has delayed in providing information preventing city from submitting reports required by AB 939 or other applicable legislation in a timely manner. The city may require, as a condition to issuance of a franchise or business license, that the operator sign and deliver to the city an agreement, on a form approved by the city attorney, to effectuate the indemnification provisions of this subsection.

E. Worker’s Compensation Insurance. As required by Section 1860 of the Labor Code of the State, each operator shall secure payment of workers compensation to his employees in accordance with the provisions of Section 3700 of the Labor Code of the State. Each operator shall supply to the city the certificate required by Section 1861 of said labor code.

F. Liability Insurance. Each operator shall procure and maintain public liability and property damage insurance with coverage limits not less than:

Bodily injury, property damage and personal injury liability: two million dollars per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage.

Automobile liability: two million dollars per accident for bodily injury and property damage.

1. The general liability and automobile liability policies are to contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following provisions:

a. The city, its officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers (“additional insureds”) are to be covered as insured as respects: liability arising out of activities performed by or on behalf of the operator, products and completed operations of the operator; premises owned, occupied or used by the operator; or vehicles owned, leased, hired or borrowed by the operator. The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of protection afforded to the city, its officers, officials, employees, agents or volunteers.

b. Insurance coverage shall be primary over any other valid and collectible insurance available to the city. Any insurance maintained by the city shall be excess of the operator’s insurance and shall not contribute with it.

c. Any failure to comply with reporting or other provisions of the policies including breaches of warranties shall not affect coverage provided to the additional insured.

d. Insurance shall apply separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer’s liability.

e. Coverage shall not be suspended, voided or canceled except after thirty days’ prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, given to the city.

2. Insurance is to be placed with insurers which are California admitted (licensed) companies, approved by the state of California Department of Insurance and which have a current A.M. Best’s rating of no less than A-XIII.

3. Prior to commencing or conducting business within the city the operator shall file with the city clerk original endorsements effecting the liability coverage required by this section. In addition, the city shall have the right of inspection of all insurance policies required. Each operator shall also establish an insurance policy repository and maintain copies of insurance policies required for one hundred years after the end of the term during which collection services are provided. Operator shall notify city’s risk manager and city attorney before destroying copies of such policies. This provision shall survive the expiration of the period during which collection services are provided. (Ord. 1520 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.160 Reporting requirements.
A. Each operator shall maintain all records relating to the services provided hereunder, including, but not limited to, route maps, customer lists, billing records, weight tickets, maps, AB 939 records, and customer complaints, for the full term during which collection services are provided, and an additional period of not less than three years, or any longer period required by law. The city shall have the right, upon reasonable advance notice, to inspect, audit and copy all records which may be relevant to operations within the city or relating to the imposition of any fees which may imposed by the city. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, two business days’ notice shall be considered reasonable. Such records shall be made available to city at operator’s regular place of business, but in no event outside the county of Los Angeles.

B. Should any examination or audit of operator’s records reveal an underpayment to city by operator, the amount, plus interest compounded daily at the maximum lawful rate, shall be paid to city within thirty days.

C. Reporting Requirements. Operator shall cooperate with city and or designated consultants in solid waste disposal characterization studies and waste stream audits and shall implement measures adequate to achieve the city’s source reduction, recycling and waste stream diversion goals for the solid waste stream. Operator, at its own expense, shall submit to city information and reports necessary for city to meet its reporting obligations imposed by AB 939 and/or other legislation, and the regulations implementing AB 939 and/or other legislation, with respect to the solid waste collected by operator in the city.

D. Reports and Records.

1. Monthly, Quarterly and Annual Reports. In addition to reports required by other provisions, operator shall also submit to city such other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the city may reasonably request or require or as set forth by resolution or incorporated into the city’s solid waste hauler/recycler manual as may be amended from time to time.

2. Source Reduction and Recycling Plan (“SRRP”). Operator shall be required to submit an annual SRRP that is exclusive to the city. Each SRRP will be reviewed in detail to ensure that it meets the state-mandated requirements as established by AB 939 or other legislative requirements. The SRRP should examine in detail how the operator will accomplish these goals. The SRRP must include but is not limited to: (1) targeted materials including special wastes for source reduction, recycling and composting; (2) hazardous waste exclusion plan; (3) diversion methods; (4) reporting methodology; (5) contingency plans; and (6) methods for the handling of white goods including CFC removal, PCB removal and compliance with the requirements of Public Resources Code Sections 42160-42185.

E. Hazardous Waste Inspection and Reporting. Operator shall inspect solid waste put out for collection and reject solid waste observed to be contaminated with hazardous substances. Operator shall notify all agencies with jurisdiction, if appropriate, including the California Department of Toxic Substances Control and Local Emergency Response Providers and the National Response Center, of reportable quantities of hazardous waste, found or observed in commercial solid waste anywhere within the city. In addition to other required notifications, if operator observes any substances which it or its employees reasonably believe or suspect to contain hazardous wastes unlawfully disposed of or released on any city property, including storm drains, streets or other public rights-of-way, operator will immediately notify the city manager.

F. Hazardous Waste Diversion Records. Operator shall maintain records showing the types and quantities, if any, of hazardous waste found in solid waste which was inadvertently collected from solid waste service recipients within the city, but diverted from landfilling.

G. Reports. All required reports and records shall be furnished at the sole expense of operator. Reports shall be submitted to the city manager. Operator shall submit all reports and information required on computer disks, or by modem, in a format compatible with city’s computers, at no additional charge, if requested by city.

H. Certification. All reports provided herein shall be signed under penalty of perjury, by a responsible corporate official, that the report is true and correct.

I. The city shall reserve the right to require all commercial, industrial, institutional or other entities to comply with the conditions of the section should the city deem that the activities engaged in by the entity are of significant levels to warrant reporting.

J. C&D Waste Diversion Plan. Contractors are required to prepare and follow a C&D waste diversion plan that identifies the activities to be conducted during the course of the construction and/or demolition project to assure conformance with the city’s requirement that the state required percentage of regulated C&D wastes must be diverted. The plan shall include but is not limited to a description of the following aspects: (1) targeted materials including special wastes for diversion, (2) diversion methods, (3) reporting methodology, (4) employee training, and (5) a contingency plan in the event that diversion methods are inadequate or infeasible for implementation. The C&D waste diversion plan shall be prepared and submitted to the city for review and approval with the building and/or demolition permit application. The contractor shall follow this plan and its activities are subject to city inspection for verification.

K. C&D Waste Diversion Report. Contractors are required to prepare and submit a C&D waste diversion report within sixty days of completion of the project to the city for review and approval. This report shall contain information documenting the good faith effort of the contractor to meet the C&D waste diversion plan, and demonstrating conformance with the state required percentage diversion requirement. The report shall contain as a minimum a completed “Waste Diversion Report Form,” originals or copies of all weight tickets or receipts documenting both disposal and diversion, and any other information attesting to or verifying the implementation of diversion activities. (Ord. 1797 § 9, 2018; Ord. 1649 § 5, 2004; Urg. Ord. 1648 § 5, 2003; Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.170 Recycling services.
A. Recycling services shall be provided to all residential, multifamily, commercial, industrial and other entities throughout the city. Any costs associated with the implementation of such programs shall not exceed those rates as established by the city or those rates identified by industry standards for the same services, whichever is less.

B. At least once each year, operator shall provide to its customers a current listing of recyclable materials said operator will collect and process through material recovery facilities, in order to maximize the diversion of solid waste from landfills (said list may be subject to the approval of the city using the best efforts standard to determine the extent of marketable material listed).

C. No person, other than the owner thereof or his agents or employees, or any officer or employee of the city, or operator shall collect or tamper with any recyclable materials in any container from any residential and/or commercial source. Scavenging of recyclable materials is prohibited.

D. Right of Individual to Dispose of Recyclable Solid Waste. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person, organization or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of any recyclable solid waste owned by that person, organization or other entity, provided that any such donation, sale or other disposal is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

E. Civil Action by Authorized Recycling Agent. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of an authorized recycling agent to bring a civil action against any persons who violate California Public Resources Code Sections 41950 through 41951, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by an authorized recycling agent.

F. Each solid waste collection franchisee must achieve the state required percentage diversion goal for any applicable city-sponsored project or regulated project for which the franchisee collects and hauls waste. (Ord. 1797 § 10, 2018; Ord. 1653 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1649 § 6, 2004; Urg. Ord. 1648 § 6, 2003; Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.20.180 Violations – Misdemeanors.
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six months, or by fine exceeding one thousand dollars, or both. Each separate day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in this section. (Ord. 1497 § 1 (part), 1996)

Chapter 8.28
GARBAGE AND MARKET REFUSE
Sections:

8.28.010    Definitions.

8.28.020    Feeding garbage to swine.

8.28.030    Repealed by Ord. 1721.

8.28.040    Depositing and burying garbage – Permit required.

8.28.050    Deposit of refuse.

8.28.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases set out in this section are defined as follows unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning:

“Garbage” means all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchen and household waste which has been prepared for or intended to be used as food or which shall have resulted from the preparation of food; all decayed or unsound fruit and vegetable matter; and all animal, fish, or fowl refuse (other than manure).

“Market refuse” means all nondecayed fruit and vegetable matter from stores and markets or other places having fruits and vegetables, either for sale or exchange or to give away. (Prior code § 5-1.601)

8.28.020 Feeding garbage to swine.
It is unlawful for any person to feed or permit to be fed any garbage or market refuse from any source whatsoever to any swine within the city. (Prior code § 5-1.602)

8.28.040 Depositing and burying garbage – Permit required.
Except as provided in Chapter 8.20 of this title, it is unlawful for any person to deposit or place in or upon uncovered racks or open containers or receptacles, either on or off the ground, or bury, or cause or permit to be deposited or buried, within the city any garbage or market refuse upon any premises, public or private, without having first obtained a written permit from the health officer. Any such permit issued shall be subject to revocation and may be revoked at any time by either the council or the health officer. (Prior code § 5-1.604)

8.28.050 Deposit of refuse.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall permit, or cause to be permitted, the contents of any cesspool, septic tank, or water closet, or sewer or sewage effluent, excrement, urine, slop water, butcher offal, market refuse, garbage, rubbish, cans, or any dead animal, dead fowl, or putrid or offensive animal or vegetable matter to remain or be deposited or discharged upon the surface of the ground on any premises or lot or in any building, basement, or public street, or into any standing water, stream, excavation, or public place. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the placing of cans or rubbish in any lawfully existing dump. (Prior code § 5-1.605)

Chapter 8.36
NOISE
Sections:

8.36.010    Declaration of policy.

8.36.020    Definitions.

8.36.030    General noise regulations.

8.36.040    Exterior noise standards.

8.36.050    Interior noise standards.

8.36.060    Noise measurement procedure.

8.36.070    Prohibited acts.

8.36.080    Exemptions.

8.36.090    Enforcement.

8.36.010 Declaration of policy.
In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise and vibration in the City of Gardena, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit such noise and vibration generated from or by all sources as specified in this chapter. It shall be the policy of the City to maintain quiet in those areas which exhibit low noise levels and to implement programs aimed at reducing noise in those areas within the City where noise levels are above acceptable values.

It is determined that certain noise levels and vibrations are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and are contrary to public interest. Therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, caused or maintained, any noise or vibration in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682 § 1, 2006; prior code § 4-8.01)

8.36.020 Definitions.
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning as indicated below. All terminology used in this chapter, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.

A-Weighted Sound Level: The sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.

Ambient Noise Level: The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.

Average (equivalent) Noise Level, or Leq: The sound level corresponding to a steady state noise level over a given measurement period with the same amount of acoustic energy as the actual time-varying noise level. Also known as the energy average noise level during the measurement period. The measurement period shall be fifteen (15) minutes under the terms of this chapter. Measured in dB(A).

Construction: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or on public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.

Decibel: A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) microPascals.

Demolition: Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property.

Emergency Machinery, Vehicle or Work: Any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility services, on an emergency basis.

Fixed Noise Source: A stationary device, which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

Grading: Any excavating or filling of earth material, or any combination thereof, conducted at a site to prepare said site for construction or other improvements thereon.

Impact Noise: The noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass, which may be either in motion or at rest.

Impulsive Noise: Noise of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, and the discharge of firearms.

Intrusive Noise: That noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.

Maximum Noise Level (Lmax): The greatest sound level measured on a sound level meter during a designated time period. The measurement period shall be fifteen (15) minutes under the terms of this chapter. Measured in dB(A).

Mobile Noise Source: Any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

Motor Vehicle: Motor vehicle shall include any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Motor Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under said Code, and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under said Code.

Muffler or Sound Dissipative Device: A device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine, and effective in reducing noise.

Noise Disturbance: Any noise which (a) endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals, or (b) annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers or injures personal or real property, or (d) violates the factors set forth in Section 8.36.040 or 8.36.050 of this chapter.

Noise Level: The A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB(A).

Person: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a State or any political subdivision of a State.

Powered Model Vehicle: Any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne, or land borne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket.

Public Right-of-Way: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place, which is owned or controlled by a government entity.

Public Space: Any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

Pure Tone: Any sound, which can be judged as audible or as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of this ordinance, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by 5 dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above and by 8 dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.

Real Property Boundary: An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions. Typically this “line” is the same as a lot line.

Residential Property: A parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels.

Sound Amplifying Equipment: Any device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed, and as used in this chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.

Sound Level Meter: An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for Type 1 or Type 2 meters in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.

Sound Pressure Level: For the purposes of this chapter, sound pressure level is the same as “A-weighted Sound Level.”

Sound Truck: Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.

Vibration Perception Threshold: The minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. The perception threshold shall be presumed to be a motion velocity of 0.01 in/sec over the range of 1 to 100 Hz.

Weekday: Any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682 § 1, 2006; prior code § 4-8.02)

8.36.030 General noise regulations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 4-8.03)

8.36.040 Exterior noise standards.
A. The following exterior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all property within the City. The Land Use category refers to the affected receiver property:

Type of Land Use

Allowable Exterior Noise Level

15-Minute Average Noise Level (Leq)

Maximum Noise Level (Lmax)

7 a.m. to 10 p.m.

10 p.m. to 7 am

7 a.m. to 10 p.m.

10 p.m. to 7 am

Residential

55 dB(A)

50 dB(A)

75 dB(A)

70 dB(A)

Residential portions of mixed-use

60 dB(A)

50 dB(A)

80 dB(A)

70 dB(A)

Commercial

65 dB(A)

60 dB(A)

85 dB(A)

80 dB(A)

Industrial or manufacturing

70 dB(A)

70 dB(A)

90 dB(A)

90 dB(A)

In the event the alleged offensive noise contains a pure tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, or contains repetitive, impulsive or impact noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, each of the above noise standards shall be reduced by 5 dB.

B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated, any source of sound at any location within the incorporated City or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured from any other property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed the noise standards of paragraph (A).

C. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the noise standard, the ambient noise level shall become the noise standard. (Ord. 1683, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682, 2006)

8.36.050 Interior noise standards.
A. The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential dwellings with windows in their normal seasonal configuration, where such dwelling is the receiver of intrusive noise:

Type of Land Use

Allowable Interior Noise Level

15-Minute Average Noise Level (Leq)

Maximum Noise Level (Lmax)

7 a.m. to 10 p.m.

10 p.m. to 7 am

7 a.m. to 10 p.m.

10 p.m. to 7 am

Residential

45 dB(A)

40 dB(A)

65 dB(A)

60 dB(A)

Residential portions of mixed-use

45 dB(A)

40 dB(A)

70 dB(A)

60 dB(A)

In the event the alleged offensive noise contains a pure tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, or contains repetitive, impulsive or impact noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, each of the above noise standards shall be reduced by 5 dB.

B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated, any source of sound at any location within the incorporated City or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured within any residential dwelling, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed the noise standards of paragraph (A).

C. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the noise standard, the ambient noise level shall become the noise standard. (Ord. 1683, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682, 2006)

8.36.060 Noise measurement procedure.
Upon receipt of a complaint from a citizen of noise disturbance that is not a Prohibited Act set forth in Section 8.36.070, the City or its agent, equipped with sound level meter satisfying the requirements specified in Section 8.36.020, shall investigate the complaint. The investigation shall consist of a measurement and the gathering of data to adequately define the noise problem and shall include the following:

A. Non-Acoustic Data.

1. Type of noise source.

2. Location of noise source relative to complainant’s property.

3. Time period during which noise source is considered by complainant to be intrusive.

4. Total duration of noise produced by noise source.

5. Date and time of noise measurement survey.

B. Noise Measurement Procedure.

1. Utilizing the “A” Weighting scale of the sound level meter and the “slow” meter response (use “fast” response for impulsive or impact type sounds), the noise level shall be measured at a position or positions at any point on the receiver’s property.

2. Measurements shall be made at the location with the highest perceived noise level including, but not limited to, locations identified by the complainant as being most severely affected by noise. In general, the microphone shall be located five feet above the ground or finished surface, and ten feet or more from the nearest reflective surface, where possible. However, in those cases where another elevation or microphone height is deemed appropriate (e.g., a second floor facade or balcony), it shall be utilized. If the noise measurement is to be obtained behind a noise barrier (e.g., a fence or wall) the microphone shall be located no closer than five feet from the noise barrier, where possible. If the noise complaint is related to interior noise levels, interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected residential unit. The measurements shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the noise source, with windows in the normal seasonal configuration. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustical calibrator, shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data.

3. If possible, the ambient noise shall be measured at the same location utilized in paragraph (2), with the alleged offending noise source inoperative. If for any reason the alleged offending noise source cannot be shut down, the ambient noise must be estimated by performing a measurement in the same general area of the source but at a sufficient distance such that the noise from the source but at a sufficient distance such that the noise from the source is inaudible. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682, 2006)

8.36.070 Prohibited acts.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary and unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity.

1. Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound:

a. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.36.040 or 8.36.050, except for activities for which a permit has been issued by the City.

b. In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth in Section 8.36.040, measured at a distance of at least 50 feet from such device operating on a public right-of-way or public space.

2. Loudspeakers (Amplified Sound). Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, or similar device between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 am, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line, or at any time violates the provisions of Section 8.36.040 or 8.36.050, except for any non-commercial public speaking, public assembly or other activity for which a permit has been issued by the City.

3. Street Sales.

a. Offering for sale, selling anything, or advertising by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area of the City except by permit issued by the City.

b. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at permitted sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, or other similar licensed public entertainment events.

4. Yelling, Shouting, Whistling and Singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.

5. Animals and Birds. Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal or bird which frequently or for long duration, howls, barks, mews, squawks, or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line.

6. Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.36.040 or 8.36.050.

7. Vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates a vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the real property boundary of the source if on private property or at 150 feet from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way.

8. Powered Model Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles:

a. Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.36.040 or 8.36.050.

b. In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth in Section 8.36.040, measured at a distance not less than 100 feet from any point on the path of a vehicle operating on public space or public right-of-way.

9. Stationary Non-Emergency Signaling Devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place, for more than 10 seconds in any hourly period. Houses of religious worship shall be exempt from the operation of this provision.

10. Emergency Signaling Devices. The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as described below:

a. Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed 60 seconds.

b. Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. The time limit specified in subsection (a) shall not apply to such complete system testing.

c. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is terminated within 15 minutes of activation.

11. Domestic Power Tools, Machinery.

a. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line.

b. Any motor, air conditioner, machinery, pump, such as swimming pool equipment, etc., shall be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and maintained so as not to create a noise disturbance in accordance with Section 8.36.040 or 8.36.050.

12. Places of Public Entertainment. Operating or permitting the operation or playing of any loudspeaker, musical instrument, motorized racing vehicle, or other source of sound in any place of public entertainment that exceeds 95 dB(A) as read on the slow response of a sound level meter at any point normally occupied by a customer, without a conspicuous and legible sign stating: “WARNING! SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT”.

13. Tampering. The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited:

a. The removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any noise control device or element thereof.

b. The use of a product, which has had a noise control device or element thereof, removed or rendered inoperative.

14. Motor Vehicle Noise Limits. Motor vehicle noise limits on a public right-of-way are regulated as set forth in the California Motor Vehicle Code, Sections 23130 and 23130.5. Equipment violations, which create noise problems, are covered under Sections 27150 and 27151. Any peace officer of any jurisdiction in California may enforce these provisions. Therefore, it shall be the policy of the City to enforce these sections of the California Vehicle Code.

15. Motor Vehicle Horns. It is unlawful for any person to sound a vehicular horn except as a warning signal (Motor Vehicle Code, Section 27001).

16. Motorized Recreational Vehicles Operating Off Public Right-of-Way. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorized recreational vehicle off a public right-of-way in such a manner that the sound levels emitted there from violate the provisions of Section 8.36.040. This section shall apply to all motorized recreational vehicles, whether or not duly licensed and registered, including, but not limited to, commercial or non-commercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, go-carts, campers, and dune buggies.

17. Vehicle, Motorboat, or Aircraft Repair and Testing.

a. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying, or testing any motor vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property line, or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.36.040.

b. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin, or in any manner regulate the movement of aircraft which are in all respects conducted in accordance with, or pursuant to, applicable Federal laws or regulations.

18. Standing Motor Vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than 5 minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.36.040. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682, 2006)

8.36.080 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:

A. Emergency sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or

B. Mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work.

C. Warning Devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as for example police, fire, and ambulance sirens, and train horns shall be exempted from the provisions of this ordinance.

D. Noise from occasional outdoor events/activities, outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting and entertainment events, provided said events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the City relative to the staging of said event.

E. School Activities, provided said activities are conducted on the grounds of a public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college.

F. Gatherings or festival activities conducted on a publicly owned and operated park or playground, pursuant to a city permit.

G. Noise associated with construction, repair, remodeling, grading or demolition of any real property, provided said activities do not take place between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday or any time on Sunday or a Federal holiday.

H. Operation of refuse and recyclable collection vehicles, provided:

1. Collection of residential refuse/recyclables does not occur between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Weekdays, or at any time on a weekend or holiday, except as provided below.

2. Collection from commercial premises, audible in residential areas, and which does not occur between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or at any time on a weekend or holiday, except as provided below.

3. When a collection day occurs on a holiday, alternative collections may be made on the following Saturday, between the hours of 7 a.m. and 6 p.m.

I. Federal or State Preempted Activities to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by State or Federal law.

J. Street cleaning, parking lot sweeping and sidewalk steam cleaning activities provided the activities do not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or at any time on a weekend or holiday.

1. When a cleaning/sweeping day occurs on a holiday, alternative scheduling may be made on the following Saturday, between the hours of 7 a.m. and 6 p.m.

K. Pre-existing Noise Sources. Commercial and/or industrial operations in existence prior to the date of adoption of this amendment, if in compliance with local zoning statues, shall be granted a six-month period from the effective date of this ordinance to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If prior to the end of the six-month period, it can be shown that compliance with the provisions herein constitutes a hardship in terms of technical and economic feasibility, an extension of time may be granted by the City Manager. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682, 2006)

8.36.090 Enforcement.
Any noise from prohibited actions or noise, which exceeds the noise level limits for a designated noise zone as specified in Section 8.36.030, 8.36.040 or 8.36.050 shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating or permitting the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

A. Additional Remedies.

1. The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter which operation or maintenance causes or create sound levels or vibration exceeding the allowable limits specified in this chapter shall be deemed and declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement by restraining order, injunction, warrant or any other judgment issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.

2. Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and my be abated in accordance with law. The expense of abating such public nuisance may be recovered through a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained and such item shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682, 2006)

Chapter 8.40
OIL WELLS
Sections:

8.40.010    Purpose.

8.40.020    Definitions.

8.40.030    Drilling and producing – Permit required.

8.40.040    Establishment of oil producing districts and controlled drilling sites – Application.

8.40.050    Establishment of controlled drilling sites and oil producing districts.

8.40.060    Required conditions for districts and sites.

8.40.070    Conditions controlling oil drilling and production.

8.40.080    Additional permit fee and business license.

8.40.090    Violation of conditions – Right of cancellation.

8.40.100    Capping wells and sumps – Public nuisance declared.

8.40.110    Fencing wells and sumps.

8.40.120    Fencing wells and sumps – Exceptions.

8.40.130    Cleaning wells and sumps.

8.40.140    Invalid exceptions.

8.40.010 Purpose.
It is declared to be the object and purpose of this chapter to permit and establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards, and controls for the reasonable and safe drilling for and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbons from controlled drilling sites located within the city.

It is recognized that restrictive limitations, safeguards, and controls are necessary in the public interest to effect practices which will not only provide for the most economical recovery of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances, but which will also take into consideration the surface uses of land, as such uses are indicated by the value and character of the existing improvements in or near districts where oil drilling or production is permitted, the desirability of the area for residential or other uses, or any other factor relating to the public health, comfort, safety, and general welfare. It is contemplated that portions of the city may be explored and developed for oil with surface drilling and production operations limited to a few, small, controlled drilling sites within the city so located and spaced as to cause the least detriment to the community and to the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare. (Prior code § 4-9.101)

8.40.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Controlled drilling site” and “site” shall each mean that particular area located within any part of the city upon which surface operations for oil well drilling or deepening and the production of oil or gas or other hydrocarbons shall be permitted under the provisions of this chapter, established and controlled as provided in this chapter.

“Oil” means and includes oil, gas and other hydrocarbons.

“Oil producing district” and “district” shall each mean any area within the city beneath which subsurface operations for oil well drilling or deepening and the production of oil or gas or other hydrocarbons may be permitted under the provisions of this chapter, established and controlled as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 4-9.102)

8.40.030 Drilling and producing – Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to drill for or produce oil within the city until such person first obtains a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-9.103)

8.40.040 Establishment of oil producing districts and controlled drilling sites – Application.
Any person desiring to establish an oil producing district and a controlled drilling site shall file an application with the city clerk for the establishment of such district and for the establishment of and a permit to use such site for the development of oil from such district. Such application shall be in writing, duly verified under oath by or on behalf of the applicant, and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information, documents, and fee:

A. The name and address of the applicant;

B. A statement that the applicant has the proprietary or contractual authority to drill for or produce oil under the surface of at least fifty-one percent of the area to be included in each oil producing district covered by such application. Each district covered by such application shall be not less than fifty acres in area, including all streets, ways, and alleys within the boundaries thereof, and shall be substantially compact in area and shall include all lands within the boundaries thereof, and the boundaries thereof shall follow public streets, ways, or alleys so far as may be practicable;

C. A statement that the applicant has the proprietary or contractual authority to drill into and produce oil from each controlled drilling site covered by such application. Each site covered by such application shall be not more than two acres in area and shall be substantially compact in area and shall include all lands within the boundaries thereof;

D. A scale map or plat of each proposed oil producing district showing the boundaries, location, and area thereof;

E. A scale map or plat of each proposed controlled drilling site showing the boundaries, location, and area thereof, the existing surface uses of the area within such site and the surface uses of the area within three hundred feet outside the exterior boundaries of each controlled drilling and other operations conducted on each such controlled drilling site;

F. A statement or other information showing that such proposed oil producing district and controlled drilling site and the applicant’s rights in respect thereto otherwise conform to the requirements of this chapter entitling the applicant to the request permit;

G. A tentative plan of development and producing operations showing:

1. The method by which the applicant proposes to drill, complete, and produce such wells and the type, size and kind of equipment and installations to be used in connection therewith,

2. The precautions the applicant proposes to take against fires, noise, odors, and other hazards incident to drilling and other operations conducted on each such controlled drilling site,

3. The proposed routing of trucks and other traffic incident to such drilling and other operations conducted on each such controlled drilling site, and

4. A landscaping plan showing the size, type, and kind of walls, fences, shrubbery, or other screening to be installed and maintained for concealment:

a. During drilling operations, and

b. Thereafter so long as the controlled drilling site is in use; and

H. A permit fee in an amount established by City Council resolution for each controlled drilling site requested or referred to in the application. (Ord. 1629 § 10, 2003; prior code § 4-9.104)

8.40.050 Establishment of controlled drilling sites and oil producing districts.
A. Hearing on Application – Notice. Upon the filing of such application, the city clerk shall immediately refer the same to the planning commission for examination and report and such other action thereon as may be required by law. Thereafter at the meeting at which the council receives a report of the planning commission upon such application, or in the event the planning commission does not submit to the council its report on such application within a period of forty days (or such additional time not to exceed twenty-five days as shall be authorized by the council prior to the expiration of such forty-day period) from the date of reference of such application to the planning commission, then at the meeting of the council immediately following the expiration of such forty-day period (or such extended period of not to exceed twenty-five additional days), the council shall set such application for public hearing before the council. The council shall set such application for hearing not less than ten days but not more than twenty-five days from the date of making such order and shall direct the city clerk to give notice of the filing of such application and of the hearing thereon. Such notice shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. A copy of such notice shall be posted on or near the door of the council chambers and shall remain posted for not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. Such notice shall also be published not less than once prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city and designated by the council or selected by the city clerk in the absence of such designation. The publication of such notice shall not be less than ten days prior to the hearing.

B. Hearing – Witnesses. The council shall have the power and authority to subpoena and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers at such hearing, to swear and examine all witnesses under oath, and may from time to time continue such hearing to a date certain without further notice. The city clerk shall keep a record and minutes of its proceedings.

C. Hearing – Evidence – Issuance of Permit. At such hearing the council shall receive evidence relating to any matter material to such application and give to all persons directly interested, or who may be affected by the action taken by the council in respect thereof, a reasonable opportunity to be heard. After the conclusion of such hearing, if the council finds and determines that the size, shape, and location of each proposed oil producing district and the size and location of each proposed controlled drilling site comply with the requirements of this chapter, that the applicant owns or controls the required percentage of the area within each oil producing district and each controlled drilling site and that the boundaries of each proposed oil producing district are otherwise fairly located so as not to include land which should not be reasonably included or to exclude land that should reasonably be included, the council may, by resolution, authorize the establishment of such oil producing district and controlled drilling site and direct the city clerk to issue to the applicant a permit for the development and production of such oil producing district by means of wells and other surface operations located on such controlled drilling site upon and subject to such reasonable terms, conditions, and requirements as the council finds and determines may be necessary in the discretion of the council to conserve the public safety and general welfare and as will provide for and result in the proper drilling and development of such oil producing district from wells drilled on such controlled drilling site as may be found and determined by the council to be just, fair and equitable and such as will protect the rights of and result in substantial justice to all concerned, will avoid unnecessary hardship and otherwise carry out the spirit and comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such permit shall be effective from and after the date of issuance thereof by the city clerk.

D. Royalties. Each permittee, or his successor in interest, shall, within one year from the date the permit for the establishment of any oil producing district and controlled drilling site becomes effective, execute an offer in writing giving to each record owner of property located in an oil producing district who, on the date of such offer, has not joined in the lease or other authorization to drill the right to royalties as follows: the right to share in the proceeds of production from wells bottomed in such district upon the same basis as those property owners who have by lease or other legal consent agreed to the drilling for and production of oil from the subsurface of fifty-one percent or more of the area in such district. The offer required shall remain open for acceptance for a period of at least four years after the date such permit becomes effective. During the period such offer is in effect, the permittee, or his successors in interest, shall impound all royalties to which such owners, or any of them, may be entitled in a bank or trust company in the state, with proper provisions for payment to the record owners of property in the district who have not signed the lease at the time such permit became effective but who accept such offer in writing within such period. Any such royalties remaining in any bank or trust company at the time such offer expires, which are not due or payable as provided, shall be paid pro rata to those owners who at the time of expiration are otherwise entitled to share in the proceeds of such production. (Prior code § 4-9.105)

8.40.060 Required conditions for districts and sites.
Each controlled drilling site and/or oil producing district established under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following required conditions:

A. Each oil producing district shall be not less than fifty acres in area, including all streets, ways and alleys within the boundaries thereof.

B. Not more than one controlled drilling site shall be permitted for the development of each fifty acres in each district, and such site shall not be larger than two acres.

C. The number of wells which may be drilled from any controlled drilling site shall not exceed one well to each five acres in each district to be explored from such site.

D. Each applicant requesting a permit for the establishment of an oil producing district shall have the proprietary or contractual authority to drill for oil and produce oil from under the surface of at least fifty-one percent of the area in the district to be explored.

E. Each controlled drilling site and all exterior parts thereof shall be adequately landscaped except for those portions occupied by any required structure, appurtenance, or driveway and all such landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

F. Each permittee, prior to commencing drilling, production, or incidental operations permitted, shall post with the council a corporate surety bond (to be approved as to form by the city attorney) in the sum of five thousand dollars in favor of the city, conditioned upon the performance by the permittee of each and all of the conditions, provisions, restrictions and requirements of the permit and this chapter. No extension of time which may be granted by the council or any change of specifications or requirements which may be approved or required by it, or any other alterations, modifications, or waivers affecting any of the obligations of the permittee made by any city authority or by any other power or authority whatever shall be deemed to exonerate either the permittee or the surety on any bond posted pursuant to this subsection. (Prior code § 4-9.106)

8.40.070 Conditions controlling oil drilling and production.
No operations in connection with the drilling for and producing of oil shall be commenced until a permit has been issued therefor pursuant to an application and the determination of prescribed conditions as set forth in this chapter. In addition thereto, the following conditions shall also be required conditions under which operations shall be conducted from any controlled drilling site:

A. Drilling operations shall be commenced on at least one controlled drilling site within one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the permit or within such additional time as the council in its discretion may allow and thereafter shall be prosecuted diligently to completion.

B. Drilling operations shall at all times be carried on only by internal combustion engines equipped with mufflers so as to reduce noise to a minimum.

C. Pumping and producing operations shall at all times be carried on only by electrical power, none of which power shall be generated by the permittee on the controlled drilling site or in the district.

D. Drilling operations shall be carried on or conducted in connection with only one well at a time on any controlled drilling site, and such well shall be brought in or abandoned before operations of the drilling of another well are commenced on such controlled drilling site; provided, however, the council may permit the drilling of more than one well on such controlled drilling site at any time after a discovery well has been brought in.

E. All oil drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration and noxious odors and shall be in accordance with good engineering practices incident to drilling for and the production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances.

F. All parts of the derrick above the derrick floor shall be enclosed with fire resistant, soundproofing material approved by the fire chief.

G. Heavy trucking of materials, equipment, and pipe used either for drilling or production operations shall be conducted to or from the controlled drilling site only between the hours of six a.m. and six p.m. on any day except in case of emergency incident to unforeseen drilling or producing operations.

H. No earthen sumps shall be used.

I. Firefighting equipment, as required by applicable fire regulations of the city, shall be maintained on the site at all times during the drilling and production operations.

J. Within sixty days after the drilling of each well has been completed and such well placed on production or abandoned, the derrick and all other drilling equipment shall be entirely removed from the site unless such derrick and appurtenant equipment are to be used in a reasonable time for the drilling of another well in the same site.

K. No oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances may be produced from any well permitted unless all equipment necessary for such production is reasonably screened from view or installed below ground level and maintained in accordance with applicable fire regulations.

L. No production tanks and no tanks or other facilities for the storage of mud, water, or oil shall be erected or maintained on the site which facilities extend above the ground level to a height of more than six feet.

M. No refinery or other processing plant of any kind shall be constructed, established, or maintained on the site at any time.

N. No sign shall be constructed, erected, maintained, or placed on the site, or any part thereof, except those required or permitted by law to be displayed in connection with the drilling or maintenance of the well.

O. Suitable and adequate sanitary toilet and washing facilities shall be installed on the site and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.

P. Each permittee, and his agents, successors, and assigns who conduct drilling, production, or incidental operations permitted, shall at all times be insured to a limit of not less than five hundred thousand dollars against liability in tort arising from drilling, production, or other activities or operations conducted or carried on from any controlled drilling site. The policy of insurance shall be written by an insurer whose total assets are at least five million dollars, and the form of the policy shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. A duplicate policy shall be filed with the city clerk. Each such policy shall be conditioned or endorsed so as to cover all agents, lessees, or representatives of the owner, lessee, or permittee who may actually conduct drilling, production, or incidental operations permitted by this chapter.

Q. The performance of any act required to be performed within a specified period of time shall be suspended during the time the permittee is prevented from performing by the elements, accidents, strikes, lockouts, riots, delays in transportation, interference by municipal, state or federal action, or the action of other governmental officials or bodies, or any other cause beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, whether such causes are similar or dissimilar to the causes specifically mentioned, or so long as the price of oil of the quality specifically mentioned, or so long as the price of oil of the quality produced from any well shall be less than seventy-five cents per barrel at the well. (Prior code § 4-9.107)

8.40.080 Additional permit fee and business license.
Each permittee holding a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right and such permittee is permitted, in consideration of the one thousand dollars controlled drilling site fee, to drill one well in and upon such drilling site, but shall pay a further permit fee in the sum of one thousand dollars for each additional well drilled in or upon such site, which fee shall be paid before drilling operations on any such additional well are commenced. Each such permittee shall also obtain and at all times have and possess a valid and then current business license covering each and every well, business, or activity conducted by, for, or on behalf of such permittee in or upon the premises included within any such drilling district or controlled drilling site and for which a business license is required under the provisions of this code. (Prior code § 4-9.108)

8.40.090 Violation of conditions – Right of cancellation.
In the event any owner, lessee, or permittee shall violate any of the conditions prescribed by this chapter or any permit issued by this chapter, the council may order the city clerk to give such owner, lessee, or permittee notice of such violation. If such owner, lessee, or permittee shall fail, without just cause, to commence to remedy such violation within ten days after receipt of written notice thereof from the city clerk, the council may, by resolution, suspend or cancel any permit issued; provided, however, such suspension or cancellation shall not affect the right of the owner, lessee, or permittee to continue the drilling for or production of oil from wells which are then drilling or producing and as to which no such violation exists. (Prior code § 4-9.109)

8.40.100 Capping wells and sumps – Public nuisance declared.
The council does hereby finds and declares that uncapped or unguarded wells, cisterns, holes in the ground which are likely to produce bodily injury as a result of a fall therein, oil sumps and other earthen sumps or excavations to be of a dangerous nature and a public nuisance. (Prior code § 4-9.201)

8.40.110 Fencing wells and sumps.
Every person making, maintaining, or using any oil well or sump, and every person making, maintaining, or using any other manmade excavation three feet or more in depth, and every person owning or having possession of any premises on which such excavation exists shall either cover such excavation by a wooden or metal cover as approved by the building official, so designed as to effectively prevent any likely injury or accident, or erect and maintain around such excavation at all places, if an oil sump and in other cases at all places where the slope is steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, if not under water, or one foot vertical to four feet horizontal, if under water, a fence not less than five feet high, mounted on steel posts. Such fence shall be constructed of chainlink or other industrial type fence of not less than nine gauge wire and of not greater than two inch mesh. The posts supporting such fence shall be set thirty-six inches in a concrete base and shall be spaced approximately ten feet apart. Tension wires of at least nine gauge coil spring wire or equivalent shall be stretched at the top and bottom of the fence fabric at twenty-four-inch intervals. On top of such fence shall be constructed a protective guard of not less than three strands of barbed wire, each strand not less than six inches or more than eight inches apart, mounted at a forty-five degree angle from the top of the fence. Gates shall be of a structure substantially the same as the required fence and shall be kept locked when not attended by an adult. There shall be no apertures below the fence large enough to permit any child to crawl under such fence. (Prior code § 4-9.202)

8.40.120 Fencing wells and sumps – Exceptions.
The provisions of Section 8.40.110 shall not apply to:

A. An oil sump constantly and immediately attended while drilling operations are continuously proceeding;

B. An excavation covered by Sections 24400, 24401, or 24402 of the Health and Safety Code of the state;

C. An excavation for the installation of a public utility or other public building if not abandoned;

D. An excavation in connection with the construction of a private residence or other private building if not abandoned; or

E. A swimming pool, fish pond, or wading pond on the same lot or parcel of land as a private residence. (Prior code § 4-9.203)

8.40.130 Cleaning wells and sumps.
Every person operating or maintaining an oil well shall cause all sumps, cellars, and ditches which were used, installed, or maintained for use in connection with any well and which have not been used for ninety days for the operation of or the drilling of such well, or any other well in the vicinity, to be cleaned and all oil, rotary mud, and rubbish removed therefrom. (Prior code § 4-9.204)

8.40.140 Invalid exceptions.
Should any exception to the provisions of this chapter be held invalid, such exception shall be eliminated from this chapter. The council declares that it intends the provisions of this chapter to apply to every excavation which, by reason of constitutional limitations, cannot be excepted from its provisions. (Prior code § 4-9.205)

Chapter 8.44
PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:

8.44.010    Definitions.

8.44.020    Alarm system permits required.

8.44.025    Alarm system permit applications.

8.44.026    Permit issuance.

8.44.030    Exemptions and exclusions.

8.44.040    Alarm system permits – Fees.

8.44.050    Alarm system requirements.

8.44.060    False alarms.

8.44.070    False alarms – Service charges.

8.44.080    Malfunction repairs.

8.44.100    Violation – Penalty.

8.44.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure, or facility, or both and which system emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. “Alarm system” includes, but is not limited to, silent alarms and audible alarms. Auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system shall not be included in this definition.

“Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises which alarm generates an audible sound on the premises when it is activated.

“Chief of police” means the chief or his designee.

“False alarm” means any alarm activated for reasons not of an emergency nature or due to the malfunction of any segment of the alarm system and which may result in a response by the police department where an emergency situation does not exist. “False alarm” also means the use of an alarm for purposes other than that for which it was installed.

“Proprietor alarm” means an alarm system which does not request a public response when activated or is not reasonably expected to result in some public response.

“Silent alarm” means a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises which alarm does not generate an audible sound on the premises when it is activated but transmits a signal directly to the police or alarm business. (Ord. 1504 § 2, 1996; prior code § 3-6.01)

8.44.020 Alarm system permits required.
A. No person shall have installed on any premises under his control an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm system permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. For any alarm system in operation on the effective date of the ordinance amending this Section 8.44.020, no person shall maintain or operate any alarm system unless such person shall have secured the required alarm system permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1504 § 3, 1996: prior code § 3-6.02)

8.44.025 Alarm system permit applications.
Subscribers and owners or users of alarm systems shall file annual applications for alarm permits with the city through the business license department or police department. Alarm businesses may procure and process initial applications for their subscribers.

Applications shall contain the following information:

A. Name, address and telephone number (both home and work) of the applicant;

B. Identification of the location where the alarm is or will be installed;

C. Identification of the alarm business monitoring, or rendering service or repairs, to the alarm system;

D. Description of the alarm system by manufacturer, model and type;

E. Names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs for service and secure the premises during any hours of the day or night the alarm system is activated. It shall be the responsibility of every person maintaining an alarm system to ensure that the names and telephone numbers are kept current;

F. Such other information as the chief of police deems necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. (Ord. 1664 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1504 § 4, 1996)

8.44.026 Permit issuance.
The chief of police shall review permit applications to ensure that the alarm system meets the requirements of this chapter. Upon approval, the permits shall be issued to the person owning, leasing, renting or otherwise possessing the alarm system. (Ord. 1504 § 5, 1996)

8.44.030 Exemptions and exclusions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to products of combustion detection systems, flow alarm systems, proprietor alarms, audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles, or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the state. (Prior code § 3-6.03)

8.44.040 Alarm system permits – Fees.
A. The fee for an alarm system permit shall be an annual fee as specified by resolution of the city council.

B. A late fee, as specified by resolution of the city council, in addition to the permit fee, will be imposed for those permits not obtained within sixty days of installation or for those alarm systems already installed and not permitted by annually by March 1 of the current year.

C. Alarm system permit applicants submitting permit applications from January 1 through August 31 shall pay the established annual fee for that current year. Alarm system permit applicants submitting permit applications from September 1 through December 31 shall pay the established annual fee, which payment shall apply to the remainder of that current year and the following year. (Ord. 1664 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1504 § 6, 1996: prior code § 3-6.04)

8.44.050 Alarm system requirements.
A. No person shall have installed an audible alarm system which creates a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning system.

B. No person shall install an audible alarm system which does not automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within one-half hour after it is activated. (Ord. 1504 § 7, 1996: prior code § 3-6.05)

8.44.060 False alarms.
A person shall not knowingly turn in or activate a false alarm. This section shall not prohibit a test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the police department. Activation of audible alarm systems for one second or less shall not be considered false alarms. (Ord. 1664 § 3, 2004; prior code § 3-6.06)

8.44.070 False alarms – Service charges.
Any alarm system placed in a residential, commercial or industrial premises which has four or more false alarms shall be subject to payment of administrative fines as specified by resolution of the city council. The fines shall be imposed in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1504 § 8, 1996: prior code § 3-6.07)

8.44.080 Malfunction repairs.
After any false alarm caused by a malfunction of the alarm system, an alarm system permittee shall cause the alarm system to be repaired so as to eliminate such malfunction before reactivating the alarm. A person shall not reactivate such alarm until such repairs have been made. (Prior code § 3-6.08)

8.44.100 Violation – Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1504 § 10, 1996: prior code § 3-6.10)

Chapter 8.56
GRAFFITI PREVENTION AND REMOVAL
Sections:

8.56.010    Definitions.

8.56.020    Regulation of sales and purchases of aerosol paint containers and etching solution.

8.56.030    Regulation of possession of graffiti implements.

8.56.040    Graffiti prohibited.

8.56.050    Graffiti reward.

8.56.060    Liability for damages and reimbursement of reward payments.

8.56.070    Graffiti removal from private property by owner.

8.56.080    Graffiti removal from private property by the city.

8.56.090    Penalties.

8.56.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used shall be defined as provided in this section:

“Adhesive label” shall mean any so-called bumper sticker, sheet of paper, fabric, or plastic, or other substance with an adhesive backing.

“Aerosol paint container” shall mean any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, undercoating, spray insulation, or other substance capable of defacing property.

“Etching solution” shall mean any product or compound manufactured for the purpose of permanently altering a glass surface.

“Felt-tip marker” shall mean any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch and which contains an ink or other pigmented liquid.

“Graffiti” shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material, to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof.

“Graffiti implement” shall mean an aerosol paint container, a felt-tip marker, gum label, paint stick, etching tool or solution capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, wood, or other surface, adhesive label, or any other device capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width upon any surface of any material.

“Paint stick” shall mean a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and, upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width.

“Structures” shall mean any structure as defined in the city’s building code, and shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, signs, and cargo/shipping containers.

“Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.020 Regulation of sales and purchases of aerosol paint containers and etching solution.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, except a parent or legal guardian, to sell or give or in any way furnish to another person, who is in fact under the age of eighteen years, any aerosol paint container, etching solution or any other graffiti implement without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity. As used herein, the phrase “bona fide evidence of majority and identity” means any document evidencing the age and identity of any individual which has been issued by a federal, state or local governmental entity.

B. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to purchase an aerosol paint container, etching solution or any other graffiti implement.

C. Every retailer or other business establishment selling or offering for sale in the city aerosol paint containers, etching solution and/or any other graffiti implement shall store and maintain all such aerosol paint containers and etching solution in a place that is locked and secure, or which is otherwise made inaccessible to the public except upon request.

D. Every retailer or other business establishment selling or offering for sale in this city aerosol paint containers, etching solution and/or any other graffiti implement shall post in a conspicuous place a sign in letters at least three-eighths of an inch high stating: “Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment or both.”

E. It is unlawful to sell, trade, give, exchange, or display for sale at any swap meet, flea market, open-air market, or yard sale any aerosol paint container, etching solution or any other graffiti implement. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.030 Regulation of the possession of graffiti implements.
A. It is unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person and/or in plain view to the public an aerosol paint container, or a container which contains paint or dye, or any writing instrument having a porous point, tip, or nib in excess of one-eighth of one inch in width at its widest point, or a glass etching tool/solution or similar device while in any posted public facility, park, playground, swimming pool or recreational area, other than a highway, street, alley or way, unless he or she has first received valid authorization from the governmental entity which has jurisdiction over the public area. As used herein, the term “posted” means a sign placed in a reasonable location or locations stating that it is a violation of this code to possess the above-referenced instruments and devices in such public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, or recreational area without valid authorization.

B. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person under the age of 18 years to have in his or her possession any instrument described herein below while upon private property and/or without the prior written consent of the owner of such property, or upon a public highway, street, alleyway, park, playground, swimming pool, public building or any area open to the public:

1. Any aerosol paint container or other spray can containing anything other than a solution which can be removed by water after it dries;

2. Any spray can tips, other than those affixed to a spray can not meeting the description of subsection (B)(1) of this section;

3. Any felt-tip marker containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries;

4. Any container holding anything other than solution that can be removed with water after it dries and which can be used to apply that solution. This includes acrylic paint tubes, oil paint tubes, shoe dyes, and bottles and cans of such solutions; and

5. Objects capable of etching glass or ceramic surfaces, including, but not limited to, bits, grinding stones, glass cutters, scribes, broken spark plug ceramic, chisels, and any solution capable of etching these surfaces when applied, including acids and etching baths.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person under the age of eighteen years attending or traveling to or from school, at which time the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at said school which has a written requirement of the class for the possession of the implements or instruments described in this section. The burden of proof in any prosecution for a violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to establish enrollment in a class that requires the possession of the implements or instruments described in this section. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.040 Graffiti prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply graffiti (including etching and etching materials/substances) to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle located within the city. It shall also be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply or affix any adhesive label to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle not owned or lawfully possessed by such person, or without advance authorization by the owner thereof. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.050 Graffiti reward.
A. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.5, the city does hereby offer a reward in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation committed within the state of California of Penal Code Sections 594 or 594.3 (by the use of graffiti), 640, 640.5, 640.6, or Section 8.56.040 of this chapter. In the event of multiple contributors of information regarding a single event or suspect, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction.

B. Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed, in writing, with the city clerk. Each claim should:

1. Specifically identify the date, location, and kind of property damaged or destroyed;

2. Identify by name the person who was convicted; and

3. Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred.

C. The city council shall review each claim for reward submitted pursuant to this chapter and either accept, accept in part, or deny the claim. No claim for a reward shall be accepted by the city council unless the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. The investigation must determine that the claimant’s information was relevant and directly responsible for the arrest and conviction of the suspect.

D. The offer of reward is made to members of the public generally. However, no law enforcement officer, municipal officer, employee of the city, or person(s) apprehended shall be eligible for such reward.

E. Any person committing graffiti vandalism, and if said person is an unemancipated minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of said minor, shall be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.060 Liability for damages and reimbursement of reward payments.
A. Pursuant to Section 1714.1(b) of the California Civil Code, any act of willful misconduct of a minor and/or adult which results in the defacement of property of another with paint, graffiti implement, or any similar substance or device, shall be imputed to the parent and/or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of civil damages, including court costs and attorney’s fees, to the prevailing party, and the parent or guardian having custody and control shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages resulting from the willful misconduct, not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars for each such act of the minor.

B. Any person violating the provisions of Section 8.56.040 shall pay to the city the amount of any reward paid pursuant to Section 8.56.050, and, if such person is an unemancipated minor, such minor’s parent and/or guardian shall be liable therefor and shall pay the amount of any such reward to the city. Failure to pay any amount demanded by the city pursuant to this subsection within thirty days after written demand therefor shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.070 Graffiti removal from private property by owner.
It is unlawful for the owner of any privately owned real property to permit graffiti or other unauthorized inscriptions to remain on any building, structure or other facility so as to be capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, such as a highway, street, road, parkway or alley; provided, that the city manager, chief of police, or his designee, has given written notice to the owner to remove the graffiti within a period of ten calendar days and such time period has elapsed without remedial action. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.080 Graffiti removal from private property by the city.
Upon a determination by the city manager, chief of police, or his designee, that graffiti or other unauthorized inscriptions are on any privately owned building, structure or other facility and are in view of persons utilizing any public right-of-way, whether a highway, street, road, parkway or alley, the city shall be authorized to undertake the removal of such graffiti. Prior to the removal of such graffiti, the city shall obtain the written consent of the owner, including an appropriate release form and right of entry form authorizing such graffiti removal. The city shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of a more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located. The authority of the city under this section shall be in addition to all other remedies available under the provisions of this code, including those related to the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

8.56.090 Penalties.
A. Criminal Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.16.

B. Additional Penalties. Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the city’s intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional penalties or conditions of any grant or probation, diversion, deferred entry of judgment, or other court supervision (including upon a determination that a minor is to be a ward of the court as a result of committing an act of vandalism or graffiti) upon conviction:

1. Suspension or delay in issuance of driver’s license (pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6); and

2. Community service and/or graffiti removal service (pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 640.6 and 1203 et seq., Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 728 and 729.8, and Vehicle Code Section 42001.7).

C. Lien Against Property. It is the intent of the city to make the expense of abatement of any nuisance, resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material, a lien against the property of a parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, and a personal obligation against the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor (pursuant to California Government Code Section 38772, California Penal Code Section 1202.4 and other state law). “Expense of abatement” includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person.

D. Cumulative Remedies. The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of other applicable city ordinances, the laws of the state of California, or the laws of the United States. (Ord. 1713 § 2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 8.64
ABATEMENT OF REAL PROPERTY NUISANCES
Sections:

8.64.010    Definitions.

8.64.020    Nuisances designated.

8.64.030    Duty to maintain free of nuisance.

8.64.035    Maintenance and repair of sidewalks and street landscape planters.

8.64.036    Liability for injuries to public.

8.64.040    Abatement.

8.64.050    Responsibility for abatement.

8.64.060    Notices and orders/manner of giving.

8.64.070    Notice/order of abatement.

8.64.080    Appeals.

8.64.090    Hearing/testimony and oaths.

8.64.100    Hearing – Conduct.

8.64.110    Decision of hearing officer.

8.64.120    Notice of decision.

8.64.130    Compliance with final order.

8.64.140    Cost of abatement.

8.64.150    Notice of cost hearing.

8.64.160    Report hearing and proceedings.

8.64.170    Service on owner of statement of costs/recordation.

8.64.180    Assessment of costs against property.

8.64.190    Nuisance abatement lien.

8.64.200    Assessment – Refunds.

8.64.210    Alternatives.

8.64.220    Emergency abatement.

8.64.230    Violation – Criminal penalty.

    Prior code history: Prior code §§ 5-3.301 – 5-3.314.

8.64.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, the following definitions shall apply:

“City manager” means the city manager or his designee.

“Garbage” means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

“Occupant,” when used in connection with a lot building or structure, means any person, including an owner, who has the legal or equitable right to use, occupy or possess the same, on either an exclusive or nonexclusive basis.

“Parkway” means and refers to that portion of street right-of-way between the back of the established curb line and the existing sidewalk.

“Property” for purposes of this chapter shall include the sidewalk and parkway abutting or adjoining the lot, parcel, tract, or piece of land at issue.

“Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.

“Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the primary use of pedestrians.

“Weeds” means:

1. Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;

2. Sagebrush, chaparral, and any other brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property;

3. Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous; and

4. Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other combustible material which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard. (Ord. 1786 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.020 Nuisances designated.
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property in the city:

A. To maintain any building or structure on the property in such a manner as to constitute a health hazard, fire hazard or a danger to human life; or

B. To maintain the property, the topography or configuration of which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, in such a manner as to cause erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff problems which will or may be injurious to persons and/or to adjacent or nearby public or private properties; or

C. To maintain or fail to maintain the property so as to allow the overgrowth of vegetation or the accumulation of garbage, rubbish or debris so as to constitute a fire or health hazard, be likely to harbor rats or other vermin, be dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare, or have a tendency to depreciate property values of surrounding properties; or

D. To maintain or fail to maintain the property so as to allow an overgrowth of weeds or grasses on the property to exceed twelve inches in height; or

E. To maintain or fail to maintain the property, or any building or structure thereon, in such condition so that it is defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that it causes or may be reasonably expected to cause any diminution of the property values of nearby properties or otherwise interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of nearby properties and improvements; or

F. To abandon or vacate any real property, building or structure so that it becomes readily available to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to juveniles and vagrants; or

G. To cause or maintain any real property, building, structure, or improvement thereon, or uses and activities thereon, to be in violation of any provision of the Gardena Municipal Code; or

H. To use, occupy or maintain any building, structure, improvement or property, or any part thereof, in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building, structure, or property contained in the Gardena Municipal Code, including all codes adopted by reference; or

I. To maintain any building or portion thereof in a manner which constitutes a substandard building pursuant to Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code; or

J. To maintain property in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480; or

K. To store, discharge, hold, handle, maintain, use or otherwise deal with hazardous substances, as defined by applicable state or federal laws or regulations:

1. In violation of federal, state or local laws or regulations, or

2. In such a manner to affect in any way air or water quality, or

3. In such a manner as to create an identifiable risk of accidental release of the substances, which release might adversely affect the health or safety of persons, damage property, or adversely affect air or water quality; or

L. To keep any animal, reptile or insect in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance, danger or menace to persons or property of another or in a public right-of-way; or

M. To operate or maintain any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery such that the operation or maintenance causes noise, vibrations, dust, exhaust or fumes which cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of the residents in the area; or

N. To fail to remove underground or aboveground storage vessels or tanks within six months after the use of such tanks or vessels ceases; or

O. To maintain property containing refuse, rubbish, garbage, offal, animal excrement or other waste materials visible from the public right-of-way or adjoining properties which are not kept or disposed of in accordance with regulations of this code or other provisions of law; or

P. To dispose of animal excrement in such a manner as to expose the excrement to fly and/or maggot infestation or resultant odor; or

Q. To allow and/or to cause animal excrement to run off onto any property not belonging to the owner or person in charge of such animal; or

R. To park or store any operable vehicle on property used or zoned for residential purposes, in any parkway, front or side yards, or on any part of the property other than on a lawfully installed surface which leads to a residential garage, carport, or other area specifically designated by Title 18, the community development department, planning commission or city council; or

S. To cause or permit the accumulation or storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative trailers, campers, boats, airplanes or other mobile equipment, or parts thereof, in yard areas or driveways visible from the public right-of-way or any adjoining properties unless such is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard; or

T. To keep any vehicle in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled in yard areas or driveways visible from the public right-of-way or any adjoining properties unless the vehicle is being actively worked upon; or

U. To keep any vehicle on blocks, jacks, or similar supports visible from the public right-of-way or any adjoining property unless the vehicle is being actively worked upon; or

V. To maintain property containing attractive nuisances dangerous to children, including but not limited to:

1. Abandoned or broken equipment or machinery, or

2. Unfenced or otherwise unprotected swimming pools, spas, ponds or excavations, or

3. Refrigerators, iceboxes or deep freeze lockers, or other similar equipment having a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more which is not being used, without removing the door or such portion of the latch or locking mechanism as will prevent the latching or locking of the door, or

4. Uncapped or otherwise dangerous wells; or

W. To maintain premises containing broken or discarded furniture or household equipment visible from the public right-of-way or any adjoining properties; or

X. To maintain premises with garbage or trash containers contrary to the provisions of the Gardena Municipal Code except when placed in places of collection at the times permitted; or

Y. To maintain premises containing packing boxes, lumber, junk, trash or other materials and debris stored in yards and/or other areas visible from public streets or adjoining properties; or

Z. To maintain any building or structure on property which is partially destroyed, abandoned, or permitted to remain in a state of partial construction for more than twelve months after expiration of a valid building permit or extension thereof issued by the city; or

AA. To maintain any building, fence, landscaping or structure and/or the access thereto, with inscriptions, writings, scratches or other markings commonly referred to as “graffiti.” (Ord. 1786 § 3, 2018: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.030 Duty to maintain free of nuisance.
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, and occupant or person in possession of any property, or any building or structure thereon, to maintain such property, building or structure free from the nuisances designated in Section 8.64.020 above. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.035 Maintenance and repair of sidewalks and street landscape planters.
A. The owners of lots or portions of lots adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area between the property line of the lots and the street line, including landscape planting strips, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right, shall repair and maintain such sidewalk areas and pay the costs and expenses therefor.

B. For the purpose of this chapter, maintenance and repair of sidewalk area shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and repair of surfaces including grinding, removal, and replacement of sidewalks, repair and maintenance of curb and gutters, removal of impervious paving materials from street tree planting strips, or other right-of-way landscape planters, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and installing root barriers, trimming of shrubs and/or ground cover, and trimming shrubs within the area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street pavement line, including planting strips and curbs, so that the sidewalk area will remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the sidewalk in a reasonable manner and will be in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area. (Ord. 1801 § 2 (part), 2019)

8.64.036 Liability for injuries to public.
The property owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on or adjacent to any portion of a street or any portion of a sidewalk area between the property line of the lots and the street line and any persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in such condition that the sidewalk will not endanger persons or property. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner to maintain the sidewalk area in a nondangerous condition, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the property owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. However, such liability shall not attach if the dangerous condition is caused by a street tree as defined in Section 13.60.020. (Ord. 1801 § 2 (part), 2019)

8.64.040 Abatement.
All or any part of any real property, or building or structure located thereon found, as provided in this chapter, to constitute a public nuisance, shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, removal, clearing, demolition, cessation of the use or a combination thereof pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.050 Responsibility for abatement.
Whenever the public works director or the community development director or their designees (hereinafter “director”) reasonably believe a public nuisance exists, the director shall then commence abatement proceedings. The public works director shall have the responsibility for abating all violations of this chapter relating to weeds and graffiti. The community development director shall have the responsibility for abating all other violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.060 Notices and orders/manner of giving.
A. All notices and orders shall be served on:

1. The owner of the affected property, building, or structure as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current;

2. Any occupants of the affected property;

3. Any persons holding permits for the applicable property, building or structure;

4. The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record;

5. The holder of any lease of record;

6. The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record; and

7. To any other person who has requested such notice.

B. All notices shall be served on the owners and occupants by personal delivery or by registered or certified mail and shall be served on all others by regular mail.

C. The failure of any person to receive any notice required by this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this chapter.

D. Notices shall be deemed to have been given as of the date of personal service or two calendar days following its deposit in the mail. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.070 Notice/order of abatement.
A. When the director reasonably believes a nuisance to exist, the director shall issue a notice of the director’s order requiring the abatement of such public nuisance to those persons and in the manner specified in Section 8.64.060A, and shall, within the same time period, conspicuously post the notice on the affected property, building or structure.

B. The order shall indicate the nature of the alleged nuisance, the description of the property involved, and shall direct the owner and/or occupant of the property to abate the conditions causing such nuisance and shall specify the manner of the abatement if applicable. The order shall set forth the time frames by which the nuisance must be abated.

C. The notice shall set forth the right to appeal the order within ten days from the date of service and shall specify that the order shall be deemed final, absent a timely filed appeal. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.080 Appeals.
A. Appeals shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days following service of the order. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the legal and/or factual grounds for the appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

B. A timely filed appeal shall stay the order. If an appeal is not timely filed, the order of the director shall be deemed to be final.

C. Upon the timely filing of an appeal, the city clerk shall give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing to the appellant and to all other persons listed in Section 8.64.060 in the manner specified therein. The hearing shall be not more than sixty days from the date of the appeal. The notice shall specify that the person has the right to be represented by an attorney, to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses.

D. Nothing herein shall prevent any property owner or other person with the legal ability to so do from abating the nuisance prior to the time of the hearing and notifying the city of the same. Upon confirmation by the city that the nuisance has been abated, the need for the appeal hearing shall be deemed terminated, no costs shall be assessed or fines imposed and the appeal fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.090 Hearing/testimony and oaths.
A. The city manager shall designate the hearing officer. The city manager may sit as the hearing officer, unless to do so violates the requirements of due process. The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and, in the course of doing so, is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093(a).

B. The employment, performance, evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the outcome of the decision. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.100 Hearing – Conduct.
A. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. Appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses.

B. The hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to applicable staff reports. The hearing officer shall give any interested persons a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction therewith. Based upon the evidence so presented, the hearing officer shall determine whether a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter exists. The hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.110 Decision of hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall render his decision as soon as possible, but in no event more than thirty days after the close of the hearing and a copy of that decision shall be mailed to the appellant within five days after the decision is rendered. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive. If it is determined that a nuisance exists, the decision shall include an order to abate the nuisance within a reasonable period of time as determined by the hearing officer and shall also include the manner in which the nuisance should be abated. The decision shall provide that pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be commenced not later than the ninetieth day after service of the decision. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.120 Notice of decision.
A copy of the city manager’s decision shall be given as provided for in Section 8.64.060 within five working days after the adoption thereof. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.130 Compliance with final order.
A. The owner and/or occupant of the property to which a final order relates shall promptly comply with all the provisions of the final order within the time specified.

B. If the nuisance is not completely abated as ordered, the city manager may cause the director to abate the same by city forces or private contract, and entry upon the premises, property, building and/or structure is expressly authorized for such purposes. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.140 Cost of abatement.
A. Where the director and/or the city attorney is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, an accounting of the actual costs shall be kept, including incidental expenses for the abatement. The term “incidental expenses” includes but is not limited to the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required under this chapter, city overhead costs and city administrative costs including any attorney’s fees expended in the abatement of the nuisance, through civil action or otherwise. The city attorney shall be responsible for keeping an accounting of attorney’s fees and costs and transmitting the same to the director.

B. The prevailing party may recover its attorney’s fees in any action or administrative proceeding authorized by this chapter to abate a public nuisance if the city elects at the initiation of such action or proceeding to recover its own attorney’s fees. In no event shall an award of attorney’s fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the city.

C. Costs shall be assessed at the conclusion of the abatement; in the case of an abatement by any method which takes more than six months, costs may be assessed at any time after six months, but in no event more than two times a year.

D. The accounting of costs with an itemized statement shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall set the same for a hearing before the city manager. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.150 Notice of cost hearing.
A. When the city desires to assess costs against real property, an itemized report with available backup documentation shall be prepared by the finance director and submitted to the city clerk.

B. The city clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by the city manager.

C. The city clerk shall cause written notice to be served on the property owner not less than ten days prior to the time set for the hearing, as well as all other persons listed in Section 8.64.060. Notice to the property owner shall be by certified mail at the address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor with a duplicate copy to be sent by first-class mail. Notices to all other persons shall be by first-class mail. A copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted on the property.

D. The notice shall include the time and place of the hearing and shall include the itemized report and backup documentation.

E. The notice shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.160 Report hearing and proceedings.
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city manager shall hear and pass upon the report of the director, together with any objections or protests thereto. Thereupon, the city manager shall make such revision, correction and modification to the report as he may deem just, after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the city manager shall be final. The decision shall specify that pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be commenced not later than the ninetieth day after the date the city manager’s decision is mailed. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.170 Service on owner of statement of costs/recordation.
A. The city clerk shall give notice of the city manager’s decision to the property owner and all such other persons as specified in Section 8.64.060. A copy of the notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the property.

B. The city clerk shall cause a copy of the decision to be recorded with the recorder of Los Angeles County. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.180 Assessment of costs against property.
The confirmed costs shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates; and, after its recording, as thus made and confirmed, the same shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. After the confirmation of the report, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the tax collector for the city, whereupon it shall be the duty of the tax collector to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes; and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 1744 § 10 (part), 2013: Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.190 Nuisance abatement lien.
A. As an alternative to imposing the cost of abatement as a special assessment against the property, the city may choose instead to collect the cost of abatement by a nuisance abatement lien in accordance with the provisions of this section.

B. The procedure to impose a nuisance abatement lien shall be the same as specified in Sections 8.64.140 through 8.64.180 herein except that the notice sent to the property owner as required by Section 8.64.060 must be served in the same manner as service of a summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 et seq. and the notice need not specify that the property can be sold for delinquent assessments. If after diligent search the owner of record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for ten days and by publication of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Government Code Section 6062.

C. A nuisance abatement lien imposed pursuant to this section shall be recorded in the county recorder’s office of the county of Los Angeles and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien.

D. A nuisance abatement lien imposed pursuant to this section shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

E. In the event that the nuisance abatement lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in paragraph D of this section shall be recorded by the city.

F. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index.

G. A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment.

H. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the nuisance abatement lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of a foreclosure action to enforce the lien. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.200 Assessment – Refunds.
The city manager may order refunded all or a part of an assessment made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if the city manager shall find that all or a part of the assessment has been erroneously levied. An assessment, or part thereof, shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the city clerk on or before November 1st of the year after the tax becomes due and payable. Such claim shall be verified by the person who paid the tax or by his guardian, executor, or administrator. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.210 Alternatives.
A. The procedures set forth in this chapter are in addition to all other legal remedies, civil or criminal, which may be pursued by the city, including but not limited to:

1. Commencing a civil or criminal action to enforce all or any of the provisions of any final order;

2. Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance;

3. Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a confirmed accounting from an owner and/or occupant of the lot to which it relates;

4. Commencing a criminal action with respect to the nuisance set forth in this chapter;

5. Ordering the city’s enforcement officer to issue a citation for maintaining a public nuisance as defined by this chapter; and/or

6. Imposing administrative fines in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of this code in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

B. Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist and orders or approves the abatement of the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting, the city is entitled to and the court shall also award the city its actual costs of abatement, as defined in Section 8.64.140. Failure of a court to award attorney’s fees as part of a judgment does not preclude the city from assessing costs against the property pursuant to the procedures set forth above.

C. Where a criminal action is filed which results in a conviction or plea of guilty, the city shall be entitled to its actual costs of abatement, as defined in Section 8.64.140. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.220 Emergency abatement.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter with reference to the abatement of a public nuisance, whenever the city manager determines that a condition exists which is structurally unsafe, constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, and such condition constitutes an immediate hazard or danger, he shall, without observing the provisions of this chapter with reference to abatement procedures, immediately and forthwith cause the existing public nuisance to be abated in such a manner as is determined to be reasonably required.

B. If the city manager deems it feasible, the city manager shall attempt to give the owner and/or occupant verbal notice of the existence of the public nuisance, and the proposed timing and method of abatement thereof. The city manager shall, forthwith, report such circumstances to the city council.

C. Where such abatement is ordered by the city manager pursuant to this section, the director or other person abating such nuisance shall, after completing the abatement of the public nuisance, comply with the provisions of Sections 8.64.140 through 8.64.190 hereof. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

8.64.230 Violation – Criminal penalty.
The owner or any other person having charge or control of any such buildings or premises who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter, or who violates an order of abatement, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1529 § 2 (part), 1997)

Chapter 8.68
SWIMMING POOLS
Sections:

8.68.010    Findings.

8.68.020    Definitions.

8.68.030    Responsibilities of owners and operators of swimming pools.

8.68.040    Responsibility for abatement.

8.68.050    Notice/order to abate.

8.68.060    Hearing.

8.68.070    Decision of city manager.

8.68.080    Notice of decision.

8.68.090    Abatement by city.

8.68.100    Cost of abatement – Billing/assessment.

8.68.110    Assessment procedure.

8.68.120    Failure to receive notice.

8.68.130    Alternatives.

8.68.140    Emergency abatement.

8.68.150    Violation – Penalty.

8.68.010 Findings.
The city council finds that improperly operated or maintained swimming pools that provide a breeding place for mosquitoes are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of residents in the vicinity. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“City manager” means the city manager or the city manager’s designee.

“Director” means the director of community development or the director’s designee.

“Health officer” means that person designated by the city to oversee issues relating to environmental health concerns or that person’s designee.

“Swimming pool” means any public or private above, at, or below grade artificial basin, chamber, tank or structure used or intended to be used for wading, swimming, diving, bathing, or any form of water recreation, therapy or sport. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.030 Responsibilities of owners and operators of swimming pools.
A. All persons owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property that contains a swimming pool shall at all times properly maintain and operate the swimming pool in a manner that does not allow the swimming pool to become a breeding place for mosquitoes. Such maintenance and operation includes, but is not limited to, emptying and keeping dry a swimming pool that is abandoned and/or not in service.

B. The maintenance of a swimming pool in such a manner so as to provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.040 Responsibility for abatement.
Whenever the director reasonably believes a public nuisance exists with relation to a swimming pool as a breeding ground for mosquitoes, based upon inspection by the city’s health officer or other evidence, the director shall commence abatement proceedings. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.050 Notice/order to abate.
A. When the director reasonably believes a nuisance to exist, the director shall issue a notice and order (“notice”) requiring the property owner to abate the nuisance within thirty days of the date of the notice and specifying that if the property owner wishes to appeal the director’s notice, to appear at a hearing at the date and time specified in the notice and show cause why the owner should not be required to abate the public nuisance.

B. The notice shall be given to each owner of the affected property as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll by mailing the same by certified mail to the owner’s address as indicated thereon and by conspicuously posting a copy of the notice on the affected property.

C. The notice shall indicate the nature of the alleged nuisance, the description of the property involved and the manner of abatement required.

D. The notice shall inform the owner of the right to be represented by an attorney, to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses at the hearing.

E. The notice shall inform the owner that if the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the notice by the date specified or alternatively, if the owner fails to appear at the hearing:

1. The city, or its contractor, may enter upon the property and abate the public nuisance;

2. The city will bill the property owner for the cost of abatement, including administrative costs, and that if the owner fails to pay the bill within thirty days of the date of mailing, the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs, shall become a special assessment against the property to be collected on the next regular property tax bill levied against the property; and

3. That the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.060 Hearing.
A. The hearing shall be held no less than ten days nor more than twenty days from the date of the notice.

B. The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager. The city manager is authorized to take testimony and in the course of so doing, is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093(a).

C. The city manager shall consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to applicable staff reports. The city manager shall give the owner and other interested persons a reasonable opportunity to be heard, to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses in conjunction therewith. Based upon the evidence so presented, the city manager shall determine whether a nuisance exists within the meaning of this chapter. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.070 Decision of city manager.
The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. If it is determined that a nuisance exists, the decision shall include an order to abate the nuisance within a reasonable period of time as determined by the city manager and shall also include the manner in which the nuisance should be abated. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.080 Notice of decision.
A copy of the city manager’s decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner within five working days after the adoption thereof. The notice shall specify that:

A. If the nuisance is not abated within the time specified, the city, or its contractor, may enter upon the property and abate the public nuisance;

B. The city will bill the property owner for the cost of abatement, including administrative costs, and that if the owner fails to pay the bill within thirty days of the date of mailing, the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs, shall become a special assessment against the property to be collected on the next regular property tax bill levied against the property;

C. That the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments; and

D. That pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be commenced not later than the ninetieth day after the date the hearing officer’s order is issued. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.090 Abatement by city.
A. Any owner shall have the right to abate the public nuisance in accordance with the decision of the director or order of the city manager prior to the expiration of time provided. Upon receipt of notice from the owner that the nuisance has been abated and verification by the city of the same, the proceedings shall be considered terminated.

B. In the event that the public nuisance is not completely abated by the date specified in the notice or by the date established by the decision of the city manager, the city, or its contractor, may enter the property and abate the public nuisance. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.100 Cost of abatement – Billing/assessment.
A. Where the director and/or the city attorney is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the director shall keep an accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses for the abatement. In the event a contract has been awarded, the contractor shall keep a complete account and submit an itemized written report with respect thereto to the city upon completion of the abatement work. The term “incidental expenses” includes but is not limited to the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the costs of printing and mailings required under this chapter, and any attorney’s fees expended in the abatement of the nuisance, through civil action or otherwise. The city attorney shall be responsible for keeping an accounting of attorney’s fees and costs and transmitting the same to the director.

B. A bill for costs shall be sent to the property owner at the conclusion of the abatement; if the bill is not paid within thirty days of the date of mailing, the costs shall be assessed against the property in accordance with the procedure set forth below. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.110 Assessment procedure.
A. The director shall submit an itemized statement of costs to the city clerk who shall set the same for a hearing before the city manager.

B. The city clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the owners of the property to which the same relate by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his last known address and as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll at least seven days in advance of the hearing.

C. At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city manager shall hear and pass upon the report of the director, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. Thereupon, the city manager shall make such revision, correction and modification to the report as he may deem just after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the city manager shall be final. The notice shall specify:

1. The amount of costs to be assessed against the property;

2. That the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments; and

3. That pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be commenced not later than the ninetieth day after the date the City Manager’s order is issued.

D. The city clerk shall give notice of the city manager’s decision to the owner, or owners of the property by certified mail within five days of the date of the decision and shall cause the same to be recorded with the recorder of Los Angeles County.

E. The confirmed cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates; and, after its recording, as thus made and confirmed, the same shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. After the confirmation of the report, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the tax collector for the city, whereupon it shall be the duty of the tax collector to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes; and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.120 Failure to receive notice.
The failure of any person to receive any notice required by this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this chapter. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.130 Alternatives.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from ordering the city attorney to commence any appropriate civil action to abate a nuisance in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with the proceedings set forth in this chapter; nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a criminal action with respect to the nuisance in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with the proceedings set forth in this chapter. Furthermore, nothing herein shall prevent the city from issuing a citation for maintaining a condition which would constitute a public nuisance pursuant to Section 8.68.030.

B. If the city council orders the city attorney to commence any appropriate action to abate a nuisance, the city may recover its costs and attorney’s fees as part of the judgment which may be recorded as an assessment against the property and constitute a lien thereon. This section grants specific authority to any court of competent jurisdiction to grant an award of costs and attorney’s fees in favor of the city. This section for the recovery of attorney’s fees may be used alternatively to, or in conjunction with, the procedures set forth above; however, in no event may the city obtain a double recovery. Failure of a court to award attorney’s fees as part of a judgment does not preclude the city from assessing costs against the property pursuant to the procedures set forth above. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.140 Emergency abatement.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter with reference to the abatement of a public nuisance, whenever the city manager or his designee determines that a condition exists which is dangerous to human life, and such condition constitutes an immediate hazard or danger, he shall, without observing the provisions of this chapter with reference to abatement procedures, immediately and forthwith abate the existing public nuisance. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

8.68.150 Violation – Penalty.
The owner or other person having charge or control of any such buildings or premises who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter, or who violates an order of abatement is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1499 § 1 (part), 1996)

Chapter 8.70
STORMWATER AND RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
Sections:

8.70.010    Definitions.

8.70.020    Purpose and intent.

8.70.030    Responsibility for administration.

8.70.040    Fees.

8.70.050    Illicit connections prohibited.

8.70.060    Illicit discharges.

8.70.070    Notification.

8.70.080    Littering.

8.70.090    Use of discontinued or banned chemicals.

8.70.100    Compliance with state and federal discharge requirements.

8.70.110    Pollutant source reduction.

8.70.120    Inspection and enforcement.

8.70.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:

A. “40CFR” means Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

B. “Automotive service facility” means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification Codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534 or 7536-7539.

C. “Best management practices” (BMPs) means methods, measures, or practices designed and selected to reduce or eliminate the discharge of pollutants to surface waters from point and nonpoint source discharges including stormwater. BMPs include structural and nonstructural controls, and operation and maintenance procedures, which can be applied before, during, and/or after pollution producing activities.

D. “CEQA” means the California Environmental Quality Act, California Public Resource Code Sections 21000 et seq., and the regulations thereunder.

E. “City” means the city of Gardena.

F. “Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amended in 1977 as the Clean Water Act (Title 33 USC Sections 1251 et seq.), and amended in 1987 to establish new controls on industrial and municipal stormwater discharges, and any and all subsequent amendments thereto.

G. “Dechlorinate/debrominated swimming pool discharges” means swimming pool discharges which have no measurable chlorine or bromine and do not contain any detergents, wastes, or additional chemicals not typically found in swimming pool water. The term does not include swimming pool filter backwash.

H. “Director” shall refer to the city of Gardena’s director of public works or his or her designee.

I. “Discharge” means when used without qualification the “discharge of a pollutant,” which shall mean any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source or, any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term discharge includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works.

J. “Hazardous substance” means any “hazardous substance” as that term is defined under California Health and Safety Code Sections 2581(g), 25501(o) and 25501.1, and pursuant to Title 42, Section 9601(14) of the United States Code; any “hazardous waste” as that term is defined under Title 42 Section 6903(5) of the United States Code and under California Health and Safety Code Section 25501(n); any chemical which the Governor of California has identified as a chemical known to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 25249.8; and any crude oil or refined or unrefined petroleum produce, or any fraction or derivative thereof, and any asbestos or asbestos containing material. The term “hazardous substance” includes any amendments to the above-referenced statutes and regulations.

K. “Hillside property” means property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is twenty-five percent or greater.

L. “Illicit connection” means any manmade conveyance that is connected to the storm drain system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system.

M. “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes all non-stormwater discharges except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit, discharges that are identified in Part 1, “Discharge Prohibitions” of the municipal NPDES Permit, and discharges authorized by the Regional Board Executive Officer.

N. “Impervious surface” means any surface that prevents or significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying soil resulting in runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at an increased rate when compared to natural conditions prior to development including, but not limited to, parking lots, driveways, roadways, storage areas, and rooftops. The imperviousness of these areas commonly results from the use of paving or compacted gravel.

O. “Maximum extent practicable” means a standard for implementation of stormwater management programs to reduce pollutants in stormwater. Deciding factors shall include, but are not limited to, the gravity of the problem, public health risk, societal concerns, environmental benefits, pollutant removal effectiveness, regulatory compliance, public acceptance, change or successful implementation, costs and technical feasibility.

P. “Municipal NPDES permit” means an area-wide NPDES permit issued to a governmental agency or agencies permitting the discharge of stormwater from an MS4.

Q. “Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, alleys, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned by a state, city, county, town or other public body, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, which is not a combined sewer, and which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works, and which discharges to waters of the United States.

R. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit” means a stormwater discharge permit issued by the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board or the State Water Resources Control Board, that authorizes discharges to water of the United States and requires the reduction of pollutants in such discharges.

S. “New development project” means a discretionary development project involving land disturbing activities, structural development (including the construction or installation of a new building or structure) and the creation of impervious surfaces resulting in one or more of the following new developments:

1. An industrial/commercial development that disturbs one or more acres of surface area;

2. An automotive service facility;

3. A retail gasoline outlet;

4. A restaurant, as defined in this chapter;

5. A residential subdivision with ten or more housing units;

6. Parking lots with five thousand square feet or more of surface area or with twenty-five or more parking spaces;

7. Any development where an urban runoff mitigation plan as described in this chapter, is otherwise required by the director of public works or the community development director, as needed to comply with any applicable municipal NPDES permit or to otherwise comply with the Clean Water Act, or state or local law.

T. “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the municipal storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

U. “Person” means any natural person, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, business trust, company, or other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.

V. “Pollutant” means those pollutants defined in Section 502(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC, Section 1362(c) or incorporated into California Water Code Section 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Artificial materials, chips or pieces of manmade materials (such as floatable plastics, paper, cartons, or pieces of metal);

2. Commercial or industrial water (such as fuels, solutions, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizer, pesticides, slag, ash and sludge);

3. Household waste (such as trash, paper, plastics, lawn clippings and yard wastes, animal fecal materials, excessive pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers, and used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment);

4. Metals, including but not limited to cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, and nonmetals, such as phosphorus and arsenic;

5. Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as crude oil, fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, condensate and grease);

6. Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving water or flora or fauna of the state of California;

7. Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including stables, show facilities or polo fields);

8. Substances having characteristics with a pH of less than six or greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus;

9. Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants, glues, limes, excessive pesticides, fertilizers or herbicides; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids; construction equipment washing, concrete pouring and cleanup wash water or use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting residues; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and super chlorinated water generated by potable water line flushing;

10. The term “pollutant” shall not include uncontaminated stormwater runoff potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility.

W. “Potable water distribution systems releases” means sources of flows from drinking water storage, supply and distribution systems including flows from system failures, pressure releases, system maintenance, distribution line testing, fire hydrant flow testing; and flushing and dewatering of pipes, reservoirs, vaults, and minor noninvasive well maintenance activities not involving chemical addition(s). It does not include wastewater discharges from activities that occur at wellheads, such as well construction, well development (i.e., aquifer pumping tests, well purging, etc.), or major well maintenance.

X. “Premises” means any building, structure, fixture, or improvement on land, and any lot, parcel of land, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved.

Y. “Proper disposal” means the act of disposing of material(s) in a lawful manner which ensures protection of water quality and beneficial uses of receiving water.

Z. “Receiving waters” means all surface water bodies in the Los Angeles region that are identified in the Basin Plan adopted by the Regional Board.

AA. “Redevelopment” means land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land-disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety.

BB. “Regional Board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.

CC. “Restaurant” means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC Code 5812).

DD. “Retail gasoline outlet” means any retail facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils.

EE. “Runoff” means any runoff, including stormwater and dry weather flows, that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather, it is typically comprised of many base flow components that are either contaminated with pollutants, or that are uncontaminated.

FF. “Sidewalk rinsing” means pressure washing of paved pedestrian walkways with average water usage of 0.006 gallons per square foot, with no cleaning agents, and properly disposing of all debris collected, as authorized under Regional Board Resolution No. 98-08.

GG. “State Board” means the State Water Resources Control Board.

HH. “Stormwater runoff” means surface runoff and drainage associated with rain or other precipitation events.

II. “USEPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

JJ. “Watershed management area plan” means a plan for implementation of permit requirements based on the countywide stormwater management plan (“SWMMP”), but further addressing specific issues involving pollutants of concern and best management practices unique to the specific watershed management area. (Ord. 1627 §§ 1 – 10, 2002; Ord. 1622 §§ 1 – 5, 2002; Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.020 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, welfare and safety and to reduce the quantity of pollutants being discharged to the waters of the United States through:

A. The elimination of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal stormwater system;

B. The elimination of the discharge of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system;

C. The reduction of pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable;

D. The protection and enhancement of the quality of the waters of the United States in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Clean Water Act. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.030 Responsibility for administration.
The responsibility for the administration, oversight and implementation of this chapter is delegated to the public works director and his or her authorized agent, deputy or representative. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.040 Fees.
Fees to be charged for plan checking, inspection, enforcement, and any other activities carried out by the city under this chapter, shall be specified by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.050 Illicit connections prohibited.
A. No person shall construct, utilize, maintain, operate or permit the existence of any illicit connection on any premises owned or operated by such person.

B. Any illicit connection constructed, utilized, maintained, operated or permitted to be operated on any premises owned or operated by any person, from and after the date of the adoption of this chapter, shall be terminated and removed and/or otherwise sealed in a manner approved by the public works director. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.060 Illicit discharges.
A. No person shall cause any illicit discharge to enter the municipal stormwater system unless such discharge: (1) consists of non-stormwater that is authorized by an NPDES point source permit obtained from the Regional Board; provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit or waiver and other applicable laws or regulation; (2) is exempted by the Regional Board; or (3) is deemed by the director to be necessary to public health, safety or welfare. Prohibited discharges include, but are not limited to:

1. The discharge of wash waters to the MS4 from the cleaning of gas stations, auto repair garages, or other types of automotive service facilities;

2. The discharge of runoff to the MS4 from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, and other such mobile commercial and industrial operations;

3. The discharge of runoff to the MS4 from areas where repair of machinery and equipment which are visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is undertaken;

4. The discharge of runoff to the MS4 from storage areas of materials containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, and uncovered receptacles containing hazardous materials;

5. The discharge of chlorinated/brominated swimming pool water and filter backwash to the MS4;

6. The discharge of runoff from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas to the MS4;

7. Washing impervious surfaces in industrial/commercial areas that results in a discharge of runoff to the MS4;

8. The discharge of concrete or cement laden wash water from concrete trucks, pumps, tools, and equipment to the MS4; and

9. Dumping or disposal of materials into the MS4 other than stormwater, such as: (a) litter, landscape debris and construction debris; (b) any state or federally banned or unregistered pesticides; (c) food and food processing wastes; and (d) fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, and other materials that have potential adverse impacts on water quality.

B. All persons shall use best management practices to avoid, to the maximum extent practicable, any discharge to the municipal storm drain system from property owned or operated by such person, where there has been an unmitigated release or a threat of release of leaking oils or other petroleum fluids, including but not limited to used oils, transmission oils, waste oils, cutting oils, kerosene, diesel, gasoline or antifreeze, from any machinery and/or equipment, including motor vehicles located in or on industrial sites or facilities within the city.

C. All owners and operators of industrial and/or commercial motor vehicle parking lots containing more than twenty-five parking spaces shall conduct regular sweeping and other similar measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants and other debris in the municipal storm drain system.

D. Exempted Discharges. The following nonstormwater discharges are not considered illicit discharges, and are not prohibited by this chapter, provided they meet all conditions when specified by the Regional Board Executive Officer:

1. Flows from riparian habitats or wetlands;

2. Diverted stream flows permitted by the State Board;

3. Springs;

4. Rising ground waters;

5. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;

6. Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities;

7. Reclaimed and potable landscape irrigation runoff;

8. Potable water supply and distribution system releases, provided the discharges are managed in accordance with approved industry wide standard pollution prevention practices developed by the American Water Works Association, California Nevada Section, or equivalent document and in accordance with any other requirements that may be established by the city;

9. Foundation drains;

10. Footing drains;

11. Air conditioning condensate;

12. Water from crawl space pumps;

13. Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool discharges;

14. Noncommercial car washing by residents or by nonprofit organizations; and

15. Sidewalk rinsing; and

16. Any other discharge authorized by the Executive Officer of the Regional Board or specified as exempt from discharge prohibitions in any NPDES permit.

E. Any person who violates the terms of this section shall immediately commence all appropriate response actions to investigate, assess, remove and/or remediate any pollutants discharged as a result of such violation, and shall reimburse the city or other appropriate governmental agency for all costs incurred in investigating, assessing, monitoring and/or removing, cleaning up, treating or remediating any pollutants resulting from such violation, including all reasonable attorneys’ fees and environmental and related consulting fees incurred in connection therewith. (Ord. 1627 § 11, 2002; Ord. 1622 § 6, 2002; Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.070 Notification.
A. Immediate Notification. Any person who intentionally, negligently or otherwise violates any provision of this chapter resulting in a discharge of a pollutant or pollutants to the municipal storm drain system shall immediately notify the public works director or his or her designee by telephone or in person, and shall identify at that time the location of the discharge, the date and time of the discharge, the type and concentration of the volume of pollutant discharged, as well as any corrective action taken as a result of the illicit discharge. Written notification of such discharge information shall thereafter be provided to the public works director or his or her designee within forty-eight hours of the discharge.

B. Written Report. All persons violating this chapter shall within ten calendar days after any such discharge of a pollutant or pollutants, file with the public works director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge, the date and time of the discharge, the type, concentration and volume of material discharged, the location of the discharge, any specific information necessary in connection with the location to fully explain the potential impacts from the discharge, and any corrective action or other measures taken in connection with the discharge, including any measures taken to prevent similar discharges in the future. Submission of this written report shall not be deemed to be a waiver or release of any person for liability, fines, or other obligations imposed under this chapter, or otherwise in the city’s code or under state or federal law. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.080 Littering.
A. No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, any refuse, hazardous waste, or infectious waste (as such terms are defined in this chapter) into the municipal storm drain system, including into any street, alley, alleyway, sidewalk, inlet, catch basin, storm basin, or drainage structure or facility which is a part thereof, or onto any public or private property, except through the discarding, depositing, disposal, or placement in containers, barrels and/or bins to be used for the proper containment and transportation of such waste material, and except for the disposal of such waste at properly licensed and permitted solid and or hazardous waste facilities.

B. Any person violating subsection A of this section shall immediately cause the proper collection and abatement of such waste material and shall remedy and clean up any premises and/or any portion of the municipal storm drain system directly or indirectly affected by such discharge.

C. Any and all costs and expenses incurred by the city in assessing and abating a violation of this section may be assessed against all violating persons, including all administrative expenses and legal fees and costs incurred by the city in assessing and abating the discharge and in enforcing the terms of this section, including litigation fees and costs. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.090 Use of discontinued or banned chemicals.
No person shall use or apply any pesticide, herbicide or fungicide on any public or private property within the city, the manufacture of which has been prohibited by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and/or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.100 Compliance with state and federal discharge requirements.
All persons engaged in commercial or industrial activity, or in construction activity, shall comply with all stormwater discharge requirements of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and/or the State Board or Regional Board. Proof of compliance with such discharge requirements may be required by the city in a form acceptable to the director, prior to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permit, or any other type of permit or license issued or to be issued by the city. (Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.110 Pollutant source reduction.
A. Treatment Systems. All persons who own, operate or maintain stormwater clarifiers, separators, sediment ponds, and other stormwater treatment systems shall at all times maintain such systems in good working order and repair. Such systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner so as to at all times permit easy and safe access for proper maintenance, repair and inspection. Treatment control BMPs shall be maintained to prevent the breeding of vectors.

B. Pollution Reduction from Development Projects.

1. Development Construction. Construction projects that disturb one or more acres of soil by grading, clearing, and/or excavating or other activities are required to obtain a general construction activity stormwater permit (“GCASWP”) from the State Water Resources Control Board (“State Board”). No grading permit shall be issued to such construction projects without obtaining a GCASWP. Projects that disturb less than one acre of soil are required to comply with minimum best management practices (“BMPs”) to reduce the discharge of construction-related pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (“MS4”). The type of BMPs required shall be based on such factors as the amount of soil disturbed, the types of pollutants used or stored at the project site, and proximity to water bodies. Erosion control plans may be required at the discretion of the city. If required, the project applicant must submit an erosion control plan to the city for approval as a condition for grading permit issuance.

2. Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation. New development and redevelopment projects that are subject to the MS4 permit are required to comply with post-construction runoff pollution reduction BMPs implemented through the standard urban stormwater mitigation plan (“SUSMP”). SUSMP conditions assigned by the city shall consist of: (a) low impact development (“LID”) best management practices (“BMPs”); (b) source control BMPs; and (c) structural and nonstructural BMPs for specific types of uses. LID controls effectively reduce the amount of impervious area of a completed project site and promote the use of infiltration and other controls that reduce runoff. Source control BMPs shall prevent runoff contact with pollutant materials that would otherwise be discharged to the MS4. Specific structural controls are also required to address pollutant discharges from certain uses including but not limited to: housing developments; retail gasoline outlets; automotive-related facilities; restaurants; industrial and commercial facilities, parking lots, and new streets. Subject projects are more particularly described in the city’s stormwater management and watershed management program plan.

3. Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan Review and Approval. An applicant subject to new development or redevelopment requirements shall submit a SUSMP for city review and approval, which shall be incorporated into the applicant’s project plans.

4. California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”). Any project subject to CEQA review that is not specified in a redevelopment or development project category may be required to comply with any of the SUSMP requirements at the city’s discretion.

5. Stormwater Management/Watershed Management Program. The city’s stormwater management program (“SWMP”) plan or watershed management program (“WMP”) plan, whichever is in effect at the time of review, shall contain specific conditions and procedures for meeting SUSMP and development construction requirements. The program plans shall contain guidance documents to facilitate compliance including but not limited to an updated SUSMP guidance manual, an LID impact design manual, USEPA’s Green Street guidance manual, and best management practices applicable to certain categories of soil disturbing construction projects over and under one acre.

6. Certificate of Occupancy. As a condition for issuing a certificate of occupancy for new development or redevelopment project identified in subsection (B)(1) of this section, the authorized enforcement officer shall require facility operators and/or owners to build all the stormwater pollution control best management practices and structural or treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the SUSMP and other applicable regulatory requirements.

7. Transfer of Properties.

a. The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either (i) assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment control BMP, or (ii) to replace existing structural or treatment control BMPs with new control measures or BMPs meeting the then current standards of the city and the SUSMP. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all structural or treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection.

b. For residential properties where the structural or treatment control BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by a homeowner’s association, language regarding the responsibility for maintenance shall be included in the project’s conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs). Printed educational material will be required to accompany the first deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to provide information on what stormwater management facilities are present, signs that maintenance is needed, and how the necessary maintenance can be performed. The transfer of this information shall also be required with any subsequent sale of the property.

c. If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted. (Ord. 1754 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1627 §§ 12, 13, 14, 2002; Ord. 1622 §§ 7, 8, 2002; Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.70.120 Inspection and enforcement.
A. Inspections. The city manager or the director, or any designee thereof, may, on twenty-four hour oral or written notice, unless exigent circumstances justify a shorter time period, enter upon and inspect any private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. Such inspection may include, but is not limited to:

1. Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals and materials used, stored, or maintained on the subject premises;

2. Identifying points of discharge of all waste water, nonstormwater, processed water systems and pollutants;

3. Investigating the natural slope of the premises including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems;

4. Establishing location of all points of discharge from the premises, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system;

5. Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge;

6. A vehicle, truck, trailer, tank or other mobile equipment;

7. All records of the owner or occupant of public or private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously stored or occurring on the property, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans and any and all records relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system;

8. Inspecting, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials with any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system;

9. Inspecting the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any connection to other pipelines on the property, including the use of dye and smoke tests, video surveys, photographs or videotapes and the taking of measurements, drawings or any other records reasonably necessary to document conditions as they exist on the premises;

10. The institution and maintenance of monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the municipal storm drain system;

11. Evaluating compliance with this chapter or the Clean Water Act.

B. Enforcement.

1. Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars or six months in the county jail or both.

2. Any person who may otherwise be charged with a misdemeanor or as a result of a violation of this chapter may be charged, at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, an administrative fine, pursuant to Chapter 1.20, Administrative Citations. The amount of the fine shall be established by resolution of the city council.

3. As a part of any sentence or other penalty imposed or the award of any damage, the court may also order that restitution be paid to the city or any injured person, or, in the case of a violator who is a minor, by the minor’s parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. Restitution may include the amount of any reward.

4. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for any and all costs incurred by the city in responding to, investigating, assessing, monitoring, treating, cleaning, removing, or remediating any illicit discharge or pollutant from the municipal storm drain system; rectifying any illicit connection; or remediating any violation of this chapter. Such costs to be paid to the city include all administrative expenses and all legal expenses, including costs and attorneys’ fees, in obtaining compliance and in litigation including all costs and attorneys’ fees on any appeal. The costs to be recovered in this section shall be recoverable from any and all persons violating this chapter.

5. In the event any violation of this chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public health, safety, or the environment, the city manager or director of public works or any authorized agent thereof, may enter upon the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and danger created to the public safety or the environment, and restore any premises affected by the alleged violation, without notice to or consent from the owner or occupant of the premises. An imminent danger shall include but is not limited to exigent circumstances created by the discharge of pollutants where such discharge presents a significant and immediate threat to the public health or safety, or the environment.

6. Violations of this chapter may further be deemed to be a public nuisance which may be abated by administrative or civil or criminal action in accordance with the terms and provisions of this code and state law.

7. All costs and fees incurred by the city as a result of any violation of this chapter which constitute a nuisance, including all administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall become a lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner, in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the premises subject to any lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to recording, as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. The city attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money judgment, or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the premises in accordance with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5.

8. Any person acting in violation of this chapter may also be acting in violation of the Clean Water Act or the California Porter-Cologne Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and the regulations thereunder, and other laws and regulations and may be subject to damages, fines and penalties, including civil liability under such other laws. The city attorney is authorized to file a citizen’s suit pursuant to the Clean Water Act, seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and appropriate relief.

9. The city attorney is authorized to file in a court of competent jurisdiction a civil action seeking an injunction against any violation or threatened or continuing violation of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city for all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation, monitoring, treatment, abatement, removal or remediation undertaken by or at the expense of the city, and may include all legal expenses and fees and any and all costs incurred relating to the restoration or remediation of the environment.

10. Each separate discharge in violation of this chapter and each day a violation of this chapter exists, without correction, shall constitute a new and separate violation punishable as a separate infraction, misdemeanor and/or civil violation.

11. The city may utilize any and all other remedies as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 1627 § 15, 2002; Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2001)

Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapters:

9.04    Offenses Against Public Officers and Government

9.08    Alcoholic Beverage Offenses and Regulations

9.12    Offenses Against Public Peace and Decency

9.16    Offenses Relating to Property

9.20    Unauthorized Use of Shopping Carts

9.24    Display of Materials Harmful to Minors

9.28    Drug Paraphernalia

9.32    Curfew

9.36    Weapons

9.40    Miscellaneous Offenses

9.44    Disposal of Unclaimed Bicycles and Toys

9.48    Administrative Processing Fee

9.52    Garage Sales

9.60    Obstruction of Businesses and Sidewalks

9.64    Sex Offender Residency Restrictions

9.68    Emergency Personnel Response Fee for Unruly Gatherings

Chapter 9.04
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Sections:

9.04.010    False reports to the police department prohibited.

9.04.010 False reports to the police department prohibited.
No person shall wilfully make any false, misleading or unfounded report to the police department of the city for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the police department or with the intention of misleading any police officer. (Prior code § 4-5.01)

Chapter 9.08
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE OFFENSES AND REGULATIONS
Sections:

9.08.010    Definitions.

9.08.020    Consumption of alcohol in public.

9.08.030    Possession of open containers on public property/places open to the public.

9.08.040    Possession of opened alcoholic beverage container on posted premises.

9.08.050    Loitering on posted premises.

9.08.060    Posting beverage prices.

9.08.070    Posting alcoholic beverage warning signs.

9.08.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Alcoholic beverage” shall have the same meaning as that set forth in Business and Professions Code section 23004 as the same may be amended form time to time.

“Licensee” shall mean any business that is licensed for the sale of alcohol pursuant to Division 9 of the California Business and Professions Code, commencing with section 23000.

“Open container” shall mean any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, which has a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.

“Public place” shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any sidewalk, street, alley, park, parkway, or other property which is owned by the City of Gardena and to which the public has access.

“Retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee” shall mean any retail premises that is licensed for such sales pursuant to Division 9 of the California Business and Professions Code, commencing with section 23000. (Ord. 1612 § 1, 2001; prior code § 4-6.01)

9.08.020 Consumption of alcohol in public.
A. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place or in any place open to the patronage of the public which premises are not licensed by the State and approved by the City, if required, for the consumption of such beverages on the premises.

B. No owner, manager, operator or employee of any place of business which is open to the general public shall allow any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in such place, except upon a premise properly licensed by the State and approved by the City, if required, for the on-sale consumption of such beverage.

C. In addition to any other punishment provided by this Code, any person who violates any provision of this sections may be immediately expelled, removed, or ejected from such grounds or premises.

D. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by the laws of the state. (Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 4-6.11)

9.08.030 Possession of open containers on public property/places open to the public.
A. Any person possessing an open container in any public park or other public place shall be guilty of an infraction.

B. This section shall not apply where the possession is within premises located in a park or other public place for which an alcohol license has been issued pursuant to Division 9 of the California Business and Professions Code and any necessary permit has been granted by the City.

C. This section shall not apply when an individual is in possession of an alcoholic beverage container for the purpose of recycling or other related activity. (Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 2001)

9.08.040 Possession of opened alcoholic beverage container on posted premises.
A. No person who has in his or her possession any open container shall enter, be, or remain on the licensed premises, the immediately adjacent parking lot, or the immediately adjacent public sidewalk of any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee, when such premises are posted in accordance with subsection B.

B. Every retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee shall be required to post and maintain clearly visible signs on the premises and any immediately adjacent parking lot to the licensed premise, a notice in substantially the following form:

No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be, or remain on the premises, including the immediately adjacent parking lot or the immediately adjacent public sidewalk. Violation of this section is an infraction.

This notice shall also be visible to persons on the immediately adjacent public sidewalk.

C. Violations.

1. Violation of subsection A shall constitute an infraction. No citation shall be issued pursuant to subsection A unless the licensee has posted signs in accordance with subsection B.

2. Violations of subsection B shall constitute a misdemeanor.

D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. (Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 2001)

9.08.050 Loitering on posted premises.
Every person who remains on the premises of a licensee when a sign prohibiting loitering has been posted on such premises pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 25612.5 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 2001)

9.08.060 Posting beverage prices.
A. Every person or legal entity who owns, operates, or manages a business establishment which offers to the public alcoholic beverages, as defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, for sale and consumption on the premises shall either post a sign(s) which lists the price of each beverage so that it is easily read by the consumer from anywhere in the premises where alcoholic beverages are served, or provide a menu to the consumer prior to each sale, listing all beverage prices.

B. Every sign posted pursuant to this section shall include the terms “Drink Prices” and list all brand names and the price of each beverage with minimum letter dimensions of one inch in height and no less than three-eighths inches in width. Such signs shall consist of black print on a white background. If all “well drinks” are the same price, separate brand names need not be listed. The same holds true for beer, wine and “call drinks.” If prices vary due to brand name, hour of the day (i.e., “Happy Hour” early evening prices vs. late evening prices and so forth) the sign or menu must reflect that change.

C. Every person or legal entity who owns, operates, or manages a business establishment defined in subsection A of this section, shall either post a sign of all cover, service, and/or miscellaneous charges so that it is easily read by the consumer from anywhere in the premises where the service or amenity is provided or provide a price list to the consumer setting forth such charges prior to providing any service or amenity for which there is a fee or charge. Every sign posted pursuant to this subsection shall include the terms “Service Charges” and list the type of service provided with minimum letter and number dimensions of one inch in height and no less than three-eighths inch in width. Such signs shall consist of black print on a white background. (Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 4-6.12)

9.08.070 Posting alcoholic beverage warning signs.
A. Every person or legal entity who owns, operates, or manages a business establishment which offers to the public alcoholic beverages, as defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, for sale or dispensing for consideration, shall clearly and conspicuously post on the premises a sign or notice reading substantially as follows:

PREGNANCY AND ALCOHOL DO NOT MIX. DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INCLUDING BEER AND WINE, DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS.

B. Every sign posted pursuant to this section shall have minimum letter dimensions of one inch in height and no less than three-eighths inch in width. Such signs shall consist of black print on a white background.

C. The sign or notice required by this section shall be placed as follows:

1. Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises, at least one sign shall be placed to assure that it is readable from all locations at which the sale or dispensing occur.

2. Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, to the public is primarily provided through over-the-counter service, at least one sign shall be placed to assure that it is readable from all counter locations available to the public.

3. Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, to the public is primarily provided for consumption on the premises by the public at tables served by food or beverage service persons, at least one sign shall be placed to assure that it is readable by persons entering the premises; provided however, that notices may be placed or displayed at each of the tables in a manner which will assure that the notices are as readily visible and readable as materials provided to the public which list food and beverage prices. (Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 2001; prior code § 4-6.13)

Chapter 9.12
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
Sections:

9.12.010    Definitions.

9.12.020    Breakfast clubs unlawful.

9.12.030    Public excretion prohibited.

9.12.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, “breakfast club” or “bottle club” means any place where food or beverages are sold, offered for sale, or given away between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day and where music or entertainment is provided or furnished between such hours. (Prior code § 4-3.01)

9.12.020 Breakfast clubs unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to open, operate, conduct or manage any breakfast club or bottle club within the city. (Prior code § 4-3.02)

9.12.030 Public excretion prohibited.
A. No person shall urinate or defecate:

1. In a public place;

2. In a place open to the public or exposed to public view;

3. In a private place entered without consent of the owner, his agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof.

B. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation in any fixture provided for such purposes in any bathroom, restroom, dressing room, or similar facility. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 9.16
OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Sections:

9.16.010    Trespassing on school grounds.

9.16.010 Trespassing on school grounds.
No person shall enter the grounds or any property or building of a public school or remain on such grounds or property or building in violation of posted rules regarding the use of school property. Any such conduct shall constitute a trespass upon school property, punishable as a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 4-7.05)

Chapter 9.20
UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SHOPPING CARTS
Sections:

9.20.010    Removal.

9.20.020    Abandonment.

9.20.030    Possession.

9.20.040    Use.

9.20.050    Alteration.

9.20.060    City retrieval of shopping carts.

9.20.010 Removal.
No person shall remove any shopping cart, shopping basket, or other similar device from the premises or parking area of any business establishment if such shopping cart, basket, or device has permanently affixed to it a sign identifying it as belonging to the owner or operator of such business establishment and a notification to the effect that such cart, basket, or device is not to be removed from the premises. (Prior code § 4-12.01)

9.20.020 Abandonment.
No person shall abandon or leave any shopping cart, shopping basket, or other similar device which has been removed from the owner’s premises upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public place, nor upon any private property except that of the owner of such cart, basket, or device. (Prior code § 4-12.02)

9.20.030 Possession.
No person shall have in his possession any shopping cart, shopping basket, or other similar device which has been removed from the premises of any business establishment operated by the owner of such cart, basket, or device and which has permanently affixed to it a sign identifying it as belonging to the operator of a business establishment and a notification to the effect that such cart, basket, or device is not to be removed from the premises of such establishment. (Prior code § 4-12.03)

9.20.040 Use.
No person shall use any shopping cart, shopping basket, or other similar device for any purpose other than that intended by the owner of such cart, basket, or device. (Prior code § 4-12.04)

9.20.050 Alteration.
No person shall alter, convert, or tamper with any shopping cart, shopping basket, or other similar device or remove any part thereof. (Prior code § 4-12.05)

9.20.060 City retrieval of shopping carts.
A. If a shopping cart has a sign affixed to it in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1, the city may retrieve and impound the shopping cart in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7.

B. The city shall collect a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to cover the city’s retrieval and storage costs.

C. In addition to the fee established by subsection B of this section, the city may collect an administrative fine from the owner of the shopping cart for each occurrence in excess of three during a specified six-month period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with this section. An occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in a one-day period. The fine shall be established by resolution of the city council and imposed in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of this code.

D. Exceptions.

1. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from immediately retrieving any shopping cart from public or private property where the location of the shopping cart will impede emergency services.

2. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from impounding any shopping cart without complying with the provisions of this section when the shopping cart is taken as evidence of a crime having been committed.

3. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from immediately retrieving and disposing of any unattended shopping cart that does not have a sign affixed to it in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 9.24
DISPLAY OF MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINORS
Sections:

9.24.010    Definitions.

9.24.020    Offenses.

9.24.030    Defenses.

9.24.040    Violation – Penalty.

9.24.050    Severability.

9.24.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Harmful to minors” means the quality of any description, exhibition, presentation, or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse when the material or performance, taken as a whole, has the following characteristics:

1. The average adult person applying contemporary community standards would find that the material or performance has a predominant tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors; and

2. The average adult person applying contemporary community standards would find that the material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse in a manner that is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with respect to what is suitable for minors; and

3. The material or performance lacks serious literary, scientific, educational, artistic, or political value for minors.

“Knowingly” means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:

1. The character and content of any material or performance which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and

2. The age of the minor; however, an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability under this chapter if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.

“Material” means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, recording tape, or video tape.

“Minor” means any unmarried person under the age of eighteen years.

“Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.

“Performance” means any motion picture, film, video tape, played record, phonograph, or tape, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance, or other exhibition performed or presented to or before an audience of one or more, with or without consideration.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity of any kind.

“Reasonable bona fide attempt” means an attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor by requiring the production of a driver’ s license, marriage license, birth certificate, or other governmental or educational identification card or paper and not relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the minor.

“Sado-masochistic abuse” means the flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask, or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered, bound, or other physical restraint on the part of one so clothed.

“Sexual conduct” means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person’ s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person shall be a female, breast.

“Sexual excitement” means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. (Prior code § 4-24.01)

9.24.020 Offenses.
No person having the custody, control, or supervision of any commercial establishment shall knowingly:

A. Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to view such material; provided, however, a person shall be deemed not to have “displayed” material harmful to minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as “blinder racks” so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view;

B. Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or otherwise disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is harmful to minors; or

C. Present to a minor or participate in presenting to a minor, with or without consideration, any performance which is harmful to a minor. (Prior code § 4-24.02)

9.24.030 Defenses.
It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this chapter that the material or performance involved was displayed, presented, or disseminated to a minor at a recognized and established school, church, museum, medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency, or quasi-governmental agency and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such persons or organizations and which institution displays, presents, or disseminates such material or performance for a bona fide governmental, educational or scientific purpose. (Prior code § 4-24.03)

9.24.040 Violation – Penalty.
Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate violation. Every act, thing, or transaction prohibited by this chapter shall constitute a separate offense as to each item, issue or title involved and shall be punishable as such. For the purposes of this chapter, multiple copies of the same identical title, monthly issue, volume and number issue or other such identical material shall constitute a single offense. (Ord. 1744 § 11, 2013: prior code § 4-24.04)

9.24.050 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Prior code § 4-24.05)

Chapter 9.28
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Sections:

9.28.010    Sale and display – Provisions relating to minors.

9.28.020    Narcotic paraphernalia – Sale and display rooms – Minors to be excluded.

9.28.030    Sale and display rooms – Public nuisances.

9.28.010 Sale and display – Provisions relating to minors.
A. No owner, manager or proprietor in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument, or paraphernalia for smoking, injecting, or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the state, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, as well as roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room, unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents or by his or her legal guardian.

B. A person under the age of eighteen years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale, or displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless such person is accompanied by one of his or her parents or by his or her legal guardian. (Prior code §§ 4-18.01, 4-18.02)

9.28.020 Narcotic paraphernalia – Sale and display rooms – Minors to be excluded.
A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room shall be signposted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that narcotic paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such a room, and that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded. (Prior code § 4-18.03)

9.28.030 Sale and display rooms – Public nuisances.
The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded, as set forth in this chapter and where devices, contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs or devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions applicable for violations of the terms and provisions of this code. (Prior code § 4-18.04)

Chapter 9.32
CURFEW
Sections:

9.32.010    Definitions.

9.32.020    Curfew violations by minors during certain hours.

9.32.030    Exceptions.

9.32.050    Daytime curfew violations by minors.

9.32.060    Recovery of police service costs for nighttime curfew violations.

9.32.070    Enforcement.

9.32.080    Power of law enforcement officers not limited.

9.32.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:

“Chief of police” or “chief” means the chief of police of the city or his designee.

“City manager” means the city manager or his designee.

“Curfew hours” means between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the immediately following day.

“Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, an earthquake or other natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation which requires immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by court order.

“Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural, adoptive or step-parent of another person.

“Police service” means the administrative costs and transportation costs related to the transport of the minor to his place of permanent or temporary residency within the state of California which are incurred by the city due to a violation of the nighttime curfew provisions of Section 9.32.020.

“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, parks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

“Remain” means to linger or stay, or fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.

“Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“Responsible party” means the parent or guardian of the minor.

“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death, serious disfigurement or serious permanent injury. (Ord. 1744 § 12, 2013: Ord. 1534 § 2 (part), 1998: prior code § 4-7.03)

9.32.020 Curfew violations by minors during certain hours.
It is unlawful for a minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. It is also unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow a minor for whom they are responsible, to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. Any person in violation of these curfew restrictions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1534 § 2 (part), 1998: prior code § 4-7.01)

9.32.030 Exceptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.32.020 if the minor was:

A. Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or responsible adult;

B. On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;

C. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning directly home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

D. Involved in an emergency;

E. In a vehicle involved in interstate travel;

F. On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence, or on the property of, or the sidewalk of, a residence immediately adjacent to the minor’s residence, provided that the owner or tenant of such property did not complain to the police department about the minor’s presence;

G. Attending or returning home without any detour or stop from an activity supervised by an adult and sponsored by a school, religious organization, civic organization, public agency or a similar organization;

H. Returning directly home from a public meeting or returning home without any detour or stop from a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event or dance which began prior to the time of curfew;

I. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, including freedom of speech, the free exercise of religion, and the right of assembly;

J. A minor who is an emancipated minor pursuant to law; or

K. A minor who is or has been married. (Ord. 1534 § 2 (part), 1998: prior code § 4-7.02)

9.32.050 Daytime curfew violations by minors.
A. It is unlawful for any minor, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to be in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place, public building, place of amusement, eating establishment or vacant lot during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on days when said minor’s school is in session. This section does not apply when:

1. The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor, which excuse provides a reasonable explanation, as determined by the court, for the minor’s absence from school;

2. The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;

3. The minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;

4. The minor is going to or returning directly from a medical appointment or his or her place of gainful employment;

5. The minor has permission to leave campus and the minor has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit. An off-campus permit shall not be required when a minor is leaving school campus for lunch, unless it is the policy of the minor’s school to issue an off-campus permit for lunch;

6. The minor is going to or returning directly from a public meeting, or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, providing such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of the minor’s school;

7. The presence of the minor in the place or places is connected with or required by a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged;

8. The minor, due to split sessions or year-round school, is not required at the time he or she is found to be in attendance at school;

9. The minor is legally enrolled in a sponsored home schooling program administered through a school district, or legally enrolled in a sponsored home schooling program administered by a parent, guardian or their designee or is otherwise exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education;

10. The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, including freedom of speech, the free exercise of religion, and the right of assembly;

11. The minor is authorized to be absent from school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205;

12. The minor is exempt from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education;

13. The minor is otherwise exempted as provided by any other applicable state or federal law.

B. A minor cited for an infraction under this section must be accompanied at any proceedings by at least one custodial parent, legal guardian, or person having the legal care or custody of the minor. If such persons fail to attend the proceeding with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the proceeding may be continued and said person(s) shall be directed to appear at the continued proceeding with the minor by whatever means available. For purposes of this section, “custodial parent” means the parents with whom the minor resides or the parent which is given legal custody by a court of competent jurisdiction.

C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this municipal code to the contrary, violation of this section shall be treated as an infraction. Punishment for any violation of this section may include community service. (Ord. 1744 § 13, 2013: Ord. 1573 § 2, 1999: Ord. 1534 §§ 4, 5, 1998; Ord. 1505 § 2, 1996: Ord. 1485 § 2, 1995)

9.32.060 Recovery of police service costs for nighttime curfew violations.
As authorized by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625.5, when a minor is detained by the police department under the provisions of this chapter for a second violation of Section 9.32.020, the responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for actual administrative and transportation costs incurred by the city. In order for the city to recover such costs, the following procedures shall apply.

A. First Violation.

1. Upon the first violation of this chapter, the police officer shall issue a warning notice to the minor regarding the consequences of a second violation. The warning notice shall specify that upon a second violation, the minor and the responsible party may be held liable for actual administrative and transportation costs related to a violation of the nighttime curfew provisions.

2. A similar warning notice shall be mailed to the responsible party which shall also specify that, upon a second violation, the parents or legal guardian, along with the minor, may be held liable for actual administrative and transportation costs (first violation notice). The first violation notice shall include a requirement that the responsible party sign and return the notice within fifteen calendar days. However, failure to return the first violation notice shall not invalidate the notice or proceedings under this section.

3. The first violation notice shall include a space for the explanation of any circumstances as to why this should not be considered a first violation which would trigger the imposition of police services costs upon a subsequent violation. The notice shall additionally include a statement that failure to include such an explanation shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and constitute a waiver of any argument upon subsequent violations that the first violation should not have counted towards the imposition of police service costs fees under this section.

B. Second and Subsequent Violations.

1. Upon a second and subsequent violations of this chapter, the city shall send a police service costs notice to the minor and responsible party.

2. The police service costs notice shall provide for the amount of costs due the city and shall include a space for the explanation of any circumstances relevant to an applicable exemption from payment of the costs for the reasons set forth in subsection C of this section.

3. The police service costs notice shall include a statement that the responsible party is required to sign and return the notice; however, failure to return the police service costs notice shall not invalidate the notice or proceedings under this section. The notice shall also include a statement that failure to request an exemption and provide an explanation shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

C. If a request for exemption is included in the return of the notice sent under either subsection A or B of this section, the request shall be reviewed by the chief of police. The chief of police may request additional explanation with regard to the reasons for the exemption, including a meeting with the minor or responsible party. The chief of police may void the first violation notice issued under subsection A of this section if he determines there is good cause to do so. The chief of police may waive the police service costs notice issued under subsection B of this section if he determines:

1. The responsible party has made reasonable efforts to exercise supervision and control over the minor;

2. Neither the minor nor the responsible party has the ability to pay the fee;

3. The minor is willing to provide community service in lieu of imposition of the fee;

4. The responsible party has limited physical or legal custody and control of the minor; or

5. There are other findings of good cause.

D. The chief of police’s decision shall be in writing and shall be mailed to the minor and the responsible party within five days of such decision having been rendered.

E. If the request to void the first violation notice or waive the police services costs notice is denied, the minor or responsible party (“appellant”) may request a hearing before the city manager by filing such request within ten days from the date of service of the chief’s decision.

1. Appellant shall be given at least ten days written notice of the hearing, which hearing shall take place not more than sixty days from the date that the appeal is filed.

2. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. Appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses.

3. The failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and shall render the chief of police’s decision final.

4. The city manager may continue the hearing and request additional information from either party prior to issuing a written decision.

5. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the city manager shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify or overturn the chief of police’s determination and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. With respect to a police service costs invoice, the city manager shall consider the same factors set forth in subsection C of this section and, if deemed appropriate, may establish a payment schedule.

6. The city manager’s decision shall be final.

7. The city manager’s written decision shall be issued within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing. Appellant shall be mailed a copy thereof within five days thereafter.

F. Payment of the police service costs notice shall be made within thirty days of the date of the notice, the date of the chief of police’s determination if no appeal is filed, or the date of the city manager’s decision if a timely appeal is filed, whichever is later.

G. Any police service costs not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter is an obligation of the minor and responsible party and may be collected by the city through any legal means. In any civil action to collect the fee, the court may waive payment of the fee by the minor or the responsible party upon a finding of good cause. (Ord. 1744 § 14 (part), 2013)

9.32.070 Enforcement.
Before taking any action under this chapter, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.

A. The peace officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under Section 9.32.020 unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that based on any response and other circumstances, no exception listed in Section 9.32.030 is present.

B. The peace officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under Section 9.32.050 unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that based on the response and other circumstances, no exception listed in Section 9.32.050C is present. (Ord. 1744 § 14 (part), 2013; Ord. 1534 § 6, 1998. Formerly 9.32.060)

9.32.080 Power of law enforcement officers not limited.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power or right of law enforcement officers to make such investigations, detentions, or arrests as such law enforcement officers would be permitted to make had this chapter not been enacted. (Ord. 1744 § 14 (part), 2013; Ord. 1534 § 3, 1998; prior code § 4-7.04. Formerly 9.32.070)

Chapter 9.36
WEAPONS
Sections:

9.36.010    Definitions.

9.36.020    Discharging firearms.

9.36.030    Possession of firearms or deadly or dangerous weapons by minors.

9.36.040    Furnishing firearms or deadly or dangerous weapons to minors.

9.36.050    Loitering while carrying firearms.

9.36.060    Fighting while carrying firearms.

9.36.070    Loitering near public places while carrying firearms.

9.36.080    Carrying firearms in vehicles.

9.36.090    Exceptions to Sections 9.36.050 through 9.36.080.

9.36.100    Nuisances declared.

9.36.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Deadly or dangerous weapon” means and includes, but is not limited to, any dirk or dagger, any knife with a blade two inches or more in length, any snap-blade or spring-blade knife, regardless of the length of the blade, any ice pick or similar sharp stabbing tool, any straightedge razor or any razor or other blade fitted to a handle, any dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of any law of the state restricting the use thereof, any cutting, stabbing, or bludgeoning weapon or device capable of inflicting grievous bodily harm and any firearm.

“Firearm” means and includes, but is not limited to, any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, gas gun, sling, slingshot or device designed or intended to discharge, or capable of discharging, any dangerous missile or any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance, spring or other impelling force devised or intended to be used or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm. (Prior code § 3-3.101)

9.36.020 Discharging firearms.
It is unlawful to fire, discharge, shoot or operate or to assist or participate in the firing, discharging, shooting or operating, in the city of any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling, slingshot or device designed or intended to discharge or capable of discharging, any dangerous missile or any cartridge shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance devised or intended to be used or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm, except when it may be necessary to do so to protect life or property or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal or in the enforcement of any law by any peace officer and except when used at any pistol or rifle range in accordance with rules and regulations approved by the police department or the council in connection with the operation of such pistol or rifle range. (Prior code § 3-3.102)

9.36.030 Possession of firearms or deadly or dangerous weapons by minors.
No person under eighteen years of age shall have in his possession, care, custody or control any knife, any blade of which exceeds two inches in length or any snap-blade or spring-blade knife, regardless of the length of the blade, any firearm or any deadly or dangerous weapon as defined in Section 9.36.010. (Prior code § 3-3.103)

9.36.040 Furnishing firearms or deadly or dangerous weapons to minors.
It is unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give or loan to any person under eighteen years of age any firearm or deadly or dangerous weapon as defined in Section 9.36.010. (Prior code § 3-3.104)

9.36.050 Loitering while carrying firearms.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person while carrying concealed upon his person any firearm or deadly or dangerous weapon to loaf or loiter upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place or to wander about from place to place with no lawful business thereby to perform or to hide, lurk or loiter upon or about the premises of another. (Prior code § 3-3.105)

9.36.060 Fighting while carrying firearms.
It is unlawful for any person who has concealed upon his person or who has in his immediate physical possession any firearm or deadly or dangerous weapon to engage in any fight or to participate in any rough or disorderly conduct upon or in any public street, way or place or upon the premises of another. (Prior code § 3-3.106)

9.36.070 Loitering near public places while carrying firearms.
It is unlawful for any person who has concealed upon his person any firearm or deadly or dangerous weapon or who has in his immediate physical possession any such firearm or weapon, to loiter about any place wherein intoxicating liquors are sold or any other place of public resort. (Prior code § 3-3.107)

9.36.080 Carrying firearms in vehicles.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to have in his possession or under his control in any automobile any firearm or deadly or dangerous weapon. (Prior code § 3-3.108)

9.36.090 Exceptions to Sections 9.36.050 through 9.36.080.
The provisions of Sections 9.36.050 through 9.36.080 shall not apply or be deemed to apply in the following cases:

A. When the firearm or weapon is in the possession of any peace officer for use in the enforcement of law;

B. When the firearm or weapon is in the possession of a person who has a valid permit to possess and carry the same issued by a duly authorized governmental authority;

C. When any such firearm is being used at or in connection with the operation of any lawful pistol or rifle range in accordance with rules and regulations approved by the chief of police or the council; and

D. When ordinary rifles, shotguns, tools or sports equipment is possessed or carried in good faith for uses of honest work, trade or business or for the purpose of legitimate game hunting, sport or recreation. (Prior code § 3-3.109)

9.36.100 Nuisances declared.
Any firearm or deadly or dangerous weapon which is being used by any person, or which is in the possession or under the custody or control of any person, contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and may be forthwith confiscated by any police officer of the city, who shall surrender the same to the chief of police, who shall hold and/or dispose of the same in the same manner as is contemplated for the holding and/or destruction of the nuisances described and referred to in Section 12028 of the Penal Code of the state. (Prior code § 3-3.110)

Chapter 9.40
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Sections:

9.40.010    Automatic telephone dialing and message delivery devices.

9.40.010 Automatic telephone dialing and message delivery devices.
No person or legal entity, except a public utility doing business in the state under the authority of the Public Utilities Commission of the state, shall use, operate, attempt to use or operate, cause to be used or operated or arrange, adjust, program or install any device, telephone line or combination of devices which, upon activation, will either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means initiate a telephone call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public utility telephone company without the prior written consent of such subscriber. (Prior code § 4-21.01)

Chapter 9.44
DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED BICYCLES AND TOYS
Sections:

9.44.010    Disposal of unclaimed bicycles and toys.

9.44.020    Criteria for charitable or nonprofit organizations.

9.44.010 Disposal of unclaimed bicycles and toys.
Any unclaimed bicycles and toys which have been in the possession of the Gardena police department for at least sixty days and have been cleared for disposal by the police department may be turned over to a probation officer, to the welfare department of any county, or to any charitable or nonprofit organization that meets the criteria set forth in Section 9.44.020, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. (Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1997)

9.44.020 Criteria for charitable or nonprofit organizations.
Bicycles and toys may be turned over to any charitable or nonprofit organization in accordance with Section 9.44.010 of this chapter, provided that the organization meets the following criteria:

A. The organization is a charitable or nonprofit organization;

B. The organization is authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency; and

C. The organization is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, or both.

The organization shall present proof of the above three criteria to the police department or shall submit a certification signed by an officer of the organization under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct. (Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1997)

Chapter 9.48
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESSING FEE
Sections:

9.48.010    Administrative processing fee.

9.48.020    Alternate method of collection.

9.48.010 Administrative processing fee.
A. The city shall recover an administrative processing fee from any person booked into or processed through the Gardena city jail in accordance with Government Code Sections 29550.1 and 29550.3.

B. The amount of the administrative processing fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

C. The fee shall be recovered from all persons convicted of any criminal offense related to the arrest, regardless of whether it was the offense for which the person was originally booked. (Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1997)

9.48.020 Alternate method of collection.
If the convicted person fails to pay the administrative processing charge in accordance with a court order, the city may execute on the order in the manner provided for in Government Code Section 29550.1. (Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1997)

Chapter 9.52
GARAGE SALES
Sections:

9.52.010    Definitions.

9.52.020    Permit required.

9.52.030    Limitations.

9.52.040    Violation – Penalty.

9.52.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, “garage sale” means a sale conducted by an individual for the purpose of disposing of used, unwanted or surplus household goods or other personal property for which no sales tax is collected. The term “garage sale” shall not be limited to sales conducted in a garage, but shall encompass household goods sales conducted on any portion of the seller’s premises, including “yard sales,” “patio sales,” “rummage sales,” “estate sales” and the like. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 1998)

9.52.020 Permit required.
A. Any resident of the city may conduct a garage sale as defined in this chapter upon the premises on which they reside; provided, however, that a permit is first obtained from the city. A garage sale permit shall be valid for a maximum of two consecutive days. Such permit shall include the following information:

1. The full name and address of the person or persons wishing to hold the sale;

2. The address where the sale will be conducted;

3. The dates and hours of the sale;

4. A general description of the goods to be sold;

5. An affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury stating that the person or persons conducting the sale are not being paid in any manner by any other person(s) for use of the property on which the garage sale is taking place and that no more than three previous such garage sales have been held within the calendar year.

B. No garage sale permit shall be issued by the license collector until the applicant has paid a permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 1998)

9.52.030 Limitations.
A. No more than four garage sales may be conducted by any person or persons upon the same property within the same calendar year.

B. The permittee must be the resident of the property on which the garage sale is to take place.

C. Garage sales shall only be held between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. and shall not exceed two consecutive days.

D. No person shall be entitled to receive payment in any form for allowing another person’s merchandise or belongings to be sold at his or her garage sale.

E. Except for handmade craft items, the items to be sold shall consist almost exclusively of used merchandise and belongings.

F. Garage sales must be conducted within the garage, carport, front yard, back yard or patio of the seller’s residence. No sale or display of items for sale shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 1998)

9.52.040 Violation – Penalty.
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to administrative fines to be imposed in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 1998)

Chapter 9.60
OBSTRUCTION OF BUSINESSES AND SIDEWALKS
Sections:

9.60.010    Obstructing public sidewalks – Prohibited.

9.60.020    Obstructing business premises.

9.60.030    Remaining at business open to public after being asked to leave – Prohibited.

9.60.010 Obstructing public sidewalks – Prohibited.
A. No person shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk or median, or upon a blanket, chair, stool, or any other object not permanently affixed upon a public sidewalk or median, in any commercial or industrial zone in the City during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and between 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays.

B. The prohibition in subsection A. shall not apply to any person:

1. Sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk due to a medical emergency;

2. Who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker, or similar device to move about the public sidewalk;

3. Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on the public sidewalks pursuant to a permit or other authorization of the City;

4. Sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus stop zone while waiting for public or private transportation;

5. Participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting or similar event conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a permit; or

6. Engaged in activity otherwise protected by the First Amendment.

C. Nothing in the exceptions enumerated in subsection B above shall be construed to permit any conduct which is otherwise prohibited by law.

D. No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section. (Ord. 1612 § 3 (part), 2001)

9.60.020 Obstructing business premises.
A. No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs have been posted in accordance with this section, shall stand, sit, lie, or otherwise remain in or upon any portion of private property open for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon.

B. Signs posted as provided in this section shall conform to the following requirements:

1. Each sign shall not be less than twenty-two inches (22") by thirty inches (30");

2. Signs shall be posted in such a way so as to provide adequate notice;

3. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:

WARNING

Unreasonable obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic by persons standing, sitting, lying, or otherwise remaining on the premises is prohibited and punishable as a misdemeanor.

Gardena Municipal Code Section 9.60.020

4. The word “WARNING” shall be not less than two inches (2") in height, and all other lettering shall be at least five-eighths inches (5/8”) in height. (Ord. 1612 § 3 (part), 2001)

9.60.030 Remaining at business open to public after being asked to leave – Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person without lawful business to remain in or upon any business parking lot or in any business after having been directed by the owner, the owner’s agent, or a law enforcement officer of the City at the request of the owner or the owner’s agent, to leave such premises. (Ord. 1612 § 3 (part), 2001)

Chapter 9.64
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
Sections:

9.64.010    Definitions.

9.64.020    Deleted.

9.64.030    Sex offender violation – One-family dwellings.

9.64.040    Sex offender violation – Two-family dwellings.

9.64.050    Sex offender violation – Multiple dwellings.

9.64.060    Deleted.

9.64.070    Sex offender violation – Hotel/motel/inn rooms.

9.64.080    Deleted.

9.64.090    Responsible party violation – One-family dwellings.

9.64.100    Responsible party violation – Two-family dwellings.

9.64.110    Deleted.

9.64.120    Responsible party violation – Multiple dwellings.

9.64.130    Deleted.

9.64.140    Responsible party violation – Hotel/motel/inn.

9.64.150    Deleted.

9.64.160    Offenses constituting nuisances.

9.64.170    Nuisances – Recovery of abatement expenses.

9.64.180    Penalties.

9.64.190    Criminal penalties do not satisfy administrative or civil actions.

9.64.200    Timing of application of this chapter.

9.64.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

A. “Hotel” or “motel” shall have those meanings as set forth in Chapter 18.04.

B. “Inn” shall mean any boardinghouse, lodginghouse or roominghouse (as those terms are defined in Chapter 18.04).

C. “Multiple dwelling” shall have that meaning as set forth in Chapter 18.04. This includes apartment houses and condominiums, but does not include hotels, motels, or inns.

D. “One-family dwelling” shall have that meaning as set forth in Chapter 18.04.

E. “Owner’s authorized agent” shall mean any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, office or employee authorized to act for the owner of a property.

F. “Permanent resident” shall mean any person who, as of a given date, obtained the right to occupy a dwelling including but not limited to a one-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, two-family dwelling, hotel, motel, or inn for more than thirty consecutive days.

G. “Property owner” as applied to buildings and land shall mean the owner of record of any parcel of real property as designated on the county assessor’s tax roll, or a holder of a subsequently recorded deed to the property, and shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or part of such a building or land.

H. “Responsible party” shall mean the property owner and/or owner’s authorized agent.

I. “Sex offender” means any person for whom registration is required pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code, regardless of whether that person is on parole or probation.

J. “Temporary resident” means any person who, for a period of thirty days or less, obtained the right to occupy a dwelling including, but not limited to, a hotel, motel or inn.

K. “Two-family dwelling” shall have that meaning as set forth in Chapter 18.04. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1765 § 1, 2016: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.030 Sex offender violation – One-family dwellings.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a one-family dwelling already occupied by another sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.040 Sex offender violation – Two-family dwellings.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a two-family dwelling already occupied by another sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.050 Sex offender violation – Multiple dwellings.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in the same dwelling unit of a multiple dwelling already occupied by another sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.070 Sex offender violation – Hotel/motel/inn rooms.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in the same guest room of a hotel, motel, or inn already occupied by another sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.090 Responsible party violation – One-family dwellings.
No responsible party shall knowingly rent a one-family dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.100 Responsible party violation – Two-family dwellings.
No responsible party shall knowingly rent a unit within a two-family dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.120 Responsible party violation – Multiple dwellings.
No responsible party shall knowingly rent a unit within a multiple dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.140 Responsible party violation – Hotel/motel/inn.
No responsible party shall knowingly rent a guest room in a hotel, motel, or inn to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.160 Offenses constituting nuisances.
Any two-family dwelling, hotel, motel, inn, multiple dwelling, or one-family dwelling operated or maintained in a manner inconsistent with the occupancy requirements of this chapter are declared to be unlawful and are defined as and declared to be public nuisances per se that are injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1765 § 3, 2016: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.170 Nuisances – Recovery of abatement expenses.
A. In any civil action or proceeding, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding, including, but not limited to, those brought to abate a public nuisance, the prevailing party will be entitled to recovery of all staff time costs, costs of abatement, attorneys’ fees and expenses; provided, that attorneys’ fees will only be available in those actions or proceedings in which the city has provided notice at the commencement of such action or proceeding that it intends to seek and recover its own attorneys’ fees. In no action or proceeding will an award of attorneys’ fees exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

B. Moneys due the city pursuant to this chapter may be recovered in an appropriate civil action. Alternatively, such liability may be enforced by special assessment proceedings against the parcel of land upon which the nuisance existed, which proceedings must be conducted in a manner substantively similar to proceedings prescribed in Chapter 8.64 relating to assessment for abatement of property nuisances. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.180 Penalties.
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1.16. Each day that such violation exists shall be deemed a new and separate offense. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.190 Criminal penalties do not satisfy administrative or civil actions.
Neither the arrest, prosecution, conviction, imprisonment, or payment of any fine for the violation of this chapter shall satisfy or diminish the authority of the city to institute administrative or civil actions seeking enforcement of any or all of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

9.64.200 Timing of application of this chapter.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, this chapter shall apply to all sex offenders who establish a new residence within the city of Gardena after the effective date of this chapter, and to all responsible parties who allow occupancy by a sex offender within the city of Gardena after the effective date of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the obligations of a sex offender to comply with the requirements of state law, including, but not limited to, California Penal Code Section 3003.5. (Ord. 1772 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1705 § 1 (part), 2008)

Chapter 9.68
EMERGENCY PERSONNEL RESPONSE FEE FOR UNRULY GATHERINGS
Sections:

9.68.010    Findings.

9.68.020    Purpose.

9.68.030    Definitions.

9.68.040    Emergency personnel response to unruly gatherings.

9.68.050    Service of violation notice.

9.68.060    Public nuisance.

9.68.070    Billing.

9.68.080    Appeal hearing.

9.68.090    Advance deposit hardship waiver.

9.68.100    Hearing officer.

9.68.110    Hearing procedure.

9.68.120    Hearing officer’s decision.

9.68.130    Collection.

9.68.010 Findings.
The city council finds and determines that unruly gatherings on private property can constitute a threat to the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the public. Police officers have been required to make many return calls to such gatherings in order to disperse uncooperative or unruly participants in order to restore the public peace, health and safety and fire department personnel are also required to treat injuries which result from such gatherings. Such return calls drain the manpower and resources of the police and fire departments, and can leave other areas of the city without minimal levels of police and fire protection so as to create a significant hazard to the safety of citizens and police officers. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to deter unruly gatherings and also to allow the city to obtain reimbursement for expenses related to second and additional responses to unruly gatherings which have been determined to be a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein:

“Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city or his designee.

“Emergency personnel” means all police and fire personnel that respond to an unruly gathering.

“Invoice notice” means a written notice informing the responsible party of the amount of money owed for any response fee to a location within a thirty-day period after a violation notice has been issued for an unruly gathering at the property.

“Response fee” means all costs of emergency personnel, including applicable overhead costs, and equipment for the amount of time actually spent in responding to or in remaining at an unruly gathering, as well as the cost of any medical treatment of injured emergency personnel, and damage to city property.

“Responsible party” means that person or persons in charge of the premises or location, or the person or persons responsible for the event or incident, and shall include any of the following:

1. The person or persons who own the property where the unruly gathering takes place. However, when the owner has rented or leased the property to another person, such owner shall not be considered a responsible party unless: (a) the owner knew or reasonably should have known that the premises were being leased for a use that would likely lead to an unruly gathering; or (b) the city has sent at least one violation notice to the owner of the property by personal delivery or certified mail at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor within the last thirty days and at least seven calendar days have passed between the date of the violation notice and the incident for which the police response fee is being charged;

2. Tenants of the property where the unruly gathering takes place;

3. The person or persons in charge of the premises where the unruly gathering takes place;

4. The person or persons authorizing the use of the premises for the unruly gathering;

5. The person or persons who organized the unruly gathering.

If any of those persons are minors, the parents or guardians of such minor(s) shall be the responsible party.

“Subsequent emergency response” means any response by emergency personnel to the location of an unruly gathering made within a thirty-day period after the police have issued a violation notice to the responsible party, including a second or subsequent response to the incident which gave rise to the violation notice.

“Unruly gathering” means a gathering or assembly of persons for social purposes at a private location within the city of Gardena at the invitation, request, or consent of the person in charge or control of the premises where the persons are behaving in such a manner as to disturb the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, excessive noise, excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, underage drinking, public consumption of alcohol, or assaults, batteries and fights.

“Violation notice” means a written notice informing the responsible party that if a further response is necessary to the same location within a twelve-month period from the date of the disturbance violation notice or subsequent call for police services due to an unruly gathering, including to the same incident, because of the same or similar activity, the responsible party will be held liable to the city for the amount of the police response fee. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.040 Emergency personnel response to unruly gatherings.
A. If an unruly gathering is held and the police officer initially investigating the matter determines that the same is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, said officer shall, in addition to any other duty or responsibility imposed by law, give a written violation notice to the responsible party. The violation notice shall specify that a response fee for emergency personnel costs will be issued if a subsequent emergency response to an unruly gathering is necessary to control or abate the nuisance or to protect the public peace, health, safety or general welfare within thirty days subsequent to the date of the violation notice, including a subsequent emergency response to the same incident.

B. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to the authority of the police to regulate loud or large parties and shall supplement, and not supplant, the exercise of any other available law including, but not limited to, arrest or cite pursuant to the California Penal Code or other law or ordinance. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.050 Service of violation notice.
A. The violation notice referred to in Section 9.68.040 shall be served in the following manner:

1. Personal Service. When responding to the unruly gathering, the police officer shall provide the responsible party with the written violation notice and attempt to obtain the signature of the responsible party on the notice. If the responsible party refuses or fails to sign the notice, the officer shall so indicate on the signature line. The failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the notice or of subsequent proceedings under this chapter. If the only responsible party present is a minor, the violation notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the property.

2. Service by Mail. If personal service on a responsible party, including the parent or guardian of a minor responsible party was not possible, the police department shall mail the violation notice to the responsible party by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return service receipt. Simultaneously, the notice shall be sent by first class mail. If the notice is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the notice sent by first class mail is not returned. Service shall be deemed to have been completed five days after deposit in the mail.

3. Service on Property Owner. If the property is leased or rented, the violation notice shall be mailed to the responsible party owner of the property at the address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor in the manner specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

B. Service of any other document required pursuant to this chapter shall be accomplished in the manner specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

C. Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted hereunder. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.060 Public nuisance.
Any unruly gathering shall constitute a real property public nuisance, as an immediate threat to the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.070 Billing.
A. The chief of police shall keep track in writing of the date and time of the incident, the police services required, the police services performed, and such other information as may be necessary. The chief shall also obtain the same information from the fire department. Such information shall be forwarded to the finance director who shall cause an invoice notice for the response fee to be mailed to the responsible party or parties with the back-up documentation.

B. A responsible party need not be present at such gathering or have prior knowledge of the gathering to be liable hereunder.

C. Responsible parties shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the response fee.

D. The invoice notice shall be paid within thirty days of the date of service absent a timely appeal. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.080 Appeal hearing.
A. Any party wishing to challenge either a violation notice or an invoice notice may do so by filing a written request for hearing with the city clerk’s office within ten days from the date of service of the notice.

B. Any appeal of the notice of invoice shall be accompanied by the deposit of any monies due to city or a written statement that the appellant has applied for an advance deposit hardship waiver pursuant to Section 9.68.090.

C. The request shall state the grounds for contesting the notice.

D. Appellant shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be held within sixty days of the date of filing the appeal.

E. Any additional material submitted to the hearing officer in support of the notice being challenged shall be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

F. Failure to timely request a hearing shall render the notice final and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.090 Advance deposit hardship waiver.
A. Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest an invoice notice and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit as required in Section 9.68.080B may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver to be determined by the finance director.

B. The request shall be filed in writing with the city clerk’s office no later than the date of the appeal.

C. The requirement of depositing the full amount of the money shall be stayed until the finance director makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

D. The finance director may waive the requirement of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the appellant provides a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the finance director the appellant’s actual financial inability to deposit the amount due the city in advance of the hearing.

E. If an advance deposit hardship waiver is not issued, the person requesting the waiver shall remit the deposit to the city within ten days of the date of that decision or thirty days from the date of the invoice notice, whichever is later. However, in no event may the hearing take place until the deposit is remitted.

F. The finance director shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver within thirty days of application and a copy shall be served on the person seeking a waiver within five days thereafter.

G. The determination of the director shall be final. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.100 Hearing officer.
A. The city manager shall designate the hearing officer for the appeal hearing. The city manager may sit as the hearing officer, unless to do so violates the requirements of due process.

B. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the outcome of the decision or the amount of any monies due to the city upheld by the hearing officer. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.110 Hearing procedure.
A. No hearing shall be held unless any money due the city has been deposited in advance or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 9.68.090.

B. Appellant shall be given at least ten days written notice of the hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than sixty days from the date of the appeal.

C. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. Appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses.

D. The failure of any appellant to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of any monies deposited and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

E. Any notices, citations or other reports submitted by city staff shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

F. The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from either party prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.120 Hearing officer’s decision.
A. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify or overturn the notice and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

B. If the hearing officer determines that an invoice notice should be upheld, then any monies deposited with the city shall be retained by the city.

C. If the hearing officer determines that an invoice notice should be upheld and any monies due to the city had not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth a payment schedule in the decision.

D. If the hearing officer determines that an invoice notice should be overturned or reduced and money was deposited with the city, then city shall promptly provide a refund, together with interest at the average rate earned on the city’s portfolio for the period of time that the fine amount was held by the city.

E. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision including the reasons therefor within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall be served upon the appellant within five days after the decision is rendered.

F. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

9.68.130 Collection.
A. The amount of any response fee charged pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city by the responsible party or parties and shall be paid within thirty days from the date of the notice, or if an appeal is filed, within thirty days from the date of the written decision.

B. Any police response fee not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter is an obligation of the responsible party or parties and may be collected by the city through any legal means, including but not limited to:

1. Imposition of the fee as restitution in connection with any criminal conviction relating to the incident;

2. Assessment of the police response fee against the property at which the incident took place in accordance with Sections 8.64.150 through 8.64.200, but only when the owner is a responsible party as defined herein;

3. A small claims court action against the responsible party. (Ord. 1744 § 15 (part), 2013)

Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:

10.04    Traffic

10.08    Traffic Administration

10.12    Traffic Control Devices

10.16    Turning Movements

10.20    Pedestrians

10.24    One-Way Streets and Alleys

10.28    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.32    Special Speed Zones

10.36    Truck Routes

10.40    Miscellaneous Traffic Rules

10.44    Abandoned Vehicles

10.48    Bicycles

10.52    City Related Towing Services

10.56    Vehicular Cruising

10.60    Regulation of the Parking of Recreational Vehicles

Chapter 10.04
TRAFFIC
Sections:

10.04.010    Vehicle Code and article definitions.

10.04.020    Alley.

10.04.030    Holiday.

10.04.040    Loading zone.

10.04.050    Median.

10.04.060    Official time standard.

10.04.070    Official traffic control device.

10.04.080    Official traffic signal.

10.04.090    Park.

10.04.100    Parkway.

10.04.110    Passenger loading zone.

10.04.120    Pedestrian.

10.04.130    Police officer.

10.04.140    Stop.

10.04.150    Stop or stand.

10.04.160    Street car.

10.04.170    Traffic.

10.04.180    Traffic authority.

10.04.010 Vehicle Code and article definitions.
A. Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, such definitions shall be incorporated in this title and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this title as though set forth in full.

B. The words and phrases defined in this chapter, when used in this title, shall, for the purposes of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Prior code § 3-5.101)

10.04.020 Alley.
“Alley” means any street less than twenty-five feet in width between property lines. (Prior code § 3-5.102)

10.04.030 Holiday.
“Holiday” means January 1st, February 12th, February 22nd, May 30th, July 4th, the first Monday in September, September 9th, October 12th, November 11th, December 25th, and Thanksgiving Day. If January 1st, May 30th, July 4th, September 9th, October 12th, November 11th, or December 25th shall fall upon a Sunday, the Monday following shall be a holiday. (Prior code § 3-5.103)

10.04.040 Loading zone.
“Loading zone” means that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 3-5.104)

10.04.050 Median.
“Median” means that portion of a street separating the roadways or traveled ways for opposing traffic. (Prior code § 3-5.104.1)

10.04.060 Official time standard.
“Official time standard” means standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. (Prior code § 3-5.105)

10.04.070 Official traffic control device.
“Official traffic control device” means any sign, signal, marking, or device not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. (Prior code § 3-5.106)

10.04.080 Official traffic signal.
“Official traffic signal” means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed and which is erected, or may be erected, by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. (Prior code § 3-5.107)

10.04.090 Park.
“Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 3-5.108)

10.04.100 Parkway.
“Parkway” means that portion of a street between the roadway and right-of-way line and includes the sidewalk area. (Prior code § 3-5.109)

10.04.110 Passenger loading zone.
“Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Prior code § 3-5.110)

10.04.120 Pedestrian.
“Pedestrian” means any person afoot. (Prior code § 3-5.111)

10.04.130 Police officer.
“Police officer” means every officer of the police department of the city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Prior code § 3-5.112)

10.04.140 Stop.
“Stop,” when required, shall mean complete cessation of movement. (Prior code § 3-5.113)

10.04.150 Stop or stand.
“Stop” or “stand,” when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. (Prior code § 3-5.114)

10.04.160 Street car.
“Street car” means any device traveling exclusively upon rails. (Prior code § 3-5.115)

10.04.170 Traffic.
“Traffic” means pedestrians, vehicles, and street cars, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. (Prior code § 3-5.116)

10.04.180 Traffic authority.
“Traffic authority” means the chief of police of the city. (Prior code § 3-5.117)

Chapter 10.08
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

10.08.010    Traffic division – Established.

10.08.020    Traffic division – Duties.

10.08.030    Traffic accidents – Studies.

10.08.040    Traffic accidents – Reports.

10.08.050    Annual traffic safety reports.

10.08.060    Authority of police and fire department officials.

10.08.070    Obedience to traffic laws required.

10.08.080    Obedience to police and fire department officials required.

10.08.090    Obedience by persons riding bicycles or animals required.

10.08.100    Persons other than officials not to direct traffic.

10.08.110    Public employees to obey traffic regulations.

10.08.120    Exemptions to certain vehicles.

10.08.130    Report of damage to certain property.

10.08.010 Traffic division – Established.
There is established in the police department a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. (Prior code § 3-5.201)

10.08.020 Traffic division – Duties.
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all the vehicle laws of the state applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents, and to cooperate with the traffic authority and with other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the traffic division by this chapter and the traffic laws of the city. (Prior code § 3-5.202)

10.08.030 Traffic accidents – Studies.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the traffic authority in conducting studies of such accidents and in determining remedial measures. (Prior code § 3-5.203)

10.08.040 Traffic accidents – Reports.
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically or by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the traffic authority. (Prior code § 3-5.204)

10.08.050 Annual traffic safety reports.
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the traffic authority for information as required by the council. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows:

A. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent accident data;

B. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; and

C. The plans and recommendations of the traffic division for future traffic safety activities. (Prior code § 3-5.205)

10.08.060 Authority of police and fire department officials.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and of the state applicable to street traffic in the city.

B. Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.

C. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or when protecting the personnel or equipment of the fire department in the course of their duties, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. (Prior code § 3-5.301)

10.08.070 Obedience to traffic laws required.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or to fail to perform any act required, by the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 3-5.302)

10.08.080 Obedience to police and fire department officials required.
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or fire department official when directing traffic. (Prior code § 3-5.303)

10.08.090 Obedience by persons riding bicycles or animals required.
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Prior code § 3-5.304)

10.08.100 Persons other than officials not to direct traffic.
No person other than an officer of the police department or a person deputized by the chief of police, or person authorized by law, shall direct, or attempt to direct, traffic by voice, hand, or other signal, except that persons may operate when and as in this chapter provided any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the traffic authority. (Prior code § 3-5.305)

10.08.110 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, and any county or city. It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code of the state. (Prior code § 3-5.306)

10.08.120 Exemptions to certain vehicles.
A. The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking, and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle or private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this title is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code of the state in response to an emergency call.

B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others.

C. The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or to any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of United States mail. (Prior code § 3-5.307)

10.08.130 Report of damage to certain property.
A. The driver of a vehicle, or the person in charge of any animal, involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light, or power pole, or resulting in damage to any ornamental shade tree, traffic control device, or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall, within twenty-four hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the police department.

B. Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person driving or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and a brief description of the property damaged in such accident.

C. A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time such driver is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event such driver shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Prior code § 3-5.308)

Chapter 10.12
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Sections:

10.12.010    Installation authority.

10.12.020    Signs required.

10.12.030    Obedience.

10.12.040    Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue.

10.12.050    Hours of operation.

10.12.060    Installation of traffic signals.

10.12.070    Regulation of speed by traffic signals.

10.12.080    Lane markings.

10.12.090    Distinctive roadway markings.

10.12.010 Installation authority.
A. The traffic authority shall have the power and duty to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic control devices when and as required under the traffic laws of the city to make effective the provisions of such laws.

B. Whenever the traffic laws require, for the effectiveness of any provisions thereof, that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such laws, the traffic authority is authorized to install, or cause to be installed, the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the laws applicable thereto.

C. The traffic authority may also place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations, and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in the traffic laws of the city or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Prior code § 3-5.401)

10.12.020 Signs required.
No provision of the Vehicle Code of the state or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place, and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Prior code § 3-5.402)

10.12.030 Obedience.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic laws of the city unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Prior code § 3-5.403)

10.12.040 Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue.
The traffic authority is authorized to remove, relocate, or discontinue, or cause to have removed, relocated, or discontinued, the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by state law or by this title whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. (Prior code § 3-5.404)

10.12.050 Hours of operation.
The traffic authority shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or effect except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Prior code § 3-5.405)

10.12.060 Installation of traffic signals.
A. The traffic authority is directed to install and maintain, or cause to have installed and maintained, official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazards.

B. The traffic authority shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by resort to field observation, traffic counts, and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Planning Manual of Instructions, Part 8, “Traffic,” issued by the Division of Highways of the Department of Public Works of the state.

C. Whenever the traffic authority installs and maintains, or causes to have installed and maintained, an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain, or cause to have erected and maintained, at such intersection street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. (Prior code § 3-5.406)

10.12.070 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
The traffic authority is authorized to regulate, or cause to have regulated, the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speed otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and may erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Prior code § 3-5.407)

10.12.080 Lane markings.
The traffic authority is authorized to mark, or cause to be marked, center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place, or cause to be placed, signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. (Prior code § 3-5.408)

10.12.090 Distinctive roadway markings.
The traffic authority is authorized to place and maintain, or cause to have placed and maintained, distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code of the state on streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the Department of Public Works of the state pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state. (Prior code § 3-5.409)

Chapter 10.16
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Sections:

10.16.010    Authority to place and obedience to turning markers and multiple lanes.

10.16.020    Authority to place restricted turn signs.

10.16.030    Obedience to no-turn signs.

10.16.040    Signal controlled intersections – Right turns.

10.16.010 Authority to place and obedience to turning markers and multiple lanes.
A. The traffic authority is authorized to place, or cause to have placed, markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the traffic authority is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.

B. When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at that intersection, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. (Prior code § 3-5.501)

10.16.020 Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The traffic authority is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place, or cause to be placed, proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, and such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Prior code § 3-5.502)

10.16.030 Obedience to no-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such signs. (Prior code § 3-5.503)

10.16.040 Signal controlled intersections – Right turns.
No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction. The traffic authority shall post, or cause to be posted, appropriate signs giving effect to this section at any intersection where the traffic authority determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal stop indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Prior code § 3-5.504)

Chapter 10.20
PEDESTRIANS
Sections:

10.20.010    Crosswalk establishment authority.

10.20.020    Crossing in crosswalks.

10.20.030    Crossing at right angles.

10.20.040    Standing in roadways.

10.20.010 Crosswalk establishment authority.
A. The traffic authority shall establish, designate, and cause to be maintained crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway.

B. Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at those intersections where the traffic authority determines there is a particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as may be approved or required by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 3-5.901)

10.20.020 Crossing in crosswalks.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk or at an intersection. (Prior code § 3-5.902)

10.20.030 Crossing at right angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a marked crosswalk. (Prior code § 3-5.903)

10.20.040 Standing in roadways.
No person shall stand in any roadway, other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk, if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public officer or employee or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty. (Prior code § 3-5.904)

Chapter 10.24
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Sections:

10.24.010    Signs required.

10.24.010 Signs required.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic authority shall place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. When signs are erected on one-way streets or in any alley giving notice thereof, no person shall drive any vehicle in a direction contrary thereto. (Prior code § 3-5.601)

Chapter 10.28
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sections:

10.28.010    Application of regulations.

10.28.020    Stop signs – Generally.

10.28.030    Emerging from alleys, driveways and buildings.

10.28.040    Parking on sidewalks, parkways or medians.

10.28.050    Use of streets for storage of vehicles.

10.28.060    Parking for certain purposes prohibited.

10.28.070    Parallel parking.

10.28.080    Angle parking.

10.28.090    Parking lots.

10.28.100    Municipal parking lots – Parking for handicapped persons.

10.28.110    Parking adjacent to schools.

10.28.120    Parking on narrow streets.

10.28.130    Parking on hills.

10.28.140    Stopping and parking in certain places prohibited – Signs.

10.28.150    Parking by peddlers and vendors.

10.28.160    Emergency parking.

10.28.170    Authority to establish loading zones.

10.28.180    Curb markings.

10.28.190    Effect of permission to load or unload.

10.28.200    Standing for loading or unloading.

10.28.210    Standing in passenger loading zones.

10.28.220    Standing in alleys.

10.28.230    Bus zones.

10.28.240    Parking for handicapped persons.

10.28.250    Parking prohibited – Normandie Avenue.

10.28.260    Parking prohibited in required front and side yards.

10.28.270    Parking prohibited or limited – Signs.

10.28.275    Parking prohibited or limited – Street sweeping.

10.28.280    Special district regulations – Intent.

10.28.290    Special district regulations – Parking restricted in defined districts.

10.28.300    Parking permits – Procedure to obtain.

10.28.310    Parking permits – Issuance.

10.28.320    Parking permits – Contents.

10.28.330    Parking permits – Expiration.

10.28.340    Parking permits – Other parking regulations.

10.28.350    Exemptions – Licensed physicians.

10.28.360    Sign posting – Enforcement.

10.28.370    District No. 1 described.

10.28.380    District No. 2 described.

10.28.385    District No. 3 described.

10.28.386    District No. 4 described.

10.28.387    District No. 5 described.

10.28.390    Trains blocking crossings.

10.28.400    Curb parking – Rights-of-way.

10.28.410    Parking on private property.

10.28.420    Parking on city property.

10.28.430    Taxicab stands.

10.28.440    Parking commercial vehicles and buses prohibited in residential districts.

10.28.450    Sales of vehicles on vacant lots.

10.28.460    Parking of trailers, semitrailers and tractors.

10.28.470    Repealed by Ord. 1735.

10.28.480    Parking of wide vehicles prohibited.

10.28.490    Use of vehicles for human habitation prohibited.

10.28.010 Application of regulations.
A. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles shall apply at all times, or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

B. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state or the laws of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Prior code § 3-5.1001)

10.28.020 Stop signs – Generally.
The traffic authority is authorized and empowered to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, subject to the approval of the council by resolution, stop signs at or near the entrances to streets, intersections, and railroad grade crossings upon or at which traffic is hazardous or dangerous to life or property, either by reason of the volume thereon or lack of visibility on the approach thereto, or upon which the accident experience exceeds the average, or which are dangerous by reason of other physical conditions likely to render such streets, intersections, and railroad grade crossings hazardous to life or property. Such streets, intersections, and railroad grade crossings are designated as stop intersections within the meaning of this section.

Every stop sign so placed shall conform with and be placed as provided in Sections 21350, 21351, 21352, 21353, 21354, and/or 21355 of the Vehicle Code of the state.

Until removed or relocated by the traffic authority, all traffic control devices heretofore installed by the traffic authority and in place are approved. (Prior code § 3-5.701)

10.28.030 Emerging from alleys, driveways and buildings.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. (Prior code § 3-5.702)

10.28.040 Parking on sidewalks, parkways or medians.
No person shall park any vehicle upon any sidewalk, parkway or median. (Prior code § 3-5.1002)

10.28.050 Use of streets for storage of vehicles.
A. No person who owns or has the possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours.

B. In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two hours, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of subsection (k) of Section 22651 and Section 22500 of the Vehicle Code of the state. (Prior code § 3-5.1003)

10.28.060 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway, parkway or public right-of-way for the principal purpose of:

1. Displaying such vehicle for sale; or

2. Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

B. No person shall suspend, place, or attach any advertising sign on any vehicle parked upon a public street, but the provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to apply to any sign painted directly upon or permanently affixed to the body or integral part or fixture of a vehicle for permanent decor, identity, or display and which does not extend over the overall width or height of such vehicle. (Prior code § 3-5.1004)

10.28.070 Parallel parking.
No person shall park any vehicle upon any roadway other than parallel with the roadway edge or curb, headed in the direction of traffic flow, and with the vehicle’s right-side wheels within eighteen inches of the right-hand roadway edge of curb, except as follows:

A. Upon those streets which have been marked by the traffic authority for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked as indicated by such marks;

B. Upon a one-way roadway, vehicles may also be parked with the left-side wheels within eighteen inches of the left-hand roadway edge or curb. However, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply upon the roadways of a divided street; and

C. Motorcycles and bicycles shall be parked with at least one wheel touching the curb. (Prior code § 3-5.1005)

10.28.080 Angle parking.
A. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city, or the traffic authority, shall determine that the public convenience and necessity require that angle parking be permitted on any street, the traffic authority is authorized, subject to the approval of the council by resolution, to mark such places by white lines upon the surface of the roadway indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked; provided, however, the traffic authority shall not indicate angle parking upon any state highway contrary to the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state.

B. When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as provided in this section, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings and such vehicle shall not be angle parked in such a manner so as to occupy more than one angle parking space so marked on such roadway.

C. When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as provided in this section, no person shall park or stand a vehicle having unusual characteristics or length which would create a hazard to life or property or a serious obstruction to vehicular passage. (Prior code § 3-5.1006)

10.28.090 Parking lots.
A. Whenever any publicly owned or controlled real property in the city has been selected and designated as a parking lot or area for the parking of vehicles by the public and is in actual use for such purposes, the traffic authority is authorized to promulgate and establish rules, regulations, and parking time limits relating to, and regulating and governing the use of, such property for such purposes.

B. When any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the authority granted and authorized by subsection A of this section have been so promulgated and established, the same shall be submitted to the council for approval, and when approved by the council and authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, shall become effective as to the respective properties, parking lots and areas covered thereby and to which the same pertain.

C. Immediately upon approval by the council of any such rules, regulations, and parking time limits, the traffic authority shall, and is authorized and instructed to, cause suitable and adequate signs to be placed in, at, or upon the respective properties and public parking lot areas affected thereby in such manner as to be clearly visible to persons making use of such properties or areas, giving notice of the parking time limits so promulgated, established, and approved and shall post legible copies of any other rules and regulations so promulgated and applicable in at least two locations on such respective properties conspicuously available for public inspection.

D. When parking limit signs are in place and additional rules and regulations have been posted, it is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing in any parking lot or area any vehicle for a longer period of time than that designated in or on such signs, and it is likewise unlawful for any person to violate any of such other rules and regulations so promulgated, approved and posted relating to such respective properties or areas, or the use thereof. (Prior code § 3-5.1007)

10.28.100 Municipal parking lots – Parking for handicapped persons.
A. No person, other than a handicapped person whose vehicle displays specified distinguishing license plates or placards, shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a parking space in a municipal off-street parking facility when such parking space is designated for handicapped persons only. Such designation shall be made by “handicapped only” pavement markings and/or a sign posted immediately adjacent to each stall or space, which sign shall consist of a profile view of a wheelchair with the occupant in white on a blue background, and/or a blue painted curb.

B. Any vehicle stopping, standing, or parking in violation of this section may be removed from the publicly owned off-street parking facility if there is posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from, such stall or space, or if there is posted, in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the off-street parking facility, not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the following: “Unauthorized Vehicles Not Displaying Distinguishing Placards or License Plates Issued for Physically Handicapped Persons Will Be Towed Away at Owner’s Expense. Towed Vehicles May be Reclaimed at 1718 West 162nd Street, Gardena, California, or by telephoning (213) 327-0220.” (Prior code § 3-5.1007.1)

10.28.110 Parking adjacent to schools.
A. The traffic authority is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking on that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Prior code § 3-5.1008)

10.28.120 Parking on narrow streets.
A. The traffic authority is authorized to place, or cause to be placed, signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

B. When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Prior code § 3-5.1009)

10.28.130 Parking on hills.
No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residential district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb, or by other means. (Prior code § 3-5.1010)

10.28.140 Stopping and parking in certain places prohibited – Signs.
The traffic authority may appropriately sign or mark the following places, or cause the following places to be signed or marked and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of such places:

A. At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone;

B. At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection within any business district except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

C. Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device; or

D. At any place where the traffic authority determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate dangerous traffic hazards. (Prior code § 3-5.1011)

10.28.150 Parking by peddlers and vendors.
A. No person shall stand or park any vehicle from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, ice cream, confectioneries, or any other kind of goods or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited, offered for sale, bartered, or exchanged, in any alley or within five hundred feet of the property line of any public or private school or any church, synagogue, other house of worship, nor shall any person hawk, peddle or vend such merchandise or food at such locations.

B. Properly licensed vendors may stand and park vehicles at locations not specified in subsection A of this section only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes in any one place.

C. This section shall not apply to persons making deliveries to business establishments or homes nor to Parent-Teacher Associations, committees, or similar organizations as to activities conducted wholly on school or church grounds with the approval of the school or church. (Ord. 1691 § 4, 4-26-07; Ord. 1623 § 6, 2002; Ord. 1458 § 1, 1992: prior code § 3-5.1012)

10.28.160 Emergency parking.
A. Whenever the traffic authority determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the traffic authority shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the traffic authority shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the traffic authority shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park, or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.

C. Pursuant to Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code of the state, whenever parking is prohibited pursuant to subsection A of this section, the subject vehicles may be removed by towing pursuant to the direction of the police. (Prior code § 3-5.1013)

10.28.170 Authority to establish loading zones.
A. The traffic authority is authorized to determine and mark, or cause to be marked, loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

1. At any place in any business district; and

2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purposes of public assembly.

B. In no event shall more than one-half the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

C. Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line stenciled with black letters, “Loading Only,” upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

D. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white paint line stenciled with black letters, “Passenger Loading Only,” upon the top of all curbs within such zones. (Prior code § 3-5.1014)

10.28.180 Curb markings.
The traffic authority is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, or cause to be placed, and when required shall place, or cause to be placed, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings set forth in this section:

A. Red means no stopping, standing, or parking at any time, except as permitted by the Vehicle Code of the state and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

B. Yellow means no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, however, the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, and the loading or unloading of materials shall not consume more than twenty minutes.

C. White means no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which time shall not exceed three minutes. Such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows:

1. When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mail box, the restrictions shall apply at all times; and

2. When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times, except when such theater is closed.

D. Green means no standing or parking for longer than twenty minutes at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays.

E. Blue means no stopping, standing, or parking by any person other than a handicapped person whose vehicle displays a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Sections 22511.5 or 9105 of the Vehicle Code of the state.

F. When the traffic authority has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any provision of this section. (Prior code § 3-5.1015)

10.28.190 Effect of permission to load or unload.
A. Permission granted by this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

B. The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries and to the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C. Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes.

D. Within the total time limits specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this article. (Prior code § 3-5.1016)

10.28.200 Standing for loading or unloading.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or materials for such time as is permitted by Section 10.28.190. (Prior code § 3-5.1017)

10.28.210 Standing in passenger loading zones.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified by Section 10.28.190. (Prior code § 3-5.1018)

10.28.220 Standing in alleys.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Prior code § 3-5.1019)

10.28.230 Bus zones.
A. The traffic authority is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb spaces for loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth in this chapter.

B. “Bus,” as used in this chapter means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley coach, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.

C. No bus zone shall exceed eighty feet in length; provided, however, when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the traffic authority showing the necessity therefor, the traffic authority may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred twenty-five feet.

D. The traffic authority shall paint, or cause to be painted, a red line paint stencil with white letters, “No Standing,” together with the words, “Bus Zone,” upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone.

E. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle, except a bus, in a bus zone. (Prior code § 3-5.1020)

10.28.240 Parking for handicapped persons.
No person, other than a handicapped person whose vehicle displays specified distinguishing license plates, shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a parking space designated for handicapped persons only. Such designation shall be made by “Handicapped Only” pavement markings and/or a sign posted immediately adjacent to each stall or space, which sign shall consist of a profile view of a wheelchair with the occupant in white on a blue background, and/or a blue painted curb. (Prior code § 3-5.1020.1)

10.28.250 Parking prohibited – Normandie Avenue.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle at any time on the west side of Normandie Avenue immediately adjacent to the curb in that area which normally would be a parking area between 160th Street and 162nd Street. (Prior code § 3-5.1021)

10.28.260 Parking prohibited in required front and side yards.
Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this code, no person shall park any vehicle in any portion of a required front yard or of a required side yard on the street side of any lot. This section shall not prohibit the temporary standing or parking of vehicles in a permitted driveway. (Prior code § 3-5.1022)

10.28.270 Parking prohibited or limited – Signs.
Whenever the traffic authority determines either (1) that a street is within a business district, or (2) that, because of proximity to a business district or center of employment, or (3) because of an unusual concentration of population, or (4) because of any other factor or condition the unrestricted parking of vehicles has caused, or would necessarily cause, traffic congestion, create a hazard, detrimentally affect the public welfare, or deprive the public of the efficient use of available curb space, the traffic authority is authorized to install, or cause to have installed, at any such place signs giving notice that no person shall stand, stop, or park a vehicle, except as provided on such signs.

A. Stopping or Standing Prohibited. Whenever authorized signs are in place giving notice that stopping or standing is prohibited during such hours or on such days as are indicated on such signs, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle at any time during such hours or such days.

B. Parking Prohibited at All Times. Whenever authorized signs are in place giving notice that parking is prohibited at any time or during certain hours, it is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle during such prohibited times.

C. Overtime Parking Prohibited. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs.

D. Removal of Vehicles. Pursuant to Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code of the state, whenever parking is prohibited pursuant to this section and signs are posted giving notice of the removal, the subject vehicles may be removed by towing pursuant to the direction of the police. (Prior code § 3-5.1101)

10.28.275 Parking prohibited or limited – Street sweeping.
A. Parking shall be prohibited on city streets during those days and times posted for street sweeping. Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be cited.

B. This section shall not apply to commercial vehicles exempted by California Vehicle Code Section 22507.6. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 2000)

10.28.280 Special district regulations – Intent.
It is the intent of special district regulations to protect the public health, welfare, and safety of persons residing in the areas described in Section 10.28.290 by limiting parking on the streets fronting their homes within certain hours to residents, thereby to eliminate the vehicular congestion occasioned by persons attending events at facilities located in close proximity to such areas and the presence of hundreds of transient persons who continually threaten the security, peace and quiet of such residential neighborhoods. (Prior code § 3-5.1101.1)

10.28.290 Special district regulations – Parking restricted in defined districts.
Except by duly issued permit, parking is unlawful where posted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within the areas designated as follows:

A. District No. 1.

1. No parking between the hours of seven-thirty a.m. and seven-thirty p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted.

2. No parking between the hours of seven-thirty a.m. and four p.m., Saturdays and Sundays.

B. District No. 2. No parking between the hours of seven-thirty a.m. and four p.m., except Saturdays and Sundays.

C. District No. 3. No parking between the hours of seven-thirty a.m. and seven-thirty p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted.

D. District No. 4. No parking Monday through Sunday, except as authorized by this code.

E. District No. 5. No parking Monday through Sunday from six p.m. to six a.m. (Ord. 1784 § 1, 2018: Ord. 1703 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1494 § 1, 1996: prior code § 3-5.1101.2)

10.28.300 Parking permits – Procedure to obtain.
Applications for parking permits shall be filed in writing with the chief of police upon forms provided by the chief of police. Such applications shall set forth the name, residence and business address of the applicant, the license number, make and type of vehicle subject to the permit and such other information as the chief of police may require. (Prior code § 3-5.1101.3)

10.28.310 Parking permits – Issuance.
Upon the submittal of a complete application and payment of a permit fee as established by city council resolution, the chief of police shall issue parking permits granting preferential parking privileges as follows: one parking permit for each vehicle registered to a resident of an adjacent dwelling unit; one permit for a nonoccupant owner of an adjacent dwelling unit; four guest permits to each resident per adjacent dwelling unit; and temporary parking permits on an as-needed basis, applied for at least fourteen days in advance of the need for guest permits, and subject to limited duration to be indicated on the issued guest permits. An application may be submitted by either the owner of the residential dwelling unit for which a permit is sought or the tenant of such residential dwelling unit, but in the case of applications submitted by tenants, the owner of the residential dwelling unit shall also be required to sign the application form, attesting to the fact that the tenant resides at the residential dwelling unit.

“Adjacent dwelling unit,” as used in this section, means a residential dwelling unit fronting upon or having direct access to a street within a district established pursuant to this chapter by means of a front door, entryway or driveway or any combination thereof. (Ord. 1703 § 2, 2008: prior code § 3-5.1101.4)

10.28.320 Parking permits – Contents.
Parking permits shall contain such information and be in such form as determined necessary by the chief of police. Such permit shall be effective only for the vehicle and area for which it was issued. (Prior code § 3-5.1101.5)

10.28.330 Parking permits – Expiration.
Upon the transfer of the vehicle described in any permit, or upon the permittee’s change of place of residence, or upon obtaining off-street parking facilities for such vehicle rendering such permit unnecessary, the permittee shall destroy such permit and report such destruction to the chief of police. The chief of police shall retain the right to revoke any such permit for good cause. Upon notice by the chief of police, a permit issued shall be immediately surrendered. (Prior code § 3-5.1101.6)

10.28.340 Parking permits – Other parking regulations.
No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall permit parking in violation of any section of this code or the Vehicle Code of the state, except that a parking permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall permit parking for any vehicle for which the permit is issued in the district for which the permit is issued. (Prior code § 3-5.1101.7)

10.28.350 Exemptions – Licensed physicians.
Any licensed physician’s vehicle parking in violation of the provisions of Sections 10.28.280 through 10.28.380 while making a professional call shall be exempt from said provisions. (Prior code § 3-5.1101.8)

10.28.360 Sign posting – Enforcement.
Signs shall be visibly erected within such districts in words and letters restricting parking during the hours designated in Section 10.28.290 except by permit posted conspicuously in the right front windshield portion of the vehicle. The provisions of Sections 10.28.280 through 10.28.386 shall be enforced when at least two of such signs are erected on each side of each street within a block. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code of the state, vehicles parked inconsistent with the permit provisions shall be subject to removal by towing upon direction by the police. (Ord. 1703 § 3, 2008: prior code § 3-5.1101.9)

10.28.370 District No. 1 described.
District No. 1 is described as follows:

That portion of land in the city of Gardena, county of Los Angeles, state of California, described as follows:

All roadways in the city bordered by and including: Redondo Beach Boulevard on the south; Manhattan Beach Boulevard on the north; Tract No. 17943 on the east; Tract No. 16699, Tract No. 22464 and the northerly one hundred ninety-six feet of the westerly tract boundary of Tract No. 17944 on the west. (Ord. 1703 § 4, 2008: prior code § 3-5.1101.10)

10.28.380 District No. 2 described.
District No. 2 is described as follows:

That portion of land in the city of Gardena, county of Los Angeles, state of California, described as follows:

1. Budlong Avenue beginning 200' N/Rumbold Street to Electric Street;

2. Rumbold Street;

3. Felder Street;

4. Broadwell Street;

5. Berendo Avenue south of Felder Street;

6. 182nd Street from Vermont Avenue to Normandie Avenue; and

7. Electric Street from Vermont Avenue to Normandie Avenue. (Ord. 1658 § 2, 2004; prior code § 3-5.1101.11)

10.28.385 District No. 3 described.
District No. 3 is described as follows:

That portion of land in the city of Gardena, county of Los Angeles, state of California, described as follows:

1. 156th Street from Crenshaw Boulevard to Purche Avenue;

2. 157th Street from Atkinson Avenue to Purche Avenue;

3. Atkinson Avenue from 156th Street to Manhattan Beach Boulevard;

4. Purche Avenue from 156th Street to Manhattan Beach Boulevard;

5. Manhattan Beach Boulevard (north curb line) from Crenshaw Boulevard to Purche Avenue;

6. Atkinson Avenue from 156th Street to 154th Street;

7. 155th Street from Atkinson Avenue to Marigold Avenue; and

8. Marigold Avenue (west curb line) from 154th Street to 156th Street. (Ord. 1774 § 1, 2017: Ord. 1658 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1494 § 2, 1996)

10.28.386 District No. 4 described.
District No. 4 is described, as follows:

That portion of land in the city of Gardena, county of Los Angeles, state of California, described as follows:

1. Spinning Avenue from 135th Street to 141st Street;

2. Daphne Avenue from 135th Street to 141st Street;

3. Purche Avenue from 135th Street to 141st Street;

4. 129th Street from Berendo Avenue to Budlong Avenue;

5. 130th Street from Vermont Avenue to Berendo Avenue;

6. 131st Street from Vermont Avenue to Berendo Avenue;

7. 132nd Street from Vermont Avenue to Berendo Avenue;

8. Berendo Avenue from 129th Street to 132nd Street;

9. Catalina Avenue from 129th Street to 132nd Street;

10. 132nd Street from Van Ness Avenue to Cimarron Avenue;

11. Haas Avenue from 132nd Street to 129th Street;

12. Daleside Avenue from 132nd Street to 129th Street;

13. Cimarron Avenue from 132nd Street to 129th Street;

14. 129th Street from Haas Avenue to Cimarron Avenue;

15. West side of Van Ness Avenue from 132nd Street to 134th Place;

16. 134th Place from Van Ness Avenue to Purche Avenue;

17. Daphne Avenue from 134th Place to the dead end; and

18. 134th Place from Van Ness Avenue east to the dead end. (Ord. 1784 § 2, 2018: Ord. 1774 § 2, 2017: Ord. 1703 § 5, 2008)

10.28.387 District No. 5 described.
District No. 5 is described as follows:

1. Spinning Avenue from 132nd Street to 134th Place. (Ord. 1784 § 3, 2018)

10.28.390 Trains blocking crossings.
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any railway train or railway cars, or similar vehicle on rails, to operate or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars, or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of a train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of such accident. (Prior code § 3-5.1102)

10.28.400 Curb parking – Rights-of-way.
A. Limited Curb Parking Space Defined. For the purposes of this section, “limited curb parking space” means an area open for lawful parking alongside of, and adjacent to, a curb, which area is not of sufficient length to permit two or more vehicles to freely move for parking therein at the same time.

B. Parking at Curbs – Rights-of-Way. Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a limited curb parking space, which vehicle arrives at such parking space prior to any other vehicle, and who proceeds beyond such space a distance not to exceed ten feet for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right-of-way over any person driving, or attempting to drive, any other vehicle directly into such limited curb parking space or who in any manner obstructs such limited curb parking space. The driver of such other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to the driver who first arrived at such parking space. (Prior code § 3-5.1103)

10.28.410 Parking on private property.
No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. (Prior code § 3-5.1104)

10.28.420 Parking on city property.
A. Whenever the traffic authority determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city’s business requires that the parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited, or restricted, the traffic authority shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted.

B. When the signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. (Prior code § 3-5.1105)

10.28.430 Taxicab stands.
A. The traffic authority is given authority to establish taxicab stands for any person holding a taxicab license in the city, such stands to be used for an unlimited time for the parking of licensed taxicabs while awaiting employment. Any taxicab zone so designated shall be occupied only by the holder of the stand permit where such stand has been established.

B. The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be painted white and marked “Taxicab Stand” in black lettering or shall be designated by signs of a type and size approved by the traffic authority.

C. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle, except a licensed taxicab, in any taxicab stand established in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 3-5.1106)

10.28.440 Parking commercial vehicles and buses prohibited in residential districts.
No person shall park any bus, motor truck, semitrailer, trailer coach, or truck tractor in excess of ten thousand pounds unladen weight upon any street or alley within any residential district of the city for any purpose other than to make a pickup or delivery, or when such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked. For the purposes of this section, a residential district shall mean any district which is classified as residential pursuant to the zoning provisions of this code. (Prior code § 3-5.1107)

10.28.450 Sales of vehicles on vacant lots.
A. No person shall sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle upon any premises that have not been improved to city standards for a parking lot; provided, that persons not in the business of selling vehicles may sell, offer to sell, or display for the purpose of sale not more than two such vehicles per year on premises owned or leased and presently occupied by such persons.

B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to the displaying of a “For Sale” sign on any vehicle while it is parked on private property with the permission of the owner or lessee of such premises incidental to the lawful business conducted on such premises other than the sale of such vehicle. (Prior code § 3-5.1108)

10.28.460 Parking of trailers, semitrailers and tractors.
A. No person shall park any trailer or semitrailer upon any highway, street, alley or public way unless the trailer or semitrailer is at all times while so parked attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semitrailer in a normal manner upon the highway, street, alley or public way.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any trailer or semitrailer which is:

1. In the process of being loaded or unloaded, but in any instance for a period not to exceed two hours;

2. Disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semitrailer on that portion of the highway, street, alley, or public way ordinarily used for vehicular parking, but in any instance for a period not to exceed two hours;

3. Leased or owned by any permittee granted a permit for construction or repair work under any of the provisions of this code or by a public utility engaged in work for which no such permit is required, or a vehicle leased or owned by any contractor hired by such permittee or public utility, provided the trailer or semitrailer is used in connection with such construction or repair work and is parked upon the construction or repair site, or within one hundred fifty feet thereof as measured from the limits of the work area as specified in the permit, and only during the period of actual construction; or

4. Leased or owned by a city department, or a contractor or vendor hired by a city department for construction or repair work, or by a subcontractor thereof, provided such trailer or semitrailer is used in connection with such construction or repair work and is parked upon the construction or repair site, or within one hundred fifty feet thereof as measured from the limits of the work area and only during the period of actual construction or repair. (Prior code § 3-5.1109)

10.28.480 Parking of wide vehicles prohibited.
A. No person shall park any vehicle, including but not limited to any bus, motor truck, semitrailer, trailer coach or truck tractor, with a width in excess of eighty-four inches on any roadway in the city, for a time period exceeding one hour except for the purposes of loading or unloading.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle or trailer owned by the city or by any public utility, while such vehicle or trailer is being used in conjunction with the construction, installation or repair of any public facility or utility.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any authorized emergency vehicle as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 165, to any house car as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362, or to any trailer coach as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 635. Exceptions to the ordinance codified in this subsection will be made for all other overwidth vehicles displaying a valid temporary permit issued by the police department which shall be valid for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. The permit may be issued telephonically or in person.

D. The chief of police shall cause signs displaying the prohibition, set forth in this section, to be placed at the entrance points to the city.

E. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 22651(n) of the California Vehicle Code, when signs have been posted giving notice of removal, any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section may be removed by towing pursuant to the direction of the police. (Ord. 1603 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1602 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1568 § 1, 1999)

10.28.490 Use of vehicles for human habitation prohibited.
A. No person shall use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any motor vehicle for human habitation, either single or in groups, on any street, park, square, avenue, alley or public way, within the jurisdiction of the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. For purposes of this section, “motor vehicle” shall mean any self-propelled vehicle including but not limited to a recreational vehicle as defined in Section 10.60.020, but shall not mean the use of a motor vehicle for alleviation of sickness or temporary physical inability to operate such motor vehicle.

1. For purposes of this section evidence of human habitation shall include activities such as sleeping, setting up housekeeping or cooking, eating, recreating, and/or any other activity where it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that the vehicle is being used as a living accommodation.

B. The city manager may by written permit allow the use or occupancy of any recreational vehicle as defined in Section 10.60.020 on or in any property under the jurisdiction of the city when he finds, with input from the chief of police, that such use is necessary for the operation and protection of city property. (Ord. 1742 § 2, 2012: Ord. 1631 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 10.32
SPECIAL SPEED ZONES
Sections:

10.32.010    Increasing state speed limits in certain zones.

10.32.010 Increasing state speed limits in certain zones.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 22357 of the Vehicle Code of the state, it is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speeds permitted by state laws upon the street sections set forth in this section are less than necessary to facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic in a reasonable and safe manner, and, therefore, it is declared that, when appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof, the prima facie speed limits on said street sections shall be as follows:

Declared Name of Street or Portion Affected

Prima Facie Speed Limits

El Segundo Boulevard from Crenshaw Boulevard to Vermont Avenue

40 miles per hour

130 Street from Western Avenue to Budlong Avenue

30 miles per hour

132 Street from Western Avenue to Budlong Avenue

35 miles per hour

135 Street from Crenshaw Boulevard to Vermont Avenue

40 miles per hour

139 Street from Van Ness Avenue to Western Avenue

35 miles per hour

139 Street from Western Avenue to Budlong Avenue

35 miles per hour

Rosecrans Avenue from Hobart Boulevard to Vermont Avenue

40 miles per hour

147 Street from Crenshaw Boulevard to Van Ness Avenue

30 miles per hour

Compton Boulevard from Van Ness Avenue to Western Avenue

35 miles per hour

Compton Boulevard from Western Avenue to Vermont Avenue

30 miles per hour

Manhattan Beach Boulevard from 550 feet east of Crenshaw Boulevard to Van Ness Avenue

35 miles per hour

Redondo Beach Boulevard from 150 feet west of Ardath Avenue to Van Ness Avenue

40 miles per hour

Redondo Beach Boulevard from Van Ness Avenue to Vermont Avenue

35 miles per hour

155 Street from Normandie Avenue to Budlong Avenue

30 miles per hour

Magnolia Avenue from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue

30 miles per hour

158 Street from Western Avenue to Normandie Avenue

30 miles per hour

161 Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue

30 miles per hour

162 Street from Gramercy Place to Normandie Avenue

30 miles per hour

Gardena Boulevard from Gramercy Place to Budlong Avenue

30 miles per hour

Gardena Boulevard from Budlong Avenue to Vermont Avenue

25 miles per hour

166 Street from Gramercy Place to Berendo Avenue

30 miles per hour

170 Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue

30 miles per hour

178 Street from Western Avenue to Normandie Avenue

30 miles per hour

182 Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue

35 miles per hour

Van Ness Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard to Rosecrans Avenue

35 miles per hour

Van Ness Avenue from 147 Street to Compton Boulevard

35 miles per hour

Van Ness Avenue from Manhattan Beach Boulevard to Redondo Beach Boulevard

35 miles per hour

Western Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard to 660 feet south of 139 Street

35 miles per hour

Western Avenue from 126 feet north of 146 Street to Artesia Boulevard

35 miles per hour

Normandie Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard to Compton Boulevard

40 miles per hour

Normandie Avenue from Compton Boulevard to 177 Street

35 miles per hour

Budlong Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard to Rosecrans Avenue

35 miles per hour

Budlong Avenue from Rosecrans Avenue to Redondo Beach Boulevard

30 miles per hour

Vermont Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard to 300 feet south of Cassidy

40 miles per hour

Crenshaw Boulevard from Manhattan Beach Boulevard to Redondo Beach Boulevard

35 miles per hour

(Prior code § 3-5.1201)

Chapter 10.36
TRUCK ROUTES
Sections:

10.36.010    Definitions.

10.36.020    Application of regulations.

10.36.030    Truck traffic routes designated.

10.36.040    Truck traffic regulations.

10.36.050    Enforcement.

10.36.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Truck” means any motor driven vehicle, designed or operated for the transportation of property, having a body weight, or combined body and load weight, exceeding three tons.

“Deviating truck” means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. (Prior code § 3-5.1401)

10.36.020 Application of regulations.
All trucks operating within the city are prohibited from using any streets within the city except those designated in Section 10.36.030 and therein declared to be truck traffic routes, and to which routes trucks shall be restricted. The provisions of this title shall not prohibit:

A. Operation on Street of Destination. The operation of trucks upon any street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise, and/or materials from or to any building or structure located on such prohibited streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor, provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point;

B. Emergency Vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city;

C. Public Utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, or any contractor or material man while engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city;

D. Detoured Trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established;

E. Other Vehicles. The operation of any vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Section 50 1/4 of the Public Utilities Act of the state;

F. State Highways. The operation of trucks upon any highway in the state highway system; and

G. Alleys. The operation of trucks upon any alley within the city. (Prior code § 3-5.1402)

10.36.030 Truck traffic routes designated.
The following streets or portions of streets, and no others, shall be used for truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons:

El Segundo Boulevard. From the west city boundary to the east city boundary; excepting therefrom certain portions thereof lying outside the city;

Rosecrans Avenue. From the west city boundary to the east city boundary;

Marine Avenue. From the west city boundary to Western Avenue;

Redondo Beach Boulevard. From the west city boundary to the east city boundary;

Western Avenue. From the north city boundary to the south city boundary, excepting therefrom certain portions thereof lying outside the city;

Normandie Avenue. From the north city boundary to the south city boundary, excepting therefrom certain portions thereof lying outside the city;

Vermont Avenue. From the north city boundary to the south city boundary, excepting therefrom certain portions thereof lying outside the city. (Ord. 1608 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1568 § 2, 1999; prior code § 3-5.1403)

10.36.040 Truck traffic regulations.
A. Outside Origin.

1. One Inside Destination Point. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.

2. Multiple Inside Destination Points. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.

B. Inside Origin.

1. Outside Destination Point. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route as established by this chapter.

2. Inside Destination Points. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. (Prior code § 3-5.1404)

10.36.050 Enforcement.
A. Maps. The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic shall be permitted. The maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public.

B. Signs. The chief of police shall cause all truck routes to be clearly signposted to give notice that the provisions of this chapter are in effect, such posting to be done at the intersection of each truck route with each other truck route, without exception, and at such other street intersections with truck routes which in the police chief’s judgment appears desirable. No person violating the provisions of this chapter by reason of operating a truck upon a street wherein truck travel is prohibited shall be relieved of the charge of such violation because prohibitory signs are not posted on such street.

C. Weigh-in. The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. (Prior code § 3-5.1405)

Chapter 10.40
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES
Sections:

10.40.010    Driving through funeral processions.

10.40.020    Driving on sidewalks, parkways, or medians.

10.40.030    Driving on new pavement.

10.40.040    Driving on or from restricted access roadways.

10.40.050    Driving over curbs.

10.40.060    Use of coasters, roller skates, and toy vehicles.

10.40.070    Clinging to moving vehicles.

10.40.010 Driving through funeral processions.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such processions are conspicuously so designated. (Prior code § 3-5.801)

10.40.020 Driving on sidewalks, parkways, or medians.
No person shall drive any vehicle upon any sidewalk, parkway, or median, except at a driveway or opening established by public authorities for the use of vehicles. (Prior code § 3-5.803)

10.40.030 Driving on new pavement.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across any newly-made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking or when a sign is in place stating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed. (Prior code § 3-5.804)

10.40.040 Driving on or from restricted access roadways.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (Prior code § 3-5.805)

10.40.050 Driving over curbs.
No person shall drive any vehicle over any curb or berm, except at a driveway established by public authorities for the use of vehicles. (Prior code § 3-5.806)

10.40.060 Use of coasters, roller skates, and toy vehicles.
No person mounted upon roller skates or riding in, on, or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway or upon the sidewalks or public areas in any business district nor within the Civic Center complex at 1700 West 162nd Street, Gardena, California. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 1999: prior code § 3-1.12)

10.40.070 Clinging to moving vehicles.
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates, or toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (Prior code § 3-5.802)

Chapter 10.44
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Sections:

10.44.010    Findings and determinations.

10.44.020    Definitions.

10.44.030    Exceptions.

10.44.040    Effect on other laws.

10.44.050    Administration and enforcement.

10.44.060    Right of entry of certain persons.

10.44.070    Administrative costs.

10.44.080    Notices of intention to abate.

10.44.090    Hearings – Requests.

10.44.100    Hearings – Determinations.

10.44.110    Decision final.

10.44.120    Removal.

10.44.130    Removal – Notices.

10.44.140    Assessment of costs.

10.44.150    Violation – Penalty.

    Prior ordinance history: Ord. 826.

10.44.010 Findings and determinations.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state pursuant to the provisions of Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code of the state to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the council makes the following findings and declarations:

The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-13.01)

10.44.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes “street.”

“Public property” does not include “highway.”

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Prior code § 4-13.02)

10.44.030 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A. A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

B. A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the state and this chapter. (Prior code § 4-13.03)

10.44.040 Effect on other laws.
The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the city. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Prior code § 4-13.04)

10.44.050 Administration and enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, such officer and his deputies, representatives, and/or agents may enter upon private property or examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-13.05)

10.44.060 Right of entry of certain persons.
When the council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-13.06)

10.44.070 Administrative costs.
The council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle, or part thereof) for the purposes of administering the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4-13.07)

10.44.080 Notices of intention to abate.
Whenever it is determined that an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, is being maintained in violation of this chapter, a ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance shall be issued. Such notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing before the traffic committee or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. (Prior code § 4-13.08)

10.44.090 Hearings – Requests.
If the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located desires a hearing, he shall make a request to the traffic committee within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such time period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If such a request is not received within such period, the police department shall have the authority to remove the vehicle. (Prior code § 4-13.09)

10.44.100 Hearings – Determinations.
A. All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be held before the traffic committee which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on private property or public property. The traffic committee shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing, or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.

B. The traffic committee may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. It may delay the time for the removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if, in its opinion, the circumstances so justify. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the traffic committee may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property, order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle, or part thereof, is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

C. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the traffic committee shall not assess the costs of administration for the removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner.

D. If an interested person makes a written presentation to the traffic committee but does not appear, such interested person shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Prior code § 4-13.10)

10.44.110 Decision final.
The decision of the traffic committee by a majority of the members present at the time of the hearing shall be final. (Prior code § 4-13.11)

10.44.120 Removal.
If no request for a hearing is received within the period required in Section 10.44.090 and if the traffic committee authorizes removal following a hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section 10.44.100, the vehicle, or parts thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies or either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code of the state, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Prior code § 4-13.12)

10.44.130 Removal – Notices.
Within five days after the date of the removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to said Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. (Prior code § 4-13.13)

10.44.140 Assessment of costs.
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provision of Section 10.44.100 are not paid within thirty days after the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Prior code § 4-13.14)

10.44.150 Violation – Penalty.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state laws where such state laws are applicable. (Prior code § 4-13.15)

Chapter 10.48
BICYCLES
Sections:

10.48.010    –

10.48.090    Repealed by Ord. 1726.

10.48.100    Riding on sidewalks and roadways.

10.48.110    Riding on handlebars.

10.48.100 Riding on sidewalks and roadways.
No person shall ride, park, or leave a bicycle upon any sidewalk at any time in a business district. No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk outside a business district except when, because of the very nature of the conditions on the roadway, it would be hazardous to ride in the roadway, at which time it would be permissible for a bicycle to be ridden on the sidewalk providing such would not endanger or hinder the movement of pedestrians thereon. (Ord. 1748 § 1, 2013: prior code § 3-1.10)

10.48.110 Riding on handlebars.
When upon the street, no operator of any bicycle shall carry any other person upon the handlebar or tank of any such vehicle, and no person shall so ride upon any such vehicle. (Prior code § 3-1.11)

Chapter 10.52
CITY RELATED TOWING SERVICES
Sections:

10.52.010    Definitions.

10.52.020    Franchise required.

10.52.030    Franchise fee required.

10.52.040    Revocation and suspension of franchise.

10.52.050    Records/reporting requirements.

10.52.060    Uniforms/identification.

10.52.070    Business license required/decal to be displayed.

10.52.080    Administrative fees.

10.52.090    Prohibition against gifts.

10.52.100    Violations – Misdemeanors.

10.52.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended.

“Chief” shall mean the chief of police or his designee.

“Franchise” shall mean the right and privilege to perform towing services for the city of Gardena.

“Franchisee” shall mean the person or persons granted a franchise to perform towing services for the city.

“Operator” shall mean any person providing towing services within the city.

“Person” shall mean an individual, corporation, joint venture, partnership, or any other entity or enterprise.

“Towing services” shall include the towing, storage and impound of vehicles, as well as ancillary services such as jump-starts, lock-outs, and tire changes. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

10.52.020 Franchise required.
A. No person shall perform towing services for the city unless such person has obtained a franchise from the city of Gardena, except as specified in this chapter.

B. The city council may award one or more franchises for towing services on such terms and conditions as the city council may establish in its sole discretion. If more than one franchise is awarded, services shall rotate among the various franchisees on an equal basis, to be established by the franchise agreement.

C. A franchise shall not be required for:

1. Operators performing towing services for other than the city of Gardena;

2. Operators performing towing services at the direction of the city when no franchisee is available or able to perform such services or cannot provide such services in a timely manner; or

3. An officer or employee of the city in the course of official duty.

D. A franchisee shall not transfer, sell, sublet or assign the franchise, nor shall any of the rights or privileges therein be leased, assigned, sold in whole or in part, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, either by act of franchisee or otherwise, unless written authorization for such transfer, sale, subletting or assignment is obtained from the city council. For purposes of this section, an acquisition by any person, group, partnership or other entity of at least ten percent of the operator shall be considered a sale, transfer or assignment. Any such transfer, sale, sublease or assignment shall immediately void the franchise agreement. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

10.52.030 Franchise fee required.
Each franchisee shall be required to pay a franchise fee to the city. Such fee shall be in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement. Payments shall be made according to the schedule set forth in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997; Ord. 1611 § 1, 2001)

10.52.040 Revocation and suspension of franchise.
A. Should the chief determine that there is sufficient reason to authorize the suspension or revocation of a franchise, the chief shall issue a written order to the franchisee clearly stating the reasons for such suspension or revocation. Nonpayment of any franchise fee in full, with applicable late charges, within thirty days of its due date, shall be considered sufficient to suspend or revoke the franchise.

1. Unless the franchise supplies proof of correction to the chief within the time specified in the written order, the franchise may be revoked or suspended upon the date specified in the order.

2. The franchisee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the chief to the city council by means of a written request made within ten calendar days of the date of the order. The appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee. Failure to make a timely appeal shall render the chief’s decision final and conclusive. The filing of an appeal stays the order of the chief, unless subsection B of this section applies.

3. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing date which is no less than seven calendar and no more than thirty calendar days from the date of the appeal. The city clerk shall give not less than five calendar days written notice to franchisee and any other person requesting notification, of the time and place of such hearing.

4. At the hearing, the city council shall review the records and files of the chief relating to the decision. In addition, the city council shall permit any interested person, including the chief and the franchisee, to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the suspension or revocation. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall observe the substance of the rules of evidence applicable in judicial proceedings in this state. However, the city council shall accept in evidence all reasonably reliable evidentiary material.

5. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the city council shall determine whether the decision of the chief should be affirmed, modified or reversed.

6. The decision of the city council shall be communicated in writing to the franchisee and any other person requesting notification of the hearing within five working days after the decision is rendered and shall state the reasons for the decision. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. The written decision shall set forth that an action may be filed with the superior court of the state pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure within ninety days following the city council’s notice pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

B. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the city from immediately suspending or terminating the franchise when conduct is deemed, at the discretion of the chief, to be a danger to the motoring public or to constitute a gross violation of the franchise agreement.

C. All notices and orders required by this section shall be in writing and shall be either personally served or sent by certified or registered mail. (Ord. 1553 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

10.52.050 Records/reporting requirements.
A. Each franchisee shall maintain all records relating to providing towing services for the city, for a period of at least three (3) years, including, but not limited to:

1. Vehicle impound report (CHP 180), made available by the city of Gardena;

2. Copies of registered letters to vehicle owners;

3. Charge sheets which list tow, labor and storage rate charges against each individual vehicle, and administrative fees collected on behalf of the city. Charge sheets must contain the vehicle owner’s or owner’s legal representative’s signature, be of a design approved by the Gardena Police Department and be available for periodic data collection;

4. Inventory list of personal property in vehicle impounded and stored;

5. Records of vehicles sold under authority of Civil Code Section 3074; and

6. Records of vehicles sold under authority of Civil Code Section 3072.

B. Each franchisee shall provide reports to the chief on or before the 5th calendar day of each month for the previous month’s activities. The reports shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Total number of calls;

2. Location of calls;

3. Total number of vehicles impounded or stored;

4. License number, make and model of vehicle;

5. Date of release;

6. Person or firm to whom released;

7. Charges imposed and proceeds received; and

8. Total number of vehicles disposed of via lien sale from any car impounded or stored by authority of the city of Gardena to include total price and net price the franchisee receives for each vehicle disposed of by lien sale.

C. All required reports and records shall be furnished at the sole expense of the franchisee. Franchisee shall submit all reports and information required on computer disks, or by modem, in a former compatible with city’s computers, at no additional charge, if requested by city.

D. All reports provided pursuant to this chapter, or by a franchise agreement, shall be signed under penalty of perjury, by a responsible official of the franchisee that the report is true and correct.

E. All monthly reports shall be accompanied by the franchise fee payment amount established by the franchise agreement.

F. Failure to submit the monthly reports or franchise fee as specified herein shall be grounds for termination of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997; Ord. 1611 § 2, 2001)

10.52.060 Uniforms/identification.
All tow truck drivers of a franchisee must wear a distinctive uniform identifying franchisee by inscription on the uniform; the inscription shall include individual name identification of the tow truck operator. Additionally, each tow truck operator shall at all times while acting within the scope of his employment have in his possession an identification badge in a form prescribed by the chief. Such badge shall bear the name, identification number and photograph of the employee. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

10.52.070 Business license required/decal to be displayed.
Each operator must obtain and maintain a current city business license and must display a current city-issued decal on each vehicle used in towing services operations. However, no business license fee shall be required to be paid by a franchisee in obtaining a business license. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

10.52.080 Administrative fees.
Each registered owner or his agent whose car is impounded or stored by the city of Gardena shall pay an administrative fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council, in addition to any service fees imposed by the operator. No vehicle shall be released without a valid release form from the city. Fees shall be collected by the Towing Franchisee as agent for the city.

A. The administrative fee shall only be imposed on the registered owner or the agents of that owner in accordance with Vehicle Code section 22850.5.

B. No administrative fees shall be charged for vehicles which have been stolen and recovered by the Gardena Police Department and stored solely for such reason.

C. No administrative fee shall be charged on a vehicle which was improperly impounded or stored. (Ord. 1611 § 3, 2001; Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

10.52.090 Prohibition against gifts.
No franchisee shall give to an employee of the city, and no employee of the city shall receive from a franchisee, any gift or any item of value, including the performance of services or the provision of products, vehicles or parts at a rate not available to the public at large. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

10.52.100 Violations – Misdemeanors.
Violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor. Each day for which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for purposes of enforcement. (Ord. 1518 § 1 (part), 1997)

Chapter 10.56
VEHICULAR CRUISING
Sections:

10.56.010    Purpose.

10.56.020    Vehicular “cruising” defined.

10.56.030    Vehicular cruising prohibition/exceptions.

10.56.040    Vehicular cruising – Traffic control point.

10.56.050    Vehicular cruising – Written notice.

10.56.060    Vehicular cruising – Penalty.

10.56.070    Regulations of removal or impoundment of vehicles.

10.56.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the activity of vehicular “cruising,” as defined by Section 10.56.020, in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare. The City Council finds that there has been an increase in cruising activity, which results in extreme traffic congestion, an increased level of crime, and depletion of police services to the community. Such consequences serve as the basis for establishing this chapter. (Ord. 1692 § 1, 4-26-07)

10.56.020 Vehicular “cruising” defined.
Vehicular cruising is defined as operating or occupying a vehicle, as defined by California Vehicle Code section 670, that is driven past a traffic control point, as defined in section 10.56.040, two (2) or more times within a four (4) hour period. (Ord. 1692 § 1, 4-26-07)

10.56.030 Vehicular cruising prohibition/exceptions.
A. No person shall operate or occupy a vehicle that is driven past a traffic control point, established pursuant to Section 10.56.040, after the vehicle operator or any passenger in the vehicle has received written notice pursuant to Section 10.56.050 that driving past the traffic control check point on subsequent occasions will constitute a violation of this section. Each successive trip past the traffic control point following the provision of written notice shall constitute a separate violation of this section. No additional written notice shall be required for each such separate violation.

B. This section shall not apply to the driver, operators or passengers of the following vehicles:

1. Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code.

2. Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, district, state, or federal agency.

3. Any vehicle licensed for public transportation or vehicles which are normally used for business purposes and are engaged in such business use.

4. Any vehicle owned, operated, or occupied by persons residing within the area designated pursuant to Section 10.56.040.

C. No person is in violation of this section unless:

1. That person has been given the written notice pursuant to Section 10.56.050 on a previous driving trip past the traffic control point and passes the traffic control point within the prohibited time frame again; and

2. The beginning and end of the portion of the street subject to vehicular cruising controls are clearly identified by signs that reference the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1692 § 1, 4-26-07)

10.56.040 Vehicular cruising – Traffic control point.
The ranking peace officer on duty within an area affected by traffic congestion, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to establish one or more traffic control points at or near the area of the traffic congestion for the purpose of regulating vehicular cruising. The provisions of this chapter shall not be enforced until the City Traffic Engineer, or the ranking peace officer on duty, or his/her designee shall designate an area to be subject to vehicular cruising controls by causing “No Cruising” signs to be placed at the beginning and end of the area affected by traffic congestion. Such signs shall clearly reference Section 10.56.030 of the Gardena Municipal Code and California Vehicle Code section 21100(k). (Ord. 1692 § 1, 4-26-07)

10.56.050 Vehicular cruising – Written notice.
Any person, who as the operator or passenger of a vehicle that is driven past a traffic control point established pursuant to Section 10.56.040 at least two (2) times within a four (4) hour period, may be given written notice that driving past the traffic control point on subsequent occasions will constitute a violation of Section 10.56.030 of the Gardena Municipal Code. (Ord. 1692 § 1, 4-26-07)

10.56.060 Vehicular cruising – Penalty.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Gardena Municipal Code, a violation of the provisions of Section 10.56.030 herein shall constitute either an infraction or a misdemeanor, in the discretion of the citing officer or City Attorney. (Ord. 1692 § 1, 4-26-07)

10.56.070 Regulations of removal or impoundment of vehicles.
A. Pursuant to Section 22655.5 of the California Vehicle Code, a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code, may remove a vehicle from the highway or from public or private property within the city, if the peace officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle was being operated or occupied for the purpose of cruising as prohibited by this chapter, and one or more of the following criteria are met:

1. There is no other properly licensed driver who, with the permission of the vehicle’s operator or registered owner, is capable of lawfully driving the vehicle to another location;

2. It is necessary to impound the vehicle to prevent immediate and continued unlawful operation of the vehicle;

3. Leaving the vehicle parked at its current location would pose a reasonable risk of theft or vandalism;

4. Leaving the vehicle parked at its current location would pose a hazard or impediment to other traffic, the public or is otherwise illegal;

5. The vehicle has been reported stolen or contains evidence that cannot readily be removed and which tends to show that a crime has been committed;

6. The arrestee or registered owner of the vehicle, whose identification is capable of verification, consents to removal of the vehicle; or

7. Pursuant to a warrant for search or seizure of the vehicle.

B. When a vehicle has been removed and stored pursuant to Section 10.56.070(A), the police chief or his/her designee, shall provide the vehicle’s registered and legal owners, as reflected on the most current California Department of Motor Vehicle’s registration records, or their agents, with the opportunity for a post-storage hearing in compliance with California Vehicle Code section 22852. (Ord. 1692 § 1, 4-26-07)

Chapter 10.60
REGULATION OF THE PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Sections:

10.60.010    Purpose.

10.60.020    Definitions.

10.60.030    Parking prohibited – Exceptions.

10.60.040    Recreational vehicle parking permits.

10.60.050    Duration and limits.

10.60.060    Application.

10.60.070    Issuance.

10.60.080    RV permit – Display.

10.60.090    Notice.

10.60.100    Prohibited activities.

10.60.110    Violations.

10.60.120    Revocation.

10.60.010 Purpose.
The regulations enacted by this chapter are intended to ensure there is adequate parking for residents of the city and to regulate the parking of vehicles actively used as sleeping accommodations. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.020 Definitions.
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:

“Out-of-town visitor” means any natural person who does not reside in the city and who is temporarily visiting a resident of the city.

“Recreational vehicle” means a motorhome, travel trailer, truck camper, camping trailer, or other vehicle or trailer, with or without motive power, designed or altered for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other human occupancy. “Recreational vehicle” specifically includes, but is not limited to: a “recreational vehicle” as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 18010; a “truck camper” as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18013.4; a “camp trailer” as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 242; a “camper” as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 243; a “fifth-wheel travel trailer” as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 324; a “house car” as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362; a “trailer coach” as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 635; a van camper; or a van conversion.

“RV guest permit” means a limited duration parking permit for a recreational vehicle belonging to an out-of-town visitor issued by the chief of police or his designee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

“RV permit” means a two-year parking permit for a recreational vehicle belonging to a resident of the city issued by the chief of police or his designee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.030 Parking prohibited – Exceptions.
A. It is unlawful for a person to park or leave standing any recreational vehicle on any public street, park, square, avenue, alley or public way in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

B. Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section do not apply to:

1. Recreational vehicles for which a RV permit has been issued and such permit is displayed and is valid;

2. Recreational vehicles for which a RV guest permit has been issued and such permit is displayed and is valid; or

3. Recreational vehicles parked or left standing as a result of a mechanical breakdown so as to allow the performance of emergency repairs on the vehicle for a period not to exceed forty-eight hours. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.040 Recreational vehicle parking permits.
A. The chief of police, or his designee, has the authority to issue RV permits and RV guest permits and to revoke such permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Persons holding a valid RV permit or RV guest permit issued pursuant to this chapter may park the recreational vehicle for which the permit was issued on a street in a residential area during the restricted hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., provided the recreational vehicle is parked along the curb line within the same block as the residence listed in the application for which the permit is issued and the permit is valid. If the residence is located on a corner, then the permit holder may park along the curb line of either of the streets on the block on which the residence is located.

C. Except as expressly provided in this chapter, a RV permit or a RV guest permit does not authorize any vehicle to park in a location or manner that is otherwise prohibited by this code or by the California Vehicle Code.

D. A RV permit or a RV guest permit does not guarantee the availability of parking at any time. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.050 Duration and limits.
A. RV permits will be valid for two years. The permittee may apply for additional RV permits without any limitation on the number of successive permits which may be issued provided all of the conditions set forth in this chapter continue to be met. No more than one RV permit shall be issued for each residential address in the city; this does not include a RV guest permit.

B. RV guest permits will be issued for a period not to exceed two weeks. Applicants may request an additional one-week extension. No RV guest permit will be issued for a residential address for more than sixty total calendar days in any consecutive twelve-month period, regardless of the number of out-of-town visitors during that period of time. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.060 Application.
A. Every resident desiring a RV permit for his own recreational vehicle or recreational vehicle under his possession and control shall file an application with the Gardena police department containing the following information:

1. The name, residential address and phone number of the resident applying for the permit along with proof of residency satisfactory to the chief of police such as a current driver’s license or identification card, property tax bill, or public utility bill;

2. The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner of the recreational vehicle for which a permit is sought along with a copy of the vehicle registration from the California Department of Motor Vehicles or equivalent agency from another state. If the resident applying for the RV permit is not the registered owner, a letter of authorization of the registered owner shall be included;

3. The license number, year, make and model of the recreational vehicle and its dimensions as to width, height, and length;

4. Such additional information the chief of police, or his designee, may reasonably require.

B. An application for a RV guest permit may be filed by the resident or the out-of-town visitor. The application shall include the following:

1. The name, residential address and phone number of the resident that the out-of-town visitor will be visiting;

2. The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner of the recreational vehicle for which a permit is sought along with a copy of the vehicle registration from the California Department of Motor Vehicles or equivalent agency from another state. If the resident applying for the RV permit is not the registered owner, a letter of authorization of the registered owner shall be included;

3. The license number, year, make and model of the recreational vehicle and its dimensions as to width, height, and length;

4. The dates for which the permit is desired; and

5. Such additional information the chief of police, or his designee, may reasonably require.

C. There shall be no fee for issuance of a RV permit or RV guest permit. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.070 Issuance.
A. The chief of police or his designee shall issue a RV permit unless one of the following findings is made:

1. The applicant is not a city resident;

2. The resident is not the registered owner of the recreational vehicle or does not have authorization to use such vehicle;

3. A RV permit has already been issued for a resident at the listed address;

4. There are public safety concerns relating to the parking of the recreational vehicle on the street on which the parking would be provided, including but not limited to a street being too narrow to safely accommodate the recreational vehicle;

5. The street on which parking would be provided prohibits parking of all vehicles; or

6. The applicant provided information that was materially false.

B. The chief of police or his designee shall issue a RV guest permit unless one of the following findings is made:

1. The out-of-town visitor is not the registered owner of the recreational vehicle or does not have authorization to use such vehicle;

2. There are public safety concerns relating to the parking of the recreational vehicle on the street on which the parking would be provided, including but not limited to a street being too narrow to safely accommodate the recreational vehicle;

3. The street on which parking would be provided prohibits parking of all vehicles;

4. The applicant provided information that was materially false;

5. The out-of-town visitor is not visiting the resident listed in the application;

6. The address associated with the resident that the out-of-town visitor is visiting has already exceeded the number of days allowed for a RV permit for guests in the previous twelve months; or

7. The resident that is being visited has unpaid parking citations issued by the city of Gardena. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.080 RV permit – Display.
A. All RV permits and RV guest permits shall include the license plate number of the designated recreational vehicle, the date of issuance, the date of expiration, and the permit number.

B. All RV permits shall be conspicuously displayed in the lower driver’s side of the windshield or nearest window so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of the vehicle so that all information is visible in order to avoid a parking ticket. The possession of a valid, unexpired permit that was not properly displayed shall not be considered a defense to a citation for an illegally parked recreational vehicle.

C. Any person who displays a counterfeit, forged, altered, or fraudulent RV permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.090 Notice.
Signs giving reasonable notice of the prohibitions contained in this chapter will be erected within the city as required by the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.100 Prohibited activities.
Regardless of whether a person has a RV permit, no person shall:

A. Run electrical cords, extension cords, hoses, cables, or other items across, above, or on the parkway or sidewalk from any property to a recreational vehicle parked on a public street at any time;

B. Make a sewer connection with a recreational vehicle or dump wastes from a recreational vehicle onto public or private land other than a designated RV dump. Violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor; or

C. Use of such recreational vehicle for human habitation in violation of Section 10.28.490. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.110 Violations.
Unless otherwise specified, all violations of this chapter shall be an infraction and such persons shall be subject to citation, towing or both. Parking citations may be appealed under California Vehicle Code Section 40215 et seq. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

10.60.120 Revocation.
A. The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a RV permit or RV guest permit in the following circumstances:

1. A ground exists which would have justified denial of the permit in the first instance;

2. The recreational vehicle has fallen into a state of disrepair and has become a public nuisance;

3. The recreational vehicle has created a disturbance in the neighborhood due to the manner in which it has been used;

4. The recreational vehicle has become inoperable;

5. There have been at least two parking citations issued for the recreational vehicle associated with the permit;

6. There has been a violation of Section 10.60.100A;

7. There has been evidence that the recreational vehicle is being used for habitation.

B. The chief of police shall issue a notice of revocation in writing to the permittee specifying the effective date of the revocation, which date shall be at least two days after the date of service. Mailed notice shall be deemed served three days after deposit in the United States mail.

C. The permittee shall have the right to appeal the notice of revocation in accordance with the procedures of Chapter 1.12, except that the appeal shall be to the city manager with no right of review to the city council. (Ord. 1742 § 1 (part), 2012)

Title 11
PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES
Chapters:

11.04    Public Parks

11.08    Municipal Recreation and Parks Facilities Fees

11.12    Primm Memorial Swimming Pool Fees

11.16    Recreation Program Fees

11.20    Skate Park Facilities

Chapter 11.04
PUBLIC PARKS
Sections:

11.04.010    Definitions.

11.04.020    Permit required for certain activities.

11.04.030    Park hours.

11.04.040    Permit issuance.

11.04.050    Permit refusal – Appeals.

11.04.060    Exhibition of permit.

11.04.070    Interference with permittees.

11.04.080    Effect of permit.

11.04.090    Liability of permittee.

11.04.100    Permit revocation.

11.04.110    Care of buildings and grounds.

11.04.120    Care of trees, shrubbery and lawns.

11.04.130    Sanitation.

11.04.140    Traffic.

11.04.150    Bicycles.

11.04.160    Hunting and shooting firearms.

11.04.170    Use of picnic areas.

11.04.180    Camping.

11.04.190    Games.

11.04.200    Horseback riding.

11.04.220    Soliciting contributions.

11.04.230    Games of chance.

11.04.240    Loitering and disorderly conduct.

11.04.250    Fireworks and explosives.

11.04.260    Animals.

11.04.270    Peddling and vending.

11.04.280    Advertising.

11.04.290    Signs.

11.04.300    Lost and found articles.

11.04.310    Reservation of facilities.

11.04.320    Fires.

11.04.330    Closed areas.

11.04.340    Park hours.

11.04.350    Authority of officials.

11.04.360    Enforcement of provisions.

11.04.370    Drug free zones.

11.04.380    Smoking prohibited in and around parks.

11.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:

“Director” means the director of the department of recreation and human services.

“Park” means a place, park, structure, area or other facility under the jurisdiction of the city used for community recreation (whether or not the same may be used also for other purposes), playgrounds, playing fields, courts, swimming pools, gymnasiums, auditoriums, rooms for arts and crafts and meeting places.

“Vehicle” means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled and shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind, or description, except for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city parks. (Ord. 1547 § 2 (part), 1998; prior code § 11-2.01)

11.04.020 Permit required for certain activities.
A permit shall be obtained from the director before participating any activity which causes, or may cause, special handling, consideration, or variation from the “first come, first served” basis such as the following:

A. Group picnics;

B. Group activities requiring specific areas, time, and/or equipment;

C. Athletic games, contests or tournament sessions;

D. The use of buildings, tables or chairs;

E. The use of special equipment or demonstrations not normally used in park or athletic areas;

F. Dances, shows or exhibitions; and

G. Any activity for which an admission fee is charged or a donation is received. (Prior code § 11-2.02)

11.04.030 Park hours.
Gardena parks shall be closed to the public every day of the year between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be a misdemeanor to be in the park during these hours. This information shall be posted throughout each park and at each park entrance in typeface not less than two inches in height. This section shall not apply to an individual who is in the park during prohibited hours for an event or activity which is sponsored by the City or an event or activity for which a permit has been issued by the City. (Ord. 1613 § 1, 2001)

11.04.040 Permit issuance.
The director shall issue a permit when he finds:

A. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;

B. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety and recreation;

C. That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;

D. That the proposed activity or use will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city;

E. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application; and

F. That if the proposed activity and use requested is for sports league or tournament play, that the permittee provide proof of liability insurance which names the city, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers as “additionally insured” in form and amount approved by the city council. (Ord. 1547 § 4, 1998; prior code § 11-2.04)

11.04.050 Permit refusal – Appeals.
Within five calendar days after receipt of an application the director shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing to the recreation and parks commission and if the recreation and parks commission refuses to issue such permit, shall have the right to appeal in writing to the city council. Both the recreation and parks commission and the city council shall consider the application under the standards set forth in Section 11.04.040 and sustain or overrule the director’s decision at its earliest meeting date. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1547 § 5, 1998: prior code § 11-2.05)

11.04.060 Exhibition of permit.
No person shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit issued by the director which such person claims to have upon the request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any law, rule or regulation of the city. (Prior code § 11-2.06)

11.04.070 Interference with permittees.
No person shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. (Prior code § 11-2.07)

11.04.080 Effect of permit.
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable laws as fully as if the same were inserted in the permit. (Prior code § 11-2.08)

11.04.090 Liability of permittee.
The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued. (Prior code § 11-2.09)

11.04.100 Permit revocation.
The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of the violation of any rule or law or upon good cause shown. (Prior code § 11-2.10)

11.04.110 Care of buildings and grounds.
No person shall:

A. Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving, paving material, water line or other public utility or parts or appurtenances, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other boundary marker, or any other structure, equipment, facility or park property, either real or personal;

B. Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, soil, rock, stone, tree, shrub, or plant or down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tools, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency;

C. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such land except on special written permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 11.04.040; or

D. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.

E. Children under the age of ten may use the restroom of the opposite sex when accompanied by a parent or guardian of that sex and when necessary, physically handicapped individuals may use the restroom of the opposite sex when accompanied by an attendant, parent or guardian of that sex. (Ord. 1726 § 14, 2011; prior code § 11-2.11)

11.04.120 Care of trees, shrubbery and lawns.
A. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, attach any rope, wire or contrivance to any tree or plant, or dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area;

B. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or gun carriages or upon any property not designated or customarily used for such purpose; or

C. Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any rock, tree or plant. (Prior code § 11-2.12)

11.04.130 Sanitation.
No person shall:

A. Throw, discharge or place, or cause to be placed, in the water of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters; or

B. Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash.

No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or be left anywhere on the grounds but shall be placed in the proper receptacles provided; provided, however, where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. (Prior code § 11-2.13)

11.04.140 Traffic.
No person shall:

A. Fail to comply with all the applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws and city laws, rules and regulations relating to equipment and the operation of vehicles or fail to comply with such regulations as contained in this chapter;

B. Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the park in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the director;

C. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all other signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property;

D. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding eight miles per hour except upon such roads as the director may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel;

E. Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director;

F. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present; provided however, there shall be no parking in any area between the hours of midnight and sunrise without the approved written authorization from the director or the chief of police; or

G. Leave any vehicle anywhere in the park with one or more wheels chained or with the motor set in gears locked or in any manner fixed or arranged so that such vehicle cannot readily be moved by hand. (Ord. 1547 §§ 6, 7, 1998; prior code § 11-2.14)

11.04.150 Bicycles.
No person shall:

A. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose; provided, however, a bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use;

B. Ride a bicycle other than on the right hand side of the road paving as close as conditions permit;

C. Fail to keep bicycles in single file when two or more are operating as a group;

D. Fail to operate his bicycle with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal at all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle he is overtaking, or pass to the right of any vehicle he may be meeting;

E. Ride any other person on a bicycle;

F. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available;

G. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by it. (Ord. 1470 § 9, 1993; prior code § 11-2.15)

11.04.160 Hunting and shooting firearms.
No person shall:

A. Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time;

B. Use, carry or possess firearms of any description, air rifles, spring-guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument which can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device; or

C. Shoot into park areas from beyond park boundaries. (Prior code § 11-2.16)

11.04.170 Use of picnic areas.
No person shall:

A. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose; provided, however, attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all and visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end;

B. Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces, together with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of “first come, first served”;

C. Use any portion of the picnic areas or any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, or use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded; or

D. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. (Prior code § 11-2.17)

11.04.180 Camping.
No person shall:

A. Camp in other than permanent cabins for organized camping provided by the director and used by groups of persons under adequate supervision; or

B. Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping or leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the like, without the approved written authorization from the director. (Ord. 1547 § 8, 1998; prior code § 11-2.18)

11.04.190 Games.
A. No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown, or otherwise propelled, objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation.

B. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball, and quoits shall be prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor.

C. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such pastime. (Prior code § 11-2.19)

11.04.200 Horseback riding.
No person shall ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Where horseback riding is permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly restrained, ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended. (Prior code § 11-2.20)

11.04.220 Soliciting contributions.
No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private. (Prior code § 11-2.22)

11.04.230 Games of chance.
No person shall gamble, participate in or abet any game of chance. (Prior code § 11-2.23)

11.04.240 Loitering and disorderly conduct.
No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or other areas, engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace. (Prior code § 11-2.24)

11.04.250 Fireworks and explosives.
A. No person shall bring, have in his possession, set off, or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives, or flammable materials, or discharge or throw them into any park area from land or a highway adjacent thereto.

B. The explosives prohibited by the provisions of this section shall include any substance, compound, mixture or article which, in conjunction with any other substance or compound, would be dangerous; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any organized group activity, approval to which has been granted by the council. (Ord. 1738 § 62, 2012: Ord. 1726 § 15, 2011; prior code § 11-2.25)

11.04.260 Animals.
Any owner or possessor of, or any person having under his custody and/or control, a dog or other animal shall not allow the entry of such dog or other animal into any area on park premises other than into an automobile parking lot, and in such instances while the animal is in a parking lot, he shall be retained safely secured within an automobile.

Any exception to this provision shall be approved in writing by the director of recreation and human services. (Ord. 1547 § 1, 1998; prior code § 11-2.26)

11.04.270 Peddling and vending.
No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing or station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any such article or thing; provided, however, an exception to this provision shall be made for any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the director. (Prior code § 11-2.27)

11.04.280 Advertising.
No person shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire; provided, however, an exception to this provision shall be made for regularly scheduled recreation and parks department activities or such community service activities as are authorized by the council and regulated by the director. (Prior code § 11-2.28)

11.04.290 Signs.
No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, or erect, or cause to be erected, any sign whatever on any public lands, highways, or roads adjacent to a park. (Prior code § 11-2.29)

11.04.300 Lost and found articles.
The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the director who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners and the director shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost. (Prior code § 11-2.30)

11.04.310 Reservation of facilities.
No person shall occupy any seat or bench or enter into, loiter, or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which has been reserved for use by another. (Ord. 1726 § 16, 2011: prior code § 11-2.31)

11.04.320 Fires.
No person shall build, or attempt to build, a fire, except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director, or drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. (Prior code § 11-2.32)

11.04.330 Closed areas.
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses as the director shall find reasonably necessary.

No person shall enter an area posted “Closed to the Public” or use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. (Prior code § 11-2.33)

11.04.340 Park hours.
Gardena parks shall be closed to the public every day of the year between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be a misdemeanor to be in the park during these hours. This information shall be posted throughout each park and at each park entrance in typeface not less than two inches in height. This section shall not apply to an individual who is in the park during prohibited hours for an event or activity which is sponsored by the City or an event or activity for which a permit has been issued by the City. (Ord. 1613 § 1, 2001; prior code § 11-2.34)

11.04.350 Authority of officials.
The director, park supervisor and appointed or designated recreation leaders shall have complete authority and control to supervise and regulate the conduct of all activities in each respective park. Such personnel shall have the right to refuse permission to anyone to enter, use or remain on the premises for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11-2.35)

11.04.360 Enforcement of provisions.
In the event any participant or visitor fails to accede to the request of the personnel referred to in Section 11.04.350, such personnel shall immediately call or contact the police department which shall take proper action to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11-2.36)

11.04.370 Drug free zones.
In order to implement the enhanced penalties for the possession for sale or sale of controlled substances effected by California Health and Safety Code Section 11380.5, the following public parks, together with the public parking lots and sidewalks adjacent to them, are designated as “drug free zones”:

Vincent Bell Memorial Park

George H. Freeman Memorial Park

Recreation Park

Paul A. Rowley Memorial Park and Gymnasium

James Rush Memorial Gymnasium

South Gardena Park

Edward L. Thornburg Memorial Park

Harvard Parkette

Ernest J. Primm Memorial Pool

Mayme Dear Memorial Library

(Ord. 1560 § 1, 1998)

11.04.380 Smoking prohibited in and around parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, as that term is defined in Section 5.52.010(G), or to throw or deposit any cigar, cigarette, or other tobacco product as defined in Section 5.52.010(I). (Ord. 1753 § 2, 2014: Ord. 1652 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 11.08
MUNICIPAL RECREATION AND PARKS FACILITIES FEES
Sections:

11.08.010    Definitions.

11.08.020    Management.

11.08.030    Permits.

11.08.040    Schedule of rates.

11.08.050    Overtime.

11.08.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Director” means the recreation director of the city.

“Park” means any park of the city and any part or facility thereof.

“Permit” means the written permission issued to an applicant by the recreation director in accordance with the provisions and regulations established by the council and any amendment or supplement to such permit.

“Permittee” means the person who has been granted a permit to use a recreation building or park, or any part or facility thereof.

“Person” means and includes, except where the context requires a different meaning, an individual, copartnership, joint venture, firm, unincorporated association, syndicate, club, society, trust and all private, political, charitable and social organizations doing business or existing under and by virtue of any law, as a corporation or otherwise.

“Recreation building” means any building or structure operated by the recreation department and any part or facility thereof. (Prior code § 8-7.101)

11.08.020 Management.
The recreation director is authorized and directed to supervise and manage the recreation buildings and parks and to issue permits for the use thereof in accordance with and subject always to the terms, conditions, regulations, limitations and restrictions established by the council. The director may authorize and direct an assistant to do and perform all or any part of his duties with respect to recreation buildings and parks, in which event however, the director shall remain responsible for the proper and efficient supervision and management of the recreation buildings and parks. (Prior code § 8-7.102)

11.08.030 Permits.
No person may use a recreation building and/or park without first having applied for and obtained a permit therefor from the director.

Permits for the use of a recreation building and/or park may be issued by the director only when a written application therefor, upon the form prescribed and provided for such purpose by the director, and duly executed by the applicant or his authorized agent, has been filed in the office of the director. Verbal applications shall be absolutely void and prohibited. (Prior code § 8-7.103)

11.08.040 Schedule of rates.
Basic Rental Rates. Any private person, group or organization who uses recreation facilities, including Primm Memorial Pool, shall pay a fee for such use in accordance with those rates established by resolution of the City Council. For purposes of this section, groups and organizations include Parallel Organizations (defined as other municipalities) as well as School and Civic Services groups. No charge shall be imposed for City sponsored or co-sponsored activities or for use by any City department, Commission or Board. (Ord. 1694 § 2 2007; Ord. 1672 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1634 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1619 § 2, 2001; Ord. 1565 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 9, 1998: prior code § 8-7.104)

11.08.050 Overtime.
For every hour, or fraction thereof, that a permittee shall occupy a recreation building, or any part or facility thereof, in excess of the time period specified in the application, an additional rental shall be charged in an amount by resolution of the city council. The payment of such additional rental shall be made prior to or at the time the scheduled period of occupancy shall have expired; otherwise city staff may shut off the lights and terminate the attraction involved. (Ord. 1547 § 10, 1998: prior code § 8-7.105)

Chapter 11.12
PRIMM MEMORIAL SWIMMING POOL FEES
Sections:

11.12.010    Fee schedule.

11.12.020    Opening and closing schedule for the Primm Memorial Swimming Pool.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 999 and 1246.

11.12.010 Fee schedule.
Each person who takes any swimming courses shall pay those fees established by the department of recreation and human services, which fees shall not exceed the actual cost of the activity, including administrative overhead costs. (Ord. 1726 § 17, 2011: Ord. 1547 § 11, 1998: prior code § 8-7.201)

11.12.020 Opening and closing schedule for the Primm Memorial Swimming Pool.
The Primm Memorial Swimming Pool shall be opened to the public as scheduled at the discretion of the director, considering weather conditions, staff availability, funding and other relevant factors. (Ord. 1547 § 12, 1998: prior code § 8-7.202)

Chapter 11.16
RECREATION PROGRAM FEES
Sections:

11.16.010    Adult sports leagues.

11.16.020    City classes, camps and other recreation programs.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 999 and 1246.

11.16.010 Adult sports leagues.
Each team in each adult sports league shall pay those fees established by the department of recreation and human services, which fees shall not exceed the actual cost to the city, including administrative overhead costs. (Ord. 1726 § 18, 2011: Ord. 1547 § 14, 1998: prior code § 8-7.301)

11.16.020 City classes, camps and other recreation programs.
Each enrollee in a city recreation class, camp or other recreation program of the city shall pay those fees established by the department of recreation and human services, which fees shall not exceed the actual cost of the activity, including administrative overhead costs. (Ord. 1726 § 19, 2011: Ord. 1547 § 15, 1998: prior code § 8-7.302)

Chapter 11.20
SKATE PARK FACILITIES
Sections:

11.20.010    Purpose.

11.20.020    Definitions.

11.20.030    Helmet, elbow pads and knee pads required.

11.20.040    Posting of signs at skate park.

11.20.050    Penalties.

11.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with Health and Safety Code Section 115800 that requires skate park operations to adopt an ordinance requiring persons riding skateboards, in-line skates, and other self-propelled wheeled apparatus at a skateboard facility to wear helmets, elbow pads and knee pads. (Ord. 1733 § 1 (part), 2012)

11.20.020 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to the provisions of this chapter:

A. “Skateboard” means a mechanism with wheels that are fastened to a platform commonly constructed to accommodate a standing person. Skateboards are normally propelled by the operator pushing off the ground with one foot, or by the force of gravity.

B. “Skates” mean any footwear device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached, including wheels that are in line and where such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion, including in-line skates, roller blades and roller skates. (Ord. 1733 § 1 (part), 2012)

11.20.030 Helmet, elbow pads and knee pads required.
It is prohibited for any person to ride skateboards, in-line skates, or other similar devices in a skate park unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. (Ord. 1733 § 1 (part), 2012)

11.20.040 Posting of signs at skate park.
Signs shall be posted at skate parks giving notice that any person riding a skateboard, in-line skates, or similar devices must wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation and prohibition of use of the facilities for one year. Signs shall also be posted setting rules for use of the skate park as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council, and violation thereof will be subject to citation. (Ord. 1733 § 1 (part), 2012)

11.20.050 Penalties.
The violation of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction for a first offense and punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation. Second and subsequent offenses within one year of the first violation may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor. A second infraction within one year of the first violation may be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, and a third or further infraction within one year of the first violation may be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars. Additionally, any person found by a preponderance of the evidence to have violated any provision of this chapter may lose his or her privilege to use the skate park facility for a time period of up to one year. (Ord. 1733 § 1 (part), 2012)

Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapters:

12.04    Newsracks

12.08    Handbills and Signs

Chapter 12.04
NEWSRACKS
Sections:

12.04.010    Purposes and intent.

12.04.020    Definitions.

12.04.030    Applicability.

12.04.040    Registration.

12.04.050    Fees.

12.04.060    Standard for installation and placement.

12.04.070    Standard for maintenance and operation.

12.04.080    Violations.

12.04.090    Appeals.

12.04.010 Purposes and intent.
The principal purpose and objective of this chapter is to provide for the administration and regulation of newsracks placed on the public rights-of-way. Newsracks are recognized as a means for public distribution and sale of periodicals and publications. As such, newsracks are frequently placed on the public rights-of-way to serve the convenience of the public. Without proper and orderly regulation, newsracks and their placement on the public rights-of-way would interfere with the health and safety of pedestrians and motorists using the rights-of-way, and adversely impact the appearance and aesthetics of the city streets. The provisions enumerated within this chapter shall apply to all newsracks placed on the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless otherwise noted:

“Custodian” means a person who has responsibility of placing, servicing or maintaining a newsrack by depositing in and/or removing material from such newsrack and/or collecting money from such newsrack.

“Director” means the director of public works of the city or his designee.

“Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals.

“Parkway” means that area between the sidewalk and the curb or the paved edge of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. “Parkway” shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity.

“Public right-of-way” means and includes a parkway, roadway, sidewalk, and street as said terms are defined in this section.

“Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, excluding driveways.

“Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

“Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.030 Applicability.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the provisions of the ordinances codified in this chapter. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any provision enacted by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be brought into compliance with such provisions within thirty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B. Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the time period set forth in subsection A of this section shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.040 Registration.
A. No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, on or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first registering each newsrack with the Director. This registration requirement shall be deemed fulfilled upon receipt of the registration fee by the Director and a registration form which must contain the following information:

1. Each applicant must provide their name, address and telephone number.

2. The exact location of each newsrack to be installed or maintained in the city by the applicant must be identified by the nearest assigned street address and submitted by each applicant.

3. An applicant must provide proof of adjudication at the time of registration if the publication is to be considered adjudicated as a newspaper of general circulation, pursuant to Title 1, Division 7, Chapter 1 of the California Government Code.

B. Every person or other entity which submits a registration application for a newsrack on a public sidewalk or parkway in the city shall file a written statement with the Director satisfactory to the city attorney whereby he, she or it agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any loss, liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use or maintenance of a newsrack within the city; and shall also file a certificate of insurance establishing that there is in force and effect an insurance policy for the applicant which will remain in force during the time such newsrack is allowed to remain in the public right-of-way, which policy shall provide public liability insurance form a company admitted to do business in California. Said written statement and the certificate of insurance shall be submitted upon the initial registration of each newsrack in accordance with this Section, and shall be updated and resubmitted to the Director, or his or her designee, on an annual basis.

C. At the time of registration and annually thereafter, the applicant shall pay to the city a registration fee for each newsrack, as established by city council to cover the cost of processing the registration and administering these regulations, and as enumerated in Section 12.04.050. Such fees are nonrefundable.

D. In the event of a change in the ownership of a newsrack or a change of publication, the new owner must immediately provide written notification to the Director informing the Director of the change and providing the name, address and phone number of the new owner(s) and/or publication.

E. From the above registration information and following the review and approval by the Director, the Director shall approve and/or designate locations. The Director shall be guided therein solely by the standards and criteria set forth in Sections 12.04.060 and 12.04.070. Such application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one location is proposed by the applicant. In any event, when denial is solely as to location, it shall be without prejudice to amend such application to state a different location or locations.

F. Once an application has been approved and a location has been assigned by the Director, each newsrack shall be entitled to remain at the assigned location as long as each newsrack is in compliance with the standards set forth in Sections 12.04.060 and 12.04.070. In the event that the owner wishes to relocate the newsrack to another location, the owner must submit a new application for the proposed location. If approved, the Director will designate the new location of the newsrack in accordance with the applicable standards set forth in Sections 12.04.040, 12.04.060 and 12.04.070.

G. Each registered newsrack placed or maintained on the streets of the city shall be identified with a label, issued by the city, listing the distributor’s name, address and telephone number affixed to the inside of the newsrack, visible from the outside, and in a place where such information may be easily seen.

H. If the applicant removes a registered newsrack from its approved location, then the applicant shall notify public works staff of its removal. Upon verification, staff shall then delete the newsrack from the registered newsrack inventory for that particular location. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.050 Fees.
The city council may adopt, by resolution, a newsrack permit fee schedule, setting forth registration fees, annual newsrack fees, abatement and storage fees, and any other fees necessary for the implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.060 Standard for installation and placement.
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:

A. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.

B. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for lawfully permitted sidewalk dining, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or restricts the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, utility access vaults, manholes, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such location, or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.

C. A registered newsrack shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on the same sidewalk or parkway opposite another newsrack.

D. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object, nor shall any newsrack be chained or attached to loose objects including but not limited to, bricks, rocks, cinder blocks, pipes or other such objects. Every newsrack shall be installed on a single pedestal or on a multiple post which shall be securely anchored to the ground.

E. No newsrack or group of attached newsracks shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred thirty-five pounds when empty.

F. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, no newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

1. Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;

2. Within fifteen feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

3. Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

4. Within five feet of any driveway, excluding the flared ends;

5. Within five feet ahead of, and twenty-five feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

6. Within six feet of any bus bench;

7. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet;

8. Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees;

9. Directly in front of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway;

10. At any location whereby the newsrack obstructs motorists’ view of regulatory or advisory traffic and parking signs or at any other location whereby the newsrack obstructs motorists’ view of pedestrians; or

11. Within fifty feet of any other newsrack containing the same publication except where there are less than eight newsracks in any approved location in which case additional/duplicate newsracks containing the same publication shall be permitted for each available space up to the maximum of eight at any one location. The Director in assigning such additional/duplicate newsrack space shall be guided solely by the criteria set forth under subsection G of this section. In the event that an owner of an individual/nonduplicate publication wants to place a newsrack at a location where there exists more than one newsrack containing the same publication, the individual/nonduplicate publication shall have priority over the duplicate newsrack of any other publication pursuant to the priority provisions of this chapter.

G. No more than eight newsracks shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of two hundred feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than sixteen newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. As used in this section, “block” shall mean one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets.

1. In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to remain, the Director shall be guided solely by the following criteria:

a. First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County, pursuant to the procedure set forth in Title 1, Division 7, Chapter 1 of the California Government Code.

b. Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County.

c. Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County.

2. As between newspapers included within any single category of priority above, the Director shall also be guided by the following criteria of priorities whenever more than eight newsracks are proposed for any one location (two-hundred-foot space) or more than sixteen newsracks are proposed for any one block:

a. First priority shall be daily publications (published five or more days per week).

b. Second priority shall be publications published two to four days per week.

c. Third priority shall be publications published one day per week.

3. In the event that there is a conflict between newspapers within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient newsrack spaces remaining to accommodate the conflicting newspapers after first filling as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria set forth above, then the Director shall assign the space or spaces at random by lot by drawing, one by one, the names of those applicants applying for the remaining spaces until the remaining number of unfilled spaces at that location has been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public at a time and date designated by the Director. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.070 Standard for maintenance and operation.
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:

A. No newsrack shall exceed forty-eight inches in height, thirty inches in width, and twenty-four inches in thickness.

B. All newsracks shall conform to the specifications established by council resolution. Specifications shall not require that newsracks be made by any particular manufacturer, but may require newsracks to be the equivalent (i.e., same configuration and dimensions) of specified models.

C. Newsracks may be permanently attached to one another; however, no more than three newsracks may be joined together in this manner. Attaching the newsracks together with chains or cables shall be prohibited. All newsracks, whether single or grouped, shall be capable of standing alone, without relying on adjacent newsracks or structures for support.

D. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodicals sold therein. Permitted locations for signs of such periodicals shall be the front and back panels below the window displays. Signs placed perpendicularly atop the newsrack are prohibited.

E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. The newsrack shall be maintained at all times in good working order, free of graffiti, graffiti-related decals, extraneous markings and rust, and faded, chipping or peeling paint. The plexiglass view windows shall be clear, not yellowed or scratched.

F. Any material which is displayed or exhibited in any newsrack in a public place shall comply with Sections 313 et seq. of the California Penal Code as currently in effect and as may be amended. (Ord. 1696 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.080 Violations.
A. Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be tagged with a “notice of violation” stating the violation, date of tagging, notice of intention to remove the newsrack if the violation is not corrected within ten days, and procedure for obtaining a preremoval hearing before the Director, if desired.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, in the case of violations of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachments of newsracks to property other than that owned by the owner of the newsrack, to fixed objects, or to each other, and upon location of newsracks, the Director or his or her designee may, as an alterative to tagging such newsrack, move, align, remove such attachment, or otherwise move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition.

C. Any newsrack which has been tagged and remains in violation of the provisions stated on the tag past the ten-day correction period, for which no hearing has been requested, shall be removed by the Director or the Director’s designee and stored in a secured location. The Director or his or her designee shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a “notice of removal” to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the newsrack, and the procedure for obtaining a postremoval hearing before the Director, if desired. Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within thirty days after such removal and upon the payment of any fees due. Upon failure of the owner to claim such newsrack and pay the reasonable charges within thirty days after the mailing of written notice of removal, such newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.60.120.

D. Any newsrack in violation of the provisions of this chapter, which violation creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, which violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning the newsrack, such newsrack may be summarily removed and stored in a secured location so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The Director or his or her designee shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the newsrack, and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director, if desired. Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to this subsection shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within thirty days after the mailing of written notice of removal and upon the payment of abatement and storage fees. Upon failure of the owner to claim such newsrack and pay the reasonable charges within thirty days after the mailing of written notice of removal, such newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.60.120.

E. In the event that the curb, sidewalk or any other improvements in place within the public right-of-way is damaged due to the installation, placement, maintenance or use of a newsrack, the Director shall notify the owner in writing of the damage and the nature and extent of repairs that will be required. If the required repairs are not made within thirty days to the satisfaction of the Director after the mailing of the notice to do so by the Director, the Director may order the repairs made and bill the owner of the newsrack for the cost therefor. If the bill is not paid within a period of sixty days, or arrangements made satisfactory to the Director, the cost of the repairs, plus the cost of collection, may be recovered by civil action in the courts, and until paid the Director, or his or her designee, may not issue to the person in default a subsequent newsrack registration. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

12.04.090 Appeals.
A. Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the Director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, within ten consecutive calendar days from the date of the notice, file a written appeal with the city manager who shall set a time and place for an informal hearing no more than ten days from the receipt of the appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by the applicable fee set in accordance with Section 12.04.050.

B. Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the city manager pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, within ten consecutive days from the date of the city manager’s determination, file a written appeal with the city clerk who shall set the matter for consideration before the city council no more than forty-five days from the receipt of the appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by the applicable fee set in accordance with Section 12.04.050.

C. At the time of the appeal, the appealing party, the Director, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as they may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D. Based upon the submission of such evidence, the review of the city’s files and inspection of the newsrack and/or the site, if appropriate the city manager, or the city council on the appeal, shall issue a written determination and order upholding, modifying, or revoking the determination from which the appeal is taken and if appropriate, specifying the time period in which corrective actions must be taken.

1. The notice of the city manager shall specifically make reference to the right to appeal to the city council within ten calendar days from the date of the notice and that absent a timely appeal, the decision of the city manager shall be final.

2. The notice of the city council shall specifically make reference that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety days from the date of the city council’s decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure 1094.6.

E. A timely appeal shall stay the order from which the appeal is being taken. (Ord. 1621 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1585 § 3 (part), 2000)

Chapter 12.08
HANDBILLS AND SIGNS
Sections:

12.08.010    Deleted.

12.08.020    Distribution of advertising.

12.08.030    Posting on private property.

12.08.040    Deleted.

12.08.050    Deleted.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 7, 882, 1160 and 1194.

12.08.010 Definitions.
Deleted. (Urg. Ord. 1637 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1638 § 1, 2003; prior code § 4-1.01)

12.08.020 Distribution of advertising.
It is unlawful for any person to cast, scatter and strew, i.e. litter, in the city to or among any other persons in, along, or upon any public street, highway, alley, park, depot or any other public place or into or upon any automobile or other vehicle or conveyance of another person or into or upon any mailbox, porch, yard or any portion of any premises within the city any handbill, poster, dodger, pamphlet or paper containing printed or typewritten matter or advertising or other notice or advertisement. It is unlawful for any matter or materials described in this section to be distributed to any residence or business where the occupant has previously expressed opposition to the distribution of such materials to those responsible for distribution or has posted a sign on the property in opposition to delivery.

The distribution of advertising shall be subject to the special permit procedures set forth in Chapter 5.04 of this code and subsection E of Section 5.08.020 of this code and the reasonable conditions of the chief of police applied pursuant to the special permit process. (Prior code § 4-1.02)

12.08.030 Posting on private property.
It is unlawful for any person to post, print, stick, tack, stamp or otherwise affix or cause the same to be done by any other person, any sign to or upon any building, wall, or part thereof, or to or upon any private property, without the consent of the owner, agent or occupant thereof. (Prior code § 4-1.03)

12.08.040 Handbills and signs on public places and objects prohibited.
Deleted. (Urg. Ord. 1637 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1638 § 1, 2003; prior code § 4-1.04)

12.08.050 English commercial signs required.
Deleted. (Urg. Ord. 1637 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1638 § 1, 2003; prior code § 4-1.10)

Title 13
PUBLIC WORKS
Chapters:

13.04    Sewer System

13.08    Industrial Wastes – Discharges to Public Sewers

13.12    Industrial Wastes – Discharges to Other Than Public Sewers

13.16    Industrial Waste Permits

13.20    Industrial Waste Treatment Plants and Facilities

13.24    Sewer Connection Charges

13.26    Sewer Use Fee

13.28    Moving Oversized Loads

13.32    Pipeline Franchises

13.36    Public Project Contracts

13.40    Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction

13.44    Street Design Requirements

13.48    Required Dedications and Improvements

13.52    Street Vacations

13.56    Encroachments

13.60    Trees, Shrubs and Plants

13.64    Underground Utility Districts

Chapter 13.04
SEWER SYSTEM
Sections:

13.04.010    Title.

13.04.020    Scope.

13.04.030    Definitions.

13.04.040    Enforcement of provisions.

13.04.050    Minimum standards.

13.04.060    Notices.

13.04.070    Time limits.

13.04.080    Identification of employees.

13.04.090    Maintenance inspections.

13.04.100    Access requirements.

13.04.110    Interference with right of entry of city engineer.

13.04.120    Maintenance of plants, interceptors and other facilities.

13.04.130    Maintenance of house laterals and house sewers.

13.04.140    Record of fees.

13.04.150    Permits exempt from fee.

13.04.160    Estimated valuations.

13.04.170    Refunds.

13.04.180    Educational duties of city engineer.

13.04.190    Joint action with other public agencies.

13.04.200    Conditions existing prior to issuance of permits.

13.04.210    Certificate of final inspection.

13.04.220    Sewer permit required.

13.04.230    Exemptions from permit.

13.04.240    Permits not transferable.

13.04.250    Sewer permit – Application.

13.04.260    Tapping public sewers.

13.04.270    Sewers in city streets.

13.04.280    Sewers in state highways.

13.04.290    Main line sewers.

13.04.300    Pumping and treatment plants.

13.04.310    Connecting cesspools and septic tanks.

13.04.320    Laying pipe.

13.04.330    Placing vitrified clay pipe.

13.04.340    Excavations.

13.04.350    Excavation tunnels.

13.04.360    Wet and soft soil.

13.04.370    High ground water.

13.04.380    Avoidance of trees.

13.04.390    Sewers under other structures.

13.04.400    Disturbing pipes.

13.04.410    Disposal of excavated materials.

13.04.420    Pipe joints.

13.04.430    Tapping public sewer – Inspection preparation.

13.04.440    “Y” and “T” saddles.

13.04.450    Concrete around saddle.

13.04.460    Sewers to be watertight.

13.04.470    Inspection required.

13.04.480    Notice of inspection readiness.

13.04.490    Work shall be uncovered and convenient.

13.04.500    Removal of obstruction before inspection.

13.04.510    Correction of defective work.

13.04.520    Testing labor and materials.

13.04.530    Materials and construction to comply with standard specifications.

13.04.540    Facilities connected prior to inspection.

13.04.550    Removal and damage to sewers.

13.04.560    Opening manholes.

13.04.570    Dumping cesspool effluent.

13.04.580    Cleaning manholes.

13.04.590    Reconnections of industrial connection sewers.

13.04.600    Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance.

13.04.610    Design standards – Main line sewers.

13.04.620    Design standards – Sewage treatment plants and pumping plants.

13.04.630    Design standards – House laterals.

13.04.640    Design standards – Sewer service for large parcels.

13.04.650    Design standards – Conformance of plans with standards of design.

13.04.660    Design standards – Main line sewers – Size.

13.04.670    Design standards – Main line sewers – Velocity.

13.04.680    Design standards – Main line sewers – Grades.

13.04.690    Design standards – Main line sewers – Depth.

13.04.700    Design standards – Manhole structures.

13.04.710    Design standards – Location of sewers in streets.

13.04.720    Design standards – Location of end structures.

13.04.730    Design standards – House laterals – Service.

13.04.740    Design standards – Pipe strength.

13.04.750    Design standards – Substructures.

13.04.760    Design standards – Soil conditions.

13.04.770    Design standards – Bench marks.

13.04.780    Design standards – Connecting sewers in undedicated streets.

13.04.790    Design standards – Kind and size of pipe.

13.04.800    Design standards – Alignment and grade of house laterals.

13.04.810    Design standards – Depth of house laterals.

13.04.820    Design standards – Exceptions to provisions.

13.04.830    Design standards – Dedications of sewers to the city.

13.04.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “sanitary sewer law” and may be cited as such. (Prior code § 5-4.101)

13.04.020 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the discharge or deposit and discharge of all wastes in, upon, or affecting the city and the design, construction, alteration, use and maintenance of public sewers and house laterals, industrial connection sewers, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping plants, industrial liquid waste pretreatment plants, dairy screen chambers, sand and grease interceptors and appurtenances; the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor; and the inspection of construction.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all sanitary sewers and appurtenances thereto, lying within streets or easements dedicated to the city and which are under the sole jurisdiction of the city. (Prior code § 5-4.102)

13.04.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Boiler blow-off” means the condensed steam or hot water from a boiler when “blown off” to remove scale and slime or “blow-down” for cleaning and repair.

“Cesspool” means a lined excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a drainage system, or part thereof, so designed as to retain the organic matter and solids discharging therein, but permitting the liquids to seep through the bottom and sides and constructed pursuant to the provisions of applicable laws.

“Chief engineer” means the chief engineer of the county sanitation district or the county flood control district, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. The district referred to shall be that one stipulated by the context.

“Chimney” means a vertical section of a house lateral extending either from a vertical tee on the main line or from a long radius one-quarter bend set vertically at the curb or property line and, in either case, suitably reinforced with concrete.

“City engineer” means the city engineer of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector.

“Conductor” or “roof leader” means any piping which carries stormwater or rainwater from any roof, building, yard, or court. The term “downspout” is usually applied to the vertical portion.

“Dairy wastes” means the waste liquids incident to the operation of a dairy, including wash water from the milking barn, milk house, bottle washing equipment and similar devices.

“Domestic sewage” means the water-borne wastes derived from ordinary living processes and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by means of a private sewage disposal system.

“Effluent” means the liquid flowing out of any treatment plant or facility constructed and operated for the partial or complete treatment of sewage or liquid industrial wastes.

“Frontage” means the frontage as used by the city engineer in determining the benefits for local improvements in assessment proceedings.

“Health officer” means the health officer of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector.

“House lateral” means that part of the horizontal piping beginning at the property line or sewer right-of-way line and extending to its connection with the main line sewer through which sewage is discharged.

“Industrial building” means any building, structure or works which is used, or which is designed to be used, for the manufacture, processing, or distribution of materials, equipment, supplies, food or commodities of any description, or which is used, or designed to be used, as a school, sanitarium, hospital, penal institution, or charitable institution, together with all appurtenances thereto and the surrounding premises under the same ownership or control.

“Industrial connection sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping beginning at the property line or sewer right-of-way line and extending to its connection with the main line sewer through which liquid industrial wastes are discharged.

“Industrial liquid waste” means any and all liquid or water-borne wastes from industrial or commercial processes or operations, except domestic sewage.

“Industrial waste” means any and all waste substances, liquid or solid, except domestic sewage and shall include, among other things, radioactive wastes and explosive, noxious, or toxic gases when present in the sewerage system.

“Industrial waste treatment facility” means any works or devices for the treatment, storage or control of industrial wastes within a site prior to disposal.

“Inspector” means the authorized inspector, deputy, agent or representative of the city engineer.

“Interceptor” means a device designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from wastes.

“Licensed contractor” means a contractor having a valid license issued pursuant to Chapter 9 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, which license includes the activities listed on a permit applied for.

“Lot” means any piece or parcel of land bounded, defined, or shown upon a plat or deed recorded in the office of the county recorder which conforms to the boundaries of such lot as shown upon such recorded map, plat, or deed; or any parcel of land split or set aside from any such lot in conformity with applicable laws; provided, however, in the event any building or structure covers more area than a lot as defined in this chapter, the term “lot” shall include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which the building or structure is wholly or partly located, together with the yards, courts and other unoccupied spaces legally required for the building or structure.

“Main line sewer” means any public sewer in a dedicated right-of-way in which changes in alignment and grade occur only at manholes, or where angle points or curves between manholes have been approved by the city engineer. Such sewers are generally eight inches or more in diameter.

“Permittee” means the person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Person” means an individual human being, a firm, partnership, or corporation, his or their heirs, executors, administrators, assigns, officers or agents, the city and any municipal or quasi-municipal governmental agency, or district or officers thereof.

“Pollution of underground or surface waters” means affecting such waters in a manner which, if allowed to continue, would render them unfit for human or animal use or toxic to vegetation to an extent adversely affecting plant growth or curtailing crop yield.

“Public sewer” means a main line sanitary sewer, dedicated to public use.

“Radioactive material” means any material composed of or containing chemical elements which spontaneously change their atomic structure by the emission of alpha or beta particles or gamma rays or any other particles or rays or forms of energy.

“Rainwater diversion system” means any device designed to prevent the entry of storm water into the public sewer system or other waste disposal or treatment systems and to redirect storm flows to appropriate areas.

“Saddle” or “wye saddle” means a short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the main line sewer so that the short pipe shall form a forty-five degree angle from the main line sewer pipe. “Tee saddle” means a short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the main line sewer so that the short pipe shall form a ninety degree angle from the main line sewer pipe.

“Seepage pit” means a line excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a septic tank, so designed as to permit the effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bottom and sides.

“Sewage” means any water-borne or liquid wastes, except stormwater, groundwater, or roof or yard drainage and shall include domestic sewage and industrial liquid wastes.

“Sewage pumping plant” means any works or device used to raise sewage from a lower to a higher level or to overcome friction in a pipeline.

“Sewage treatment plant” means any works or device for treating sewage, except any industrial waste treatment facility or private sewage disposal system.

“Street property line” means a building line when one has been established by law, otherwise the street property line itself.

“Tapping” means the forming of a tee or wye branch connection to a main line sewer by installing a tee or wye saddle after the sewer is in place.

“Tee” or “T” means a fitting for a branch on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately ninety degrees.

“Trunk sewer” means a sewer under the jurisdiction of a public entity other than the city.

“Wye” or “Y” means a fitting for a branch on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately forty-five degrees. (Prior code § 5-4.201)

13.04.040 Enforcement of provisions.
The city engineer shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter and for such purpose shall have the powers of a peace officer. Such powers shall not limit or otherwise affect the powers and duties of the health officer. (Prior code § 5-4.301)

13.04.050 Minimum standards.
Treatment plants and facilities shall be designed so as to produce an effect which will not pollute underground or surface waters, create a nuisance, or menace the public peace, health or safety. The city engineer shall consult with the health officers and officials of industrial and public agencies and from time to time promulgate standards which may vary according to location, topography, physical conditions and other pertinent factors. (Prior code § 5-4.302)

13.04.060 Notices.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any notice required to be given by the city engineer under this chapter shall be in writing and served in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure of the state for the service of process, or by registered mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the city engineer. When the address is unknown, service may be made as provided in this section upon the owner of record of the property. (Prior code § 5-4.303)

13.04.070 Time limits.
Any time limit provided for in this chapter may be extended by mutual consent of the officer or department concerned and the permittee, applicant, or other person affected. (Prior code § 5-4.304)

13.04.080 Identification of employees.
The city engineer shall provide means of identification of inspectors and sewer maintenance men which shall identify them as such. Inspectors and sewer maintenance men shall identify themselves upon request when entering upon the work of any contractor or property owner for any inspection work required by this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.305)

13.04.090 Maintenance inspections.
The city engineer may inspect, as often as he deems necessary, every main line sewer, sewage pumping plant, sewage treatment plant, industrial liquid waste pre-treatment plant, industrial connection sewer, interceptor, dairy screen chamber, dilution basin, neutralization basin, or other similar appurtenances to ascertain whether such facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All persons shall permit the city engineer to have access to all such facilities at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 5-4.306)

13.04.100 Access requirements.
No object, whether a permanent structure or a temporary structure, or any object which is difficult of removal, shall be placed in such a position as to interfere with the ready and easy access to any facility described in Section 13.04.090. Any such obstruction, upon request of the city engineer, shall be immediately removed by the violator at no expense to the city and shall not be replaced. (Prior code § 5-4.307)

13.04.110 Interference with right of entry of city engineer.
No person in the city shall, during reasonable hours, refuse, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the city engineer into any building, factory, plant, yard, field, or other place, or portions thereof, in the performance of his duty within the power conferred upon him by law or by this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.308)

13.04.120 Maintenance of plants, interceptors and other facilities.
The requirements contained in this chapter covering the maintenance of sanitary sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping plants, industrial liquid waste pre-treatment plants, dairy screen chambers, interceptors, or other appurtenances shall apply to all such facilities now existing or hereafter constructed. All such facilities shall be maintained by the owners thereof in a safe and sanitary condition and all devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation of such facilities shall be maintained in good working order.

The provisions of this section shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any devices or safeguards or existing facilities unless authorized in writing by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.309)

13.04.130 Maintenance of house laterals and house sewers.
All house laterals, industrial connection sewers and appurtenances thereto now existing or hereafter constructed shall be maintained by the owner of the property served in a safe and sanitary condition, and all devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation thereof shall be maintained in good working order. (Prior code § 5-4.310)

13.04.140 Record of fees.
The city engineer shall keep in proper books a permanent and accurate account of all fees received under this chapter, giving the names and addresses of the persons on whose accounts the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, and the number of permits granted, if any, which books shall be open to public inspection. The city engineer shall pay all fees received by him into the city treasury and take treasurer’s receipts therefor. (Prior code § 5-4.401)

13.04.150 Permits exempt from fee.
The provisions of this chapter shall not require the payment of any fee when the collection of such fee is prohibited by Section 6103 of the Government Code of the state or by any other statute. (Prior code § 5-4.402)

13.04.160 Estimated valuations.
Whenever the fees required by this chapter are based on valuations, the city engineer shall determine the estimated valuation in all cases, and for such purposes he shall be guided by approved estimating practices. (Prior code § 5-4.403)

13.04.170 Refunds.
In the event any person shall have paid a fee for plan checking, for processing a sewer easement, to tap a public sewer, or for the processing of reimbursement documents and maps and no work or processing has been done on these functions, such person, upon presentation to the city engineer of a request therefor in writing, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to eighty percent of the fee actually paid. In the event any person shall have paid a fee for inspection and record plans and subsequently shall request and receive permission to revise the work so as to appreciably reduce the amount thereof, he shall be entitled to a refund of a portion of the original fee. Such portion shall be the difference between the original amount of the fee and a new amount to be determined from the revised valuation or total footage of main line and house lateral sewers, or both. The city engineer shall satisfy himself as to the right of such person to such refund and each such refund shall be paid as provided by law for the payment of claims against the city. (Prior code § 5-4.404)

13.04.180 Educational duties of city engineer.
The city engineer may perform educational work and may cooperate with civic organizations, industries, water companies and public agencies whenever in the opinion of the city engineer such work and cooperation are essential to the development of standards or procedures which will prevent creation of a public nuisance or a menace to the public health or safety or the pollution of underground or surface waters. (Prior code § 5-4.405)

13.04.190 Joint action with other public agencies.
The city engineer may contact, confer and negotiate with officials of any public agency and may recommend to the council a contract by which the city and one or more public agencies may jointly exercise any powers pertinent to the enforcement of this chapter and any similar statute, ordinance, rule or regulation of such public agencies common to all. The city engineer may also recommend to the council a contract between the city and county or any city within the county. (Prior code § 5-4.406)

13.04.200 Conditions existing prior to issuance of permits.
If appears from the application for any permit required by this chapter that the work to be performed thereunder is to be done according to the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer, upon receipt of the fees required, shall issue such permit. (Prior code § 5-4.407)

13.04.210 Certificate of final inspection.
When it appears to the satisfaction of the city engineer that all work done under the permit has been constructed according to, and meets the requirements of, all the applicable provisions of this chapter, and that all fees have been paid, the city engineer, if requested, shall cause to be issued to the permittee constructing such work a certificate of final inspection. The certificate shall recite that such work as is covered by the permit has been constructed according to this chapter and that such work is in an approved condition. (Prior code § 5-4.408)

13.04.220 Sewer permit required.
No person, other than persons specifically excepted by this chapter, shall commence or do, or cause to be done, construct, or cause to be constructed, use, or cause to be used, or alter, or cause to be altered, any public sewer, main line sewer, house lateral, sewage pumping plant, or other similar appurtenance in the city without first obtaining a sewer permit from the city engineer so to do. (Prior code § 5-4.501)

13.04.230 Exemptions from permit.
The provisions of this chapter requiring permits shall not apply to the county sanitation district, its chief engineer, or to contractors constructing public sewers and appurtenances under contracts awarded and entered into under proceedings had or taken pursuant to any of the special procedure statutes of the state providing for the construction of sewers and the assessing of the expenses thereof against the lands benefitted thereby, or under contracts between the contractor and the city. (Prior code § 5-4.502)

13.04.240 Permits not transferable.
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. (Prior code § 5-4.503)

13.04.250 Sewer permit – Application.
Any person requiring a sewer permit shall make written application to the city engineer.

The city engineer shall provide printed application forms for the permits provided for by this chapter, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The city engineer may require, in addition to the information furnished by the printed form, any additional information from the applicant which will enable the city engineer to determine that the proposed work or use complies with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.504)

13.04.260 Tapping public sewers.
When in the opinion of the city engineer it shall be necessary to connect a house lateral to a public sewer at a point where no connection facility has been provided, application for a public sewer tap shall be submitted and a fee for tapping the public sewer shall be paid by the applicant before the permit shall be issued for the construction of the house lateral. All tappings of public sewers, except trunk sewers, shall be performed by a licensed contractor.

Exception: Tapping of public sewers as required on sewer plans approved by the city engineer shall be constructed by a licensed contractor. (Prior code § 5-4.505)

13.04.270 Sewers in city streets.
Before granting any sewer permit for the construction, installation, repair or removal of any sewer, or appurtenance thereto, which will necessitate any excavation or fill in, upon, or under any city street, except state highways, the city engineer shall first require the applicant to obtain a permit from the superintendent of streets. (Prior code § 5-4.506)

13.04.280 Sewers in state highways.
The encroachment permit for construction of a sewer, or appurtenance thereto, under private contract, within or under any state highway shall be obtained by the sewer contractor. The contractor shall be required by the Division of Highways of the state to provide bonds to defray the cost of any damage to highways which may subsequently result from sewer construction for such periods of time as will permit the city to annex the areas benefitted by the sewers to existing sewer maintenance districts, or to form new sewer maintenance districts, and have money available to assume the liability for repairing any damages to state highways.

The city engineer shall notify the Division of Highways in writing when money is available in the districts. Upon receipt of such notification, the Division of Highways shall release the contractor from his bond, void his permit, and issue the permit to the city engineer. The sewer maintenance district thereupon shall assume the liability for defraying the costs of any damages to the highways which may subsequently result from the sewer construction.

The encroachment permit shall be obtained by the city engineer for the construction of any sewer or appurtenances within or under any state highways for contracts awarded or entered into under proceedings had or taken by the city pursuant to any of the special procedure statutes of the state providing for such construction and the assessing of property benefitted thereby to pay for such costs, or under contracts between the contractor and the council. (Prior code § 5-4.507)

13.04.290 Main line sewers.
Before granting a permit for the construction of any main line sewer or industrial connection sewer, with or without house laterals, the city engineer shall check and approve the plans therefor as to their compliance with city, state and other governmental laws and as to conformity with the standards of design set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.508)

13.04.300 Pumping and treatment plants.
Before granting a permit for the construction of any sewage pumping plant or sewage treatment plant, the city engineer shall check and approve the plans, or required modification thereof, as to their compliance with city, state and other governmental laws and shall require that the facilities be adequate in every respect for the use intended. (Prior code § 5-4.509)

13.04.310 Connecting cesspools and septic tanks.
A person shall not connect, or cause to be connected, any cesspool seepage pit or septic tank to any main line sewer or to any house lateral leading thereto. (Prior code § 5-4.601)

13.04.320 Laying pipe.
All pipe shall be laid upgrade on an unyielding foundation, true to line and grade and with a uniform bearing under the full length of the barrel of the pipe. Bell and spigot pipe shall be laid with sockets upgrade. Suitable excavations shall be made to receive the bells or collars of the pipe. All adjustments to bring the pipe to line and grade shall be made by scraping away or thoroughly tamping suitable fill material under the body of the pipe and not by wedging or blocking. (Prior code § 5-4.602)

13.04.330 Placing vitrified clay pipe.
Vitrified clay piping shall not be placed closer than two feet to the exterior wall of any building or closer than twelve inches to the surface of the ground at any point in its course. (Prior code § 5-4.603)

13.04.340 Excavations.
All excavations shall have sufficient width to allow proper workmanship and permit adequate inspection and shall be supported in the manner set forth in the rules, orders, and regulations prescribed by the Industrial Accident Commission of the state. Sheet piling and other timbers shall be withdrawn in such a manner as to prevent caving of the walls of the excavation or disturbance of the sewer. (Prior code § 5-4.604)

13.04.350 Excavation tunnels.
Where sufficient depth is available to permit, tunnels may be used between open cut trenches. Tunnels shall have a clear height of two feet above the pipe and shall be limited in length to one-half the depth of the trench but with a maximum length of eight feet. (Prior code § 5-4.605)

13.04.360 Wet and soft soil.
Before laying any sewer pipe in an excavation in soft, wet or spongy soil, sufficient gravel, crushed rock or other suitable base material to stabilize the subgrade shall be placed in the bottom of the trench. (Prior code § 5-4.606)

13.04.370 High ground water.
No person shall begin the work of house lateral construction in an area having a subsurface water level above the level of the sewer until he shall have sufficient pumping equipment available on the job to keep up the excavation unwatered. The city engineer may require adequate proof of the sufficiency of such equipment before granting a permit. (Prior code § 5-4.607)

13.04.380 Avoidance of trees.
When any portion of the sewer line, other than cast iron soil pipe, is located within ten feet of any tree or hedge, the joints of the pipe shall be entirely encased in four inches of Class “A” concrete or 1:2 mortar. (Prior code § 5-4.608)

13.04.390 Sewers under other structures.
When a house lateral constructed of any type pipe other than cast iron is located under existing or proposed steam or electric railway tracks, existing or proposed manholes, storm drains, or other sewers or large conduits, it shall be encased in Class “B” concrete as shown on the Standard Plans on file in the office of the city engineer. Pipe laid inside a steel casing jacked under such structures need not be encased. (Prior code § 5-4.609)

13.04.400 Disturbing pipes.
A person shall not walk upon or disturb the pipe in any manner after the joints have been made. (Prior code § 5-4.610)

13.04.410 Disposal of excavated materials.
Materials excavated in streets and roadways shall be laid alongside the excavations and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. Free access shall be provided to all fire hydrants, water gates, meters and private drives, and means shall be provided whereby storm and waste water can flow in the gutters uninterruptedly. All material excavated in streets and roadways, not required for backfilling, shall be immediately removed and disposed of by the permittee. (Prior code § 5-4.611)

13.04.420 Pipe joints.
All cast iron pipe joins shall be caulked and jointed with pig lead or other approved joint material to the satisfaction of the city engineer. All clay pipe joints shall be made with approved joint materials to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.612)

13.04.430 Tapping public sewer – Inspection preparation.
Whenever an application for the tapping of the public sewer has been approved and the required fee paid, the applicant shall provide the excavation exposing the public sewer sufficiently for the city engineer to make inspection of the “Y” or “T” saddle constructed by a licensed contractor. (Prior code § 5-4.613)

13.04.440 “Y” and “T” saddles.
The “Y” and “T” saddles shall be installed by cutting a hole in the main line sewer pipe and fitting the saddle snugly in place with heavy (twelve gauge) galvanized, asphalt painted iron wire bound around the main line pipe and the flange of the saddle. The “Y” saddle shall be placed in the side of the main line pipe with the “Y” branch upward at approximately forty-five degrees from the horizontal and so pointed as to direct the flow from the house lateral downstream in the sewer. The “T” saddle shall be placed in the top of the main line sewer pipe. “T” saddles shall be used only for construction of chimney pipe. (Prior code § 5-4.614)

13.04.450 Concrete around saddle.
After the saddle is in place, an embedment of not less than six inches of Portland cement concrete shall be placed under and around the main line sewer pipe saddle. The inside of the joint between pipe and saddle shall be pointed 1:2 cement mortar. (Prior code § 5-4.615)

13.04.460 Sewers to be watertight.
Every sewer constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be constructed in such a manner as to withstand, when filled with water, a pressure of not less than two pounds per square inch without leaking at any point and shall be tested in accordance with the standard specifications for sanitary sewers. (Prior code § 5-4.616)

13.04.470 Inspection required.
All work done under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to inspection by and shall meet the approval of the city engineer; provided, however, approval by the city engineer shall not relieve the permittee or any other person from complying with all of the applicable provisions of other laws.

No provisions of this chapter shall supersede, affect, or modify in any way the provisions of other laws excepting only those cases where the provisions contained in this chapter are more stringent. (Prior code § 5-4.701)

13.04.480 Notice of inspection readiness.
Immediately after the work is ready for inspection, and at least twenty-four hours before inspection is to be made, the permittee shall in writing request such inspection by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.702)

13.04.490 Work shall be uncovered and convenient.
At the time of the inspection the permittee shall have all work uncovered and convenient for the city engineer’s examination, shall give the city engineer every facility to make a thorough examination, and shall apply water pressure tests as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.703)

13.04.500 Removal of obstruction before inspection.
If any pipes are enclosed or covered in any way so as to tend to obstruct a thorough inspection of the sewer construction or installation and the city engineer notifies the permittee to remove such obstructions, the city engineer need not inspect the work until such obstructions are removed. (Prior code § 5-4.704)

13.04.510 Correction of defective work.
Within ten days after the city engineer notifies the permittee that any work is defective, either in its construction or material, the permittee shall reconstruct or remove such work and make it conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.705)

13.04.520 Testing labor and materials.
The permittee shall furnish all labor, tools and materials necessary for all tests and the permittee or his representative shall be present at the job site at the time the inspection is made. (Prior code § 5-4.706)

13.04.530 Materials and construction to comply with standard specifications.
All material used in any work done under the provisions of this chapter shall be new, first-class material and shall conform to, and the manner of construction shall meet, all the requirements prescribed by this chapter or by the specifications for public sewers, designated as city standard “Specifications-Materials-Vitrified Clay Pipe,” “Specifications-Construction-Sanitary Sewers,” and “Manholes,” as well as city standard drawings applicable thereto, on file in the office of the city engineer and adopted as the standard specifications for the construction, installation and alteration of both main line sewers and house laterals. All such work shall be approved by the city engineer before a certificate of final inspection shall be issued. The city engineer may order tests of any material at the expense of the permittee to determine whether such material meets such specifications. (Prior code § 5-4.707)

13.04.540 Facilities connected prior to inspection.
In the event a sewer, industrial connection sewer, interceptor, treatment facility, or other similar appurtenance is placed in use and fails to pass inspection, the permittee shall have ten days in which to make the construction conform to the requirements of this chapter. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.708)

13.04.550 Removal and damage to sewers.
An unauthorized person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, or injure, or cause to be injured, any portion of any public sewer, any appurtenance thereto, or pumping plants in connection therewith. (Prior code § 5-4.801)

13.04.560 Opening manholes.
An unauthorized persons hall not open or enter, or cause to be opened or entered, for any purpose whatsoever any manhole in any public sewer. (Prior code § 5-4.802)

13.04.570 Dumping cesspool effluent.
The city engineer may permit operators of cesspool pump trucks who hold a valid certificate of registration issued by the health officer to dispose of cesspool effluent which does not contain harmful concentrations of industrial liquid wastes, oils, greases or other deleterious substances into certain designated manholes. No person shall dump cesspool effluent in any manhole other than those designated by the city engineer. The city engineer may refuse to accept the cesspool effluent if it fails to meet the requirements of this section. (Prior code § 5-4.803)

13.04.580 Cleaning manholes.
When cesspool effluent is dumped into a specified manhole under permission from the city engineer, it shall be discharged through a pipe or hose in a manner such that none of the effluent shall be left adhering to the sides or shelf of the manhole. If any such effluent is inadvertently allowed to adhere to the sides or shelf of the manhole, the manhole shall be thoroughly cleaned with clear water. (Prior code § 5-4.804)

13.04.590 Reconnections of industrial connection sewers.
Whenever an industrial connection sewer has been disconnected from the public sewer by the city engineer for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, reconnection shall be made only upon issuance of a permit as provided in this chapter. Before such permit shall be issued, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of the disconnection made and the city engineer may require the installation of a manhole for the purpose of measuring the flow or for making periodic tests of the wastes from such connection. (Prior code § 5-4.805)

13.04.600 Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance.
Whenever an industrial sewer connection permittee, by reason of violation of Section 13.08.100, or any other person, by reason of violation of Section 13.04.550, causes obstruction, damage or destruction of a public sewer, or any appurtenances thereto, or pumping plants in connection therewith, he shall reimburse the city, or city sewer maintenance district if formed in which damage occurred, for the cost of flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconstruction of such sewer made necessary by such violation within thirty days after the city engineer shall render an invoice for the same. The amount when paid shall be deposited into the fund of the maintenance district. (Prior code § 5-4.806)

13.04.610 Design standards – Main line sewers.
New main line sewers shall conform to the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise specifically excepted. (Prior code § 5-4.901)

13.04.620 Design standards – Sewage treatment plants and pumping plants.
New sewage treatment plants and sewage pumping plants shall conform to the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise specifically excepted. (Prior code § 5-4.902)

13.04.630 Design standards – House laterals.
New house laterals shall conform to the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise covered by other laws, rules or regulations of the city applicable thereto. (Prior code § 5-4.903)

13.04.640 Design standards – Sewer service for large parcels.
When a lot or parcel of land is of sufficient size that the zoning regulations of the city (see Title 18 of this code) do not prohibit its division into smaller parcels, each of such possible parcels into which such lot or parcel of land legally may be divided, upon which one or more buildings containing plumbing facilities are or may be located, shall be considered as a separate parcel of land. Separate house laterals shall be constructed to the main line sewer from each of such parcels except as to variances permitted under Section 13.04.820 and except when the lot or parcel of land is occupied by an industrial building. If the main line sewer does not extend to a point from which such parcels of land can be served, the property owner shall construct a main line sewer so that such parcels may adequately be served. (Prior code § 5-4.904)

13.04.650 Design standards – Conformance of plans with standards of design.
All plans required under the provisions of this chapter for the construction of main line sewers and house laterals shall conform to the standards of design prescribed by this chapter. Plans required for all other sewer construction or installations under the provisions of this chapter shall conform to the standards of design on file in the office of the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.905)

13.04.660 Design standards – Main line sewers – Size.
A. Main line sewer pipe shall have an inside diameter of not less than eight inches and shall have sufficient capacity to carry sewage from the area tributary thereto when computed upon the following basis:

1. For residential areas, per acre, 0.004 cubic feet per second;

2. For light industrial areas, per acre, 0.016 cubic feet per second;

3. For heavy industrial areas, per acre, 0.021 cubic feet per second; and

4. Individual plant capacities shall be the determining factor when they exceed the above coefficients.

B. The city engineer shall determine the classifications set forth in this section and shall approve any modification thereof. (Prior code § 5-4.906)

13.04.670 Design standards – Main line sewers – Velocity.
A main line sewer shall be designed to provide a minimum velocity of one and one-half feet per second for pipe flowing one-half full, except that the city engineer may approve a gradient which will develop a lower velocity if he finds that a gradient which will develop a velocity of one and one-half feet per second is unobtainable. (Prior code § 5-4.907)

13.04.680 Design standards – Main line sewers – Grades.
The slope of the sewers shall be shown on the plans in feet of fall per one hundred feet of horizontal distance expressed as a percentage. Slopes used expressed in percentages shall be divisible, without remainder, by four in the hundredth column. For example, 0.36% complies with this section. (Prior code § 5-4.908)

13.04.690 Design standards – Main line sewers – Depth.
The standard depth for main line sewers in residential districts shall be six feet and in business districts shall be sufficient to provide a house lateral depth of ten and one-half feet for areas where no ground water is present. Standard minimum depth for six-inch house laterals shall be five feet in residential districts and ten and one-half feet in business or apartment house districts, respectively, below the curb grade or center line street or alley grade at the property line.

Where ground water is present, the depth for residential main line sewers shall be sufficient to provide for a house lateral with a minimum depth of at least five feet below the curb grade or center line street or alley grade at the property line.

Exceptions to the above minima may be made only on approval by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.909)

13.04.700 Design standards – Manhole structures.
Manhole structures shall be placed in the main line sewer at all changes of alignment and gradient. The maximum distance between structures shall be no more than three hundred fifty feet.

All structures shall be designed according to the standard drawings for structures on file in the office of the city engineer.

Exceptions to the above requirements may be made only on approval of the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.910)

13.04.710 Design standards – Location of sewers in streets.
Main line sewers shall be located not more than five feet from the center lines of streets or alleys except on major highways where separate sewers shall be located in the roadway six feet from either curb line. Exceptions to these standard locations may be made only upon approval of the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.911)

13.04.720 Design standards – Location of end structures.
End structures shall be located ten feet upgrade from the downgrade lot line of the last lot served unless greater length is necessary to serve the property. (Prior code § 5-4.912)

13.04.730 Design standards – House laterals – Service.
Six inch or four inch house lateral service shall be provided in the street for each lot at the minimum depths provided in this chapter and, in addition, such depth shall be sufficient to provide a connection to the lowest and/or farthest point of the lot with a cover of one foot and a grade of not less than two percent. Any exception to this requirement may be had only upon approval by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.913)

13.04.740 Design standards – Pipe strength.
Pipes used for sewers shall be:

A. Standard strength for sewers not more than ten feet in depth from the surface to invert;

B. Extra strength for sewers more than ten feet and not more than twenty feet in depth;

C. Standard strength reinforced with concrete cradle or concrete encasement for sewers more than twenty feet in depth;

D. Standard strength encased in concrete or placed inside of steel pipe backfilled with sand for sewers under railways; and

E. Reinforced as required by the city engineer for sewers under large conduits or other structures. (Prior code § 5-4.914)

13.04.750 Design standards – Substructures.
All substructures which will be encountered in the construction or which will be installed as part of the improvement shall be shown and designated on the plan. Large substructures which require special treatment in the design of the sewer shall also be shown in the profile. The permittee shall submit to the city engineer a statement from each utility company having substructures in the affected area certifying that the location and size of such structures, as shown on the plans, are the same as shown upon their records. (Prior code § 5-4.915)

13.04.760 Design standards – Soil conditions.
Soil conditions, particularly in areas known to have high ground water tables, rock, or filled ground, shall be prospected and the results shown on the profile, if required by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.916)

13.04.770 Design standards – Bench marks.
A system of bench marks on the United States Geological Survey Sea Level Datum of 1929 and adequate to construct the work shall be shown on the profile. The elevation of the sewer at the point where the system is to be discharged shall be shown as determined in the field from the above shown datum. (Prior code § 5-4.917)

13.04.780 Design standards – Connecting sewers in undedicated streets.
A person shall not connect, or cause to be connected, any sewer which has been, or may hereafter be, constructed in any way unless:

A. Such sewer has been laid under the supervision of and to the satisfaction of the city engineer or the chief engineer of the county sanitation district in which such sewer is located and in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter; and

B. If dedication of such way is required, such way has been dedicated and the council has accepted such dedication. (Prior code § 5-4.918)

13.04.790 Design standards – Kind and size of pipe.
All pipe shall be either clay or cast iron. All clay pipe shall be first-class six inch vitrified clay pipe. All cast iron pipe six inches in diameter shall be service weight or better cast iron soil pipe. Cast iron pipe eight inches or larger in diameter shall be Class 150.

The portion of the pipe extending from the public sewer to the property line shall be not less than six inches in internal diameter. (Prior code § 5-4.919)

13.04.800 Design standards – Alignment and grade of house laterals.
The alignment and grade of a house lateral shall be straight from the public sewer to the street property line and shall have a fall of not less than one foot in fifty feet towards the public sewer, except where otherwise permitted by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.920)

13.04.810 Design standards – Depth of house laterals.
Where laid within the limits of public thoroughfare, no house lateral shall be laid less than five feet below the established grade of the same, or below the surface where no grade is established, except by special permission in writing from the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.921)

13.04.820 Design standards – Exceptions to provisions.
If a literal compliance with any engineering requirement of this chapter is impossible or impractical because of peculiar conditions in no way the fault of the person requesting an exception, and the purposes of this chapter may be accomplished and the public safety secured by an alternate construction or procedure, and the city engineer so finds, he may grant an exception permitting such alternate construction or procedure. (Prior code § 5-4.922)

13.04.830 Design standards – Dedications of sewers to the city.
A. Before plans for the construction of any public main line sewer are approved by the city engineer, the person causing such plans to be prepared shall present on forms provided by the city engineer the following:

1. An “Offer of Dedication” signed and acknowledged by all persons sharing the cost of such sewer; and

2. A “Letter of Participation” describing the property of the persons who participated in such cost.

B. When the construction of the sewer has been completed and accepted by the council, the sewer shall become a public sewer.

C. No sewer shall be accepted for dedication by the city unless such sewer has been constructed in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.923)

Chapter 13.08
INDUSTRIAL WASTES – DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS
Sections:

13.08.010    Scope.

13.08.020    Industrial waste disposal permits required.

13.08.030    Revocation of permits.

13.08.040    Revocation of permits – Effect.

13.08.050    Permit application forms.

13.08.060    Issuance of permits.

13.08.070    Industrial liquid waste disposal.

13.08.080    Pretreatment plans.

13.08.090    Minimum standards for pretreatment.

13.08.100    Discharge limitations into sewers.

13.08.110    Discharge of cooling water.

13.08.120    Discharge of ground garbage.

13.08.130    Rainwater diversion systems.

13.08.140    Temperature of effluent.

13.08.150    Discharge of acids and alkalis.

13.08.160    Discharge of toxic substances.

13.08.010 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall pertain only to the disposal of industrial liquid wastes to the public sewers. (Prior code § 5-4.1001)

13.08.020 Industrial waste disposal permits required.
A person shall obtain a permit from the city engineer prior to the discharge of industrial wastes to a public sewer. The city engineer shall not grant such a permit unless he finds that sufficient capacity exists in the public sewer to allow for such industrial wastes as determined by the requirements of Section 13.04.660.

A separate permit shall be required for each connection discharging industrial wastes to the public sewer.

For the purposes of this section, discharges resulting from garbage grinders powered by motors of one horsepower or less and grease interceptors installed in restaurants in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of the city where such facilities are not required by other provisions of this chapter shall not be considered to be industrial waste discharges. (Prior code § 5-4.1002)

13.08.030 Revocation of permits.
By following the procedure set forth in Section 13.16.080, the city engineer may recommend the revocation of, and the council may revoke, any permit if, after a public hearing, if a public hearing is requested, or otherwise after due investigation, the council finds:

A. A failure of the permittee to correct conditions as required by the city engineer; or

B. Conditions which would justify the denial of a permit; or

C. Fraud or deceit was employed in obtaining the permit; or

D. Any other violation of this chapter or of any condition of any permit, including the one to be revoked, license, or exception granted under this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1003)

13.08.040 Revocation of permits – Effect.
If a permit is revoked, the city engineer may disconnect from the public sewer any industrial connection sewer which was connected pursuant to such permit. (Prior code § 5-4.1003.1)

13.08.050 Permit application forms.
The city engineer shall provide printed application forms for the permits required by this chapter, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The city engineer may require, in addition to the information furnished by the printed form, any additional information from the applicant which will enable the city engineer to determine that the proposed disposal complies with the provisions of this chapter.

For the purposes of this section, the city engineer may utilize joint permit application forms under agreements established with other public agencies as provided in Section 13.04.190. (Prior code § 5-4.1004)

13.08.060 Issuance of permits.
If it appears from the application for any permit required by this chapter that the proposed disposal complies with the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer, upon the receipt of the fees required, shall issue such permit. (Prior code § 5-4.1005)

13.08.070 Industrial liquid waste disposal.
Before granting an industrial waste disposal permit to any applicant, the city engineer shall determine:

A. That the waste is one which will not damage or destroy the public sewer, or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of the maintenance of the public sewer, or retard or inhibit the treatment of the sewage; or

B. That the waste is one which can be made acceptable by pretreatment. (Prior code § 5-4.1006)

13.08.080 Pretreatment plans.
In the event pretreatment or special facilities are required to make the waste acceptable as provided by this chapter, the applicant for an industrial waste disposal permit may be required to furnish plans showing the method of collection and pretreatment proposed to be used, and a permit shall not be issued until such plans, or required modifications thereof, have been checked and approved by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.1007)

13.08.090 Minimum standards for pretreatment.
The city engineer may establish uniform minimum standards and criteria for the application of such standards for the pretreatment of specific industrial waste discharges. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the city engineer from requiring additional pretreatment to accomplish the objectives of Section 13.08.080. (Prior code § 5-4.1007.1)

13.08.100 Discharge limitations into sewers.
No person shall place, throw, or deposit or cause or permit to be placed, thrown, or deposited in any public sewer or main line sewer any dead animal, offal, garbage, fish, fruit or vegetable waste or other solid matter, material or obstruction of any kind whatever of such nature as shall clog, obstruct or fill such sewer or which shall interfere with or prevent the effective use or operation thereof. No person shall cause or permit to be deposited or discharged into any sewer any water, sewage or liquid waste of any kind containing chemicals, greases, oils, tars or other matters in solution or suspension which may clog, obstruct or fill the sewer, or which may in any way damage or interfere with or prevent the effective use thereof, or which may necessitate or require the frequent repair, cleaning or flushing of such sewer to render the sewer operative, or which may obstruct or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of the treatment of the sewage. Storm runoff waters shall not be discharged into a sanitary sewer. (Prior code § 5-4.1008)

13.08.110 Discharge of cooling water.
No uncontaminated cooling water shall be discharged into a public sanitary sewer. (Prior code § 5-4.1009)

13.08.120 Discharge of ground garbage.
Garbage resulting from the preparation of food may be discharged into the public sewer if such garbage is ground to a fineness sufficient to pass through a three-eighths inch screen. Excessive or unnecessarily large quantities of water shall not be used to flush ground garbage into the sewer. (Prior code § 5-4.1010)

13.08.130 Rainwater diversion systems.
The city engineer may authorize the installation of a rainwater diversion system in lieu of roofing to prevent the discharge of storm waters to the sewer system where roofing is impractical, in conflict with existing laws or regulations, may create a hazardous or unsafe working condition, or may cause undue hardship on the applicant, providing the city engineer finds that:

A. The applicant has applied for an industrial waste disposal permit and has submitted all plans and specifications of the proposed system;

B. The system provides for continuous twenty-four hour protection to the public sewer system;

C. The system meets the minimum operational and component standards as may be established pursuant to Section 13.08.090; and

D. The pollution of underground or surface waters or damages to any street, gutter, storm drain, channel, or public or private property will not be caused by the diverted storm flows. (Prior code § 5-4.1010.1)

13.08.140 Temperature of effluent.
A person shall not discharge into the public sewer effluent exceeding a temperature of one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit. (Prior code § 5-4.1011)

13.08.150 Discharge of acids and alkalis.
Before any person shall discharge acids or alkalis into the public sewer, he shall control the pH to the extent which the city engineer finds adequate. (Prior code § 5-4.1012)

13.08.160 Discharge of toxic substances.
All toxic chemical substances shall be retained or rendered acceptable before discharge into the public sewer. (Prior code § 5-4.1013)

Chapter 13.12
INDUSTRIAL WASTES – DISCHARGES TO OTHER THAN PUBLIC SEWERS
Sections:

13.12.010    Scope.

13.12.020    Permits required.

13.12.030    Industrial waste disposal permits not required.

13.12.040    Applications for permits.

13.12.050    Disposal plans.

13.12.060    Permission to use public property.

13.12.070    Recommendations of public agencies.

13.12.080    Investigation by city departments.

13.12.090    Notice of violation.

13.12.100    Issuance of permit.

13.12.010 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall pertain to the disposal, discharge or deposit of all industrial wastes, including effluents from public sewers and sewage treatment plants, except where such wastes are discharged to a public sewer in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13.08. (Prior code § 5-4.1101)

13.12.020 Permits required.
No person shall maintain a deposit of waste materials or discharge or deposit, or cause to be discharged or deposited, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any waste material or effluent in or upon the city or into streams, bodies of water, surface or subsurface water, storm drains, or flood control channels where such waste material or effluent is deposited upon or may be carried through or upon the city without first securing in the manner provided in this chapter a permit from the city engineer to do so and at all times having an unrevoked permit therefor, unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1102)

13.12.030 Industrial waste disposal permits not required.
No permit shall be required for the disposal of waste, which consists only of domestic sewage, into septic tanks, cesspools or seepage pits constructed pursuant to the provisions of the plumbing code of the city. (Prior code § 5-4.1103)

13.12.040 Applications for permits.
Any person requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make a written application therefor to the city engineer, giving such information as the city engineer may require. The city engineer shall provide printed application forms, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The city engineer may require from the applicant, in addition to the information furnished on the printed form, any additional information, including detailed plans and specifications, which will enable the city engineer to determine that the proposed discharges or deposits and plan of operation comply with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances. (Prior code § 5-4.1104)

13.12.050 Disposal plans.
The city engineer may require that an application for a permit to dispose of industrial wastes shall be accompanied by suitable plans showing the proposed method of collection, treatment and disposal, and a permit shall not be issued until such plans, or required modifications thereof, have been checked and approved by the city engineer.

The city engineer may submit the application or plans, or both, to any public agency for comments or recommendations. (Prior code § 5-4.1105)

13.12.060 Permission to use public property.
Whenever facilities for the discharge of industrial wastes connect to structures or encroach on the property or rights-of-way owned or controlled by a public agency, the city engineer may either:

A. Require that the applicant obtain a property use permit, license, easement or other right to use such properties prior to the issuance of a permit to dispose of industrial wastes; or

B. Issue such permit subject to the execution of a property use permit, license, easement, or other right to use such properties. (Prior code § 5-4.1106)

13.12.070 Recommendations of public agencies.
Whenever an application for a permit is filed, the city engineer shall notify the health officer and such other public agencies as, in his opinion, may be affected and shall request a prompt reply containing their recommendations. Upon request he shall secure from the applicant, and furnish to the affected department or agency, such additional plans or information as it may require relative to such application. (Prior code § 5-4.1107)

13.12.080 Investigation by city departments.
Whenever notified that an application for a permit has been filed, the health officer, city engineer and other city departments affected shall make such investigations as in their opinions are required. The health officer and such other departments shall, within twenty days of notification of the filing of the application, make and file reports of their investigations with the city engineer. Such reports shall narrate all facts found and shall recommend that the application be denied or be granted in whole or in part, and, if granted, subject to what conditions, if any. Such report may also disclaim interest in the application. (Prior code § 5-4.1108)

13.12.090 Notice of violation.
When the health officer finds that industrial waste, effluent, or any other material is being discharged or deposited in such manner as to create a menace to the public health, he may serve a notice of violation upon the person owning or operating the premises, describing the conditions and requiring the prompt correction thereof, and shall so notify the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.1109)

13.12.100 Issuance of permit.
The city engineer shall issue a permit as required by this chapter if he determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

A. That all fees or deposits required have been paid;

B. That recommendations and conditions of the various city departments, as contained in their reports, if any, have been met. The city engineer may waive this provision except as to the recommendations of the health officer;

C. That the material to be discharged or deposited does not, or will not, in the opinion of the health officer, constitute a potential public nuisance or menace to the public health and safety and will not violate other provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state;

D. That the material to be discharged or deposited does not, or will not, involve disposal of any toxic materials or chemicals in such manner as to cause pollution of any stream, water course, lake, or other body of water, or underground or surface water storage reservoir, either natural or artificial;

E. That the material to be discharged or deposited does not, or will not, damage or adversely affect any storm drain, channel, or any public or private property; and

F. That under existing circumstances and conditions it is necessary and reasonable so to dispose of such waste matter. (Prior code § 5-4.1110)

Chapter 13.16
INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMITS
Sections:

13.16.010    Discharge of materials regulated.

13.16.020    Construction of industrial buildings – Permit application.

13.16.030    Construction of industrial buildings – Approval of permit application.

13.16.040    Construction of industrial buildings – Issuance of permits.

13.16.050    Permits subject to limitations.

13.16.060    Requests for hearings on permits.

13.16.070    Investigations of violations.

13.16.080    Notices to correct violations.

13.16.090    Applications for permits following notices.

13.16.100    Suspension of permits.

13.16.110    Recommendations to revoke permits.

13.16.120    Notices of suspension or recommendations to revoke.

13.16.130    Discontinuance of discharges or deposits.

13.16.140    Rights of permittees following notices of violation or suspension.

13.16.150    Reinstatement of permits by the city engineer.

13.16.160    Council hearings – Notices.

13.16.170    Council action following hearings.

13.16.180    Permits not transferable to successors in interest.

13.16.190    Permits not transferable from one location to another.

13.16.200    Automatic permits.

13.16.210    Permit cancellation.

13.16.220    Applications for revised industrial waste disposal permits.

13.16.010 Discharge of materials regulated.
No person shall discharge or deposit, or cause or suffer to be discharged or deposited, at any time, or allow the continued existence of the deposit of any material which may create a public nuisance or menace to the public health or safety or which may pollute underground or surface waters, or which may cause damage to any storm drain channel or public or private property. (Prior code § 5-4.1201)

13.16.020 Construction of industrial buildings – Permit application.
Every person applying for a permit pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Building Code for construction of a new industrial building, or for an addition or alteration to an existing industrial building, shall furnish to the city engineer such plans, information, data, statements or affidavits of the city engineer may require for determination of the nature and quantity of industrial waste involved and the facilities to be provided for the disposal thereof. (Prior code § 5-4.1202)

13.16.030 Construction of industrial buildings – Approval of permit application.
An application for a permit pursuant to the Uniform Building Code to construct a new industrial building, or for an addition or alteration to an existing industrial building, shall not be approved until provision has been made for the installation of such pre-treatment facilities and disposal methods, or both, as, in the opinion of the city engineer, is necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1203)

13.16.040 Construction of industrial buildings – Issuance of permits.
The city engineer shall either grant or deny a permit within thirty days after the receipt of the application.

The city engineer shall notify immediately the applicant whenever he grants a permit, denies a permit, grants a permit subject to special conditions or limitations, or adds to or eliminates any condition or limitation of an existing permit. (Prior code § 5-4.1205)

13.16.050 Permits subject to limitations.
The city engineer may issue a permit containing limitations or conditions, or both, in addition to those recommended by the health officer, or may modify an existing permit by the addition or elimination of such conditions and limitations as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, but a permit covering the discharge, deposit or disposal of wastes other than to a public sewer shall include all the limitations and conditions recommended by the health officer. (Prior code § 5-4.1206)

13.16.060 Requests for hearings on permits.
Within thirty days after the receipt of a notice of the denial of a permit, the granting of a permit subject to conditions or limitations, or the addition of conditions or limitations to an existing permit, the applicant or permittee may file with the council a written demand for a public hearing. If he does not do so, he shall be deemed to have consented to the action of the city engineer and such action shall be final. (Prior code § 5-4.1207)

13.16.070 Investigations of violations.
Notwithstanding any exception mentioned in this chapter, the city engineer shall promptly investigate every complaint charging a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and shall take action to correct any violation discovered. (Prior code § 5-4.1204)

13.16.080 Notices to correct violations.
A. The city engineer may serve a notice of violation upon the person owning or operating premises, describing the conditions and requiring prompt correction thereof, when he finds that:

1. Industrial wastes, effluent or any other material is being maintained, discharged or deposited in such a manner as to create, or if allowed to continue will create, any one or more of the following conditions:

a. A public nuisance,

b. A menace to the public safety,

c. The pollution of underground or surface waters, or

d. Adverse effects or damages to any public sewer, storm drain, channel, or public or private property; or that

2. The permittee has failed to conform with the conditions or limitations of any permit issued in accordance with this chapter.

B. Failure to comply with such notice shall constitute a wilful violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1208)

13.16.090 Applications for permits following notices.
A person who is required to have, but does not have, a permit, and who has been notified by the city engineer that he is required to obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall immediately apply for the required permit and shall rectify and cure all such violations. Failure to do so shall constitute a wilful violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1209)

13.16.100 Suspension of permits.
When the conditions described in Section 13.16.080 are so aggravated that the immediate cessation of operations is necessary, and the city engineer so finds as a fact, he shall suspend the permit. He shall serve notice of such suspension on the permittee. The city engineer may also suspend a permit if the objectionable conditions listed in a notice to correct, served in accordance with Section 13.16.080, are not corrected within the time specified in such notice. (Prior code § 5-4.1210)

13.16.110 Recommendations to revoke permits.
The city engineer may recommend to the council that a suspended permit be revoked. (Prior code § 5-4.1211)

13.16.120 Notices of suspension or recommendations to revoke.
The city engineer shall immediately notify the permittee of the suspension of the permit or of a recommendation to the council that such permit be revoked, or both. (Prior code § 5-4.1212)

13.16.130 Discontinuance of discharges or deposits.
A person whose permit has been suspended, or who has been notified of a violation as provided in this chapter, shall immediately discontinue the deposit or discharge of industrial wastes, sewage or effluent and shall not resume such deposits or discharges until a permit has been issued or reinstated by the city engineer or council as provided in this chapter. Failure so to do shall constitute a wilful violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1213)

13.16.140 Rights of permittees following notices of violation or suspension.
Within the time specified in the notice of violation or suspension, the permittee shall:

A. Correct and remedy the conditions so specified to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

B. File with the council a denial that all of the conditions which the permittee admits do exist; or

C. File with the council a denial that any of the conditions so specified exist and request a public hearing. (Prior code § 5-4.1214)

13.16.150 Reinstatement of permits by the city engineer.
The city engineer shall reinstate a suspended permit when all violations have been corrected and all the fees required by this chapter have been paid. (Prior code § 5-4.1215)

13.16.160 Council hearings – Notices.
Within thirty days after an application for a hearing has been requested, the council shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing to the applicant or permittee, the city engineer, and to the health officer, when matters pertaining to public health are involved, at least ten days in advance of the date set for such hearing. (Prior code § 5-4.1216)

13.16.170 Council action following hearings.
After a public hearing requested by the applicant or a permittee, the council may:

A. Confirm the action of the city engineer in denying a permit or the issuance of a permit subject to special conditions and limitations;

B. Instruct the city engineer to issue a permit without conditions or limitations or with such special conditions and limitations as the council may designate;

C. Continue the suspension of an existing permit invoked by the city engineer pending the correction of objectionable conditions by the permittee;

D. Remove the suspension of an existing permit invoked by the city engineer pending the correction of objectionable conditions by the permittee;

E. Deny that objectionable conditions exist and reinstate an existing permit; or

F. Revoke an existing permit on any of the following grounds:

1. The failure of the permittee to correct conditions as required by the city engineer,

2. Conditions which would justify the denial of a permit,

3. If fraud or deceit was employed in obtaining the permit, or

4. For any other violation of this chapter or of any permit, license or exception granted by this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1217)

13.16.180 Permits not transferable to successors in interest.
The successor in title or interest of a premises for which a permit had previously been granted shall file with the city engineer a new permit application in accordance with the provisions of Sections 13.08.050 or 13.12.040 within thirty days after the assumption of such title or interest and shall furnish plans and data as may be required by the city engineer. If it appears from the application and data that the succeeding operation and disposal practices comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer, upon the receipt of the fees required by this chapter, shall issue such permit. (Prior code § 5-4.1219)

13.16.190 Permits not transferable from one location to another.
Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable from one location to another, and discharge of wastes shall be made strictly in accordance with all the provisions contained in the permit at the location specifically designated therein. (Prior code § 5-4.1220)

13.16.200 Automatic permits.
Persons legally discharging industrial liquid wastes into the public sewer or otherwise on or prior to March 27, 1958, are automatically granted an industrial waste disposal permit. (Prior code § 5-4.1221)

13.16.210 Permit cancellation.
A. A person owning or operating premises containing industrial waste treatment or disposal facilities operated under a valid permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may file a written request with the city engineer to cancel such permit upon the termination of operations. Upon the receipt of such a request the city engineer shall investigate and cancel the permit if he determines that:

1. All industrial waste producing operations have ceased;

2. Any industrial waste treatment facilities have been rendered inoperable to prevent further use;

3. All permits to abandon or disconnect as may be required by the plumbing code of the city have been obtained;

4. Any industrial wastes remaining on the premises have been removed to a legal point of disposal; and

5. All fees required by this chapter due up to the date of the request for cancellation have been paid.

B. Should the city engineer deny a request for a permit cancellation, the owner or operator of any facilities required by the permit shall maintain such facilities in good operating condition and pay all the fees required by this chapter to maintain a valid permit. (Prior code § 5-4.1221.1)

13.16.220 Applications for revised industrial waste disposal permits.
A permittee shall submit to the city engineer an application for a revised industrial waste disposal permit and obtain approval prior to effecting any of the following waste discharge conditions:

A. A change in the method of disposal;

B. A change in the disposal point for nonsewered discharges;

C. A change in the discharge volume affecting treatment or storage facilities; or

D. A change in the character of the waste discharge. (Prior code § 5-4.1221.2)

Chapter 13.20
INDUSTRIAL WASTE TREATMENT PLANTS AND FACILITIES
Sections:

13.20.010    Industrial waste treatment plants or facilities required.

13.20.020    Industrial waste treatment facilities not required – When.

13.20.030    Installations.

13.20.040    Separation of domestic and industrial wastes.

13.20.050    Maintenance and operation.

13.20.060    Inspections.

13.20.070    Access to properties.

13.20.080    Compliance with owner’s safety regulations.

13.20.090    Test manholes or structures.

13.20.100    Industrial waste disposal permit fees and deposits.

13.20.010 Industrial waste treatment plants or facilities required.
Industrial waste treatment plants or facilities shall be installed whenever the city engineer shall find as a fact that such facilities are required:

A. To safeguard the public health;

B. To prevent the pollution of streams or bodies of surface or underground waters;

C. To prevent the pollution of water wells or storage reservoirs, either natural or artificial;

D. To prevent damages or increased maintenance costs in the sewerage system;

E. To prevent damages to public or private property;

F. To prevent a public nuisance; or

G. To comply with the applicable regulations of any other public agency. (Prior code § 5-4.1301)

13.20.020 Industrial waste treatment facilities not required – When.
The installation of industrial waste treatment facilities may not be required if the city engineer determines that:

A. The waste is prohibited for discharge to the available systems by this or other applicable laws or regulations;

B. The affected industry has guaranteed to separately dispose of any objectionable waste to legal points of disposal;

C. Adequate facilities are to be provided for the collection and containment of such wastes and provisions have been made to prevent the intentional or accidental discharge of such wastes to the sewer system, ground surface, surface or underground water supplies, rivers, channels, storm drains, public streets or gutters;

D. An application for an industrial waste disposal permit has been filed in accordance with Chapter 13.12; and

E. All fees required by this chapter have been paid. (Prior code § 5-4.1302)

13.20.030 Installations.
Interceptors or other industrial waste treatment plants or facilities shall be so installed and constructed that they shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection and maintenance. (Prior code § 5-4.1303)

13.20.040 Separation of domestic and industrial wastes.
All domestic wastes from rest rooms, showers, drinking fountains and the like shall be kept separate from all industrial wastes until the industrial wastes have passed through any required pretreatment facilities. (Prior code § 5-4.1303.1)

13.20.050 Maintenance and operation.
All industrial waste treatment plants or facilities and all sewage treatment plants and appurtenances thereto existing or hereafter constructed under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be maintained by the owner or person having jurisdiction of the property affected in good operating condition and in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. All devices and safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation thereof and all records of such operations, shall be maintained in good order. (Prior code § 5-4.1304)

13.20.060 Inspections.
The city engineer, at no cost to the permittee, shall make tests of industrial wastes and periodic inspections of sewage treatment plants and industrial waste treatment plants or facilities to determine whether such treatment plants or facilities are maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The city engineer, at no cost to the permittee, shall also make periodic tests of samples of sewage, industrial wastes, or effluents obtained at the point of discharge or deposit to determine whether such discharges or deposits are made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1305)

13.20.070 Access to properties.
The city engineer shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to inspect sewage treatment plants and industrial waste treatment plants or facilities and to enter and inspect the place, enclosure or structure where industrial wastes or effluents are discharged or deposited.

No person shall refuse to permit or hinder or obstruct in any way any reasonable inspection or investigation of such treatment plants, facilities, deposits, or discharges by the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.1306)

13.20.080 Compliance with owner’s safety regulations.
The city engineer shall comply with any special safety regulations brought to his attention by the owner or operator. (Ord. 1726 § 20, 2011: prior code § 5-4.1307)

13.20.090 Test manholes or structures.
The city engineer may require the installation of a test manhole or other structure through which all industrial waste shall pass. Such structure shall be so designed that flows may be measured and samples readily obtained therefrom. (Prior code § 5-4.1308)

13.20.100 Industrial waste disposal permit fees and deposits.
A. The fees for the issuance of industrial waste disposal permits shall be the same as those established by the county of Los Angeles in Title 20, Utilities, Division 2, Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance, Sections 20.36.230, 20.36.240, 20.36.245, 20.36.250, 20.36.260, 20.36.265, 20.36.270, 20.36.280, 20.36.290, 20.36.295 of the Los Angeles County Code and any subsequent amendments or modifications thereto. In addition, the city engineer shall collect a surcharge of twenty percent of all fees collected to defray the city’s administrative and engineering costs.

B. The city engineer shall enforce all of the conditions and requirements and collect the fees and deposits set forth in subsection A of this section.

C. The term “city engineer” shall be substituted for the term “director” in all of the sections referenced in subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 5-4.1401)

Chapter 13.24
SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
Sections:

13.24.010    Scope.

13.24.020    Definitions.

13.24.030    Authority to enforce.

13.24.040    Sewer connection permits required.

13.24.050    Determinations of capacity.

13.24.060    Building plans required.

13.24.070    Connection fees.

13.24.080    Sewer fund – Deposits.

13.24.090    Sewer fund – Use.

13.24.100    Refunds of connection fees.

13.24.110    Waiver of charges.

13.24.010 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to new buildings, substantially altered buildings, and changes in building occupancies for which building permits have been issued after May 10, 1979. (Prior code § 5-4.1501)

13.24.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Average daily flow” means the number of gallons of sewage discharged into the public sewer during a typical twenty-four hour period.

“City engineer” means the city engineer of the city, or his assistant or duly appointed representative.

“Floor area” means the area within the surrounding walls of a building, or portions thereof, exclusive of vents, shafts and courts.

“Peak flow” means the instantaneous maximum rate of sewage discharged to the public sewer and, for the purposes of this chapter shall be determined as three times the average daily flow rate.

“Public sewer” means the main line public sanitary sewer, including any sewer or sanitary pipeline or portion thereof, and any sewer main, trunk sewer, or appurtenance in a public place or sewer easement which connects, directly or indirectly, any lot or part thereof with any part of the sanitary sewer system of the city. (Prior code § 5-4.1502)

13.24.030 Authority to enforce.
The city engineer shall enforce and administer all the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1503)

13.24.040 Sewer connection permits required.
A. A sewer connection permit shall be required for any person to make, or cause to be made, a connection to a public sewer.

B. The sewer connection permit and the fee required for such permit shall be obtained from the city engineer. The fee for such permit shall be based on the established fees as prescribed in this chapter. (Prior code § 5-4.1504)

13.24.050 Determinations of capacity.
A. Public sewers shall provide, at all times, sufficient capacity for peak flow rates of discharge. The city engineer shall determine the necessary capacity required by each public sewer to efficiently provide proper sewage collection throughout the city. When it is determined by the city engineer that the anticipated sewage discharge generated from a proposed development or redevelopment will exceed the capacity in the existing sewer system, the building permit of such development or redevelopment shall not be issued.

B. The following table is established as a basis for computing the average daily flow to the sanitary sewer:

Occupancy

Average Daily Flow

Single-family residences, including condominiums and apartments

200 gallons per dwelling unit

Assembly areas

5 gallons for each 7 sq. ft. of floor area usable for seating occupancy

Auditoriums

5 gallons for each 7 sq. ft. of floor area usable for seating occupancy

Bars and cocktail lounges

20 gallons for each 15 sq. ft. of floor area usable for seating occupancy

Churches

200 gallons per day per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area usable for seating occupancy

Hospitals

 

Surgical

500 gallons per bed; and

Convalescent

100 gallons per bed

Hotels

200 gallons per room or apartment unit

Industry, light (no water processes)

300 gallons per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Laundries, automatic (public)

75 gallons per machine

Medical offices

300 gallons per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Motels

200 gallons per unit

Offices

200 gallons per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Restaurants

50 gallons for each 15 sq. ft. of floor area usable for seating occupancy

Schools

 

Elementary

9 gallons per capita; and

Others

25 gallons per capita

Stands for sales of lunches, ice cream, beverages and similar items

300 gallons per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Storage garages and warehouses

25 gallons per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Stores, commercial and display

100 gallons per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

C. Any other occupancy not specifically mentioned shall be classified by the occupancy it most closely resembles as determined by the city engineer.

D. The daily flow to the sanitary sewer for a building containing mixed occupancies shall be the summation of the peak flows of the various occupancies as set forth in the table above.

E. The daily flow from a room or building which is used for a variety of occupancies at different times shall be determined by the occupancy which yields the largest peak flow.

F. In the event an area of occupancy, in use prior to May 10, 1979, is to undergo structural modifications and such modifications shall not increase the peak flow as it existed from the location to the sanitary sewer immediately prior to such date, the owner shall submit to the city engineer an affidavit or statement pursuant to Section 2015.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state, in duplicate, verifying the actual occupancy load prior to such date.

G. The average daily flow rates as depicted in the table set forth in this section shall be used as a standard for calculating the total average daily flow. However, the peak flow rate, which is three times the average daily flow rate, shall be used as a basis of computing connection fees because the peak flow rate reflects the design criteria of the sewer system. (Prior code § 5-4.1505)

13.24.060 Building plans required.
In order to calculate the peak flow sewage discharged to the sanitary sewers, a set of building plans and/or any other information required shall be submitted to the city engineer. (Prior code § 5-4.1506)

13.24.070 Connection fees.
A. Every application for a sewer connection shall be accompanied by the following connection fees:

1. For each single-family residence unit, including condominiums, each unit of multiple dwelling, each hotel room and each motel unit or motel apartment, the sum of one hundred forty dollars per unit;

2. For each bar or cocktail lounge, the sum of fifty five dollars for every fifteen square feet of floor area usable for seating occupancy;

3. For each industrial unit where no water processes are directly involved in the industry, the sum of eight hundred ten dollars for each one thousand square feet of floor area;

4. For each medical office or unit providing medical, dental or veterinarian services, the sum of eight hundred ten dollars for each one thousand square feet of floor area;

5. For each restaurant, the sum of one hundred thirty-five dollars for every fifteen square feet of floor area usable for seating occupancy;

6. For each auditorium or assembly area, the sum of three dollars and fifty cents for every seven square feet of floor area usable for seating occupancy;

7. a. For each surgical hospital, seven hundred dollars per bed; and

b. For each convalescent hospital, one hundred forty dollars per bed;

8. For each elementary school, the sum of six dollars and thirty cents per student; for all other schools, the sum of seventeen dollars and fifty cents per student;

9. For each outdoor restaurant, lunch stand, or lunch counter devoted to the sale of lunches, ice cream, beverages and similar items, the sum of eight hundred ten dollars for each one thousand square feet of floor area;

10. For each storage garage and warehouse, seventy dollars for each 1,000 square feet of floor area;

11. For each store and shop devoted to commercial enterprises or display purposes, the sum of two hundred seventy dollars for each one thousand square feet of floor area;

12. For each public automatic laundry, the sum of three hundred dollars per machine;

13. For each church, the sum of two hundred eighty dollars for every one thousand square feet of floor area usable for seating occupancy;

14. For each office not otherwise specifically enumerated, the sum of five hundred forty dollars for each one thousand square feet of floor area; and

15. For each use category other than those defined in this section, the sum of ninety dollars per one hundred gallons per day of peak flow.

B. The applicant shall declare all the information necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall pay to the city engineer, at the time of the issuance of a permit, those charges based on the peak flow created by the new construction as established by subsection A of this section. No plumbing permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the charges levied by this chapter have been paid. (Prior code § 5-4.1507)

13.24.080 Sewer fund – Deposits.
All revenues collected pursuant to Section 13.24.070 shall be deposited with the city treasurer and credited to the city sewer fund. (Prior code § 5-4.1508)

13.24.090 Sewer fund – Use.
All revenues received in the city sewer fund may be expended or transferred from the city sewer fund only for the following reasons:

A. To accomplish any lawful purpose relating to sewer construction or improvement;

B. To accomplish any lawful purpose set forth in Section 5471 of the Health and Safety Code of the state;

C. To accomplish any other sewer purpose the council may lawfully authorize;

D. To pay engineering costs, mileage expenses, overhead costs and construction costs necessarily incurred in the construction of relief sewers;

E. To pay refunds as authorized by Section 13.24.100; and

F. To repay, with or without interest, funds advanced to the city sewer fund from any other fund. (Prior code § 5-4.1509)

13.24.100 Refunds of connection fees.
In the event any person shall have paid the applicable sewer charge based on the peak flow created by the new construction as provided in this chapter, and no portion of the new construction shall have been commenced and the permit for such construction shall have been canceled or expired, such person shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the sewer charges paid by such person, minus one percent of said charge; however, the amount retained shall be not less than ten dollars nor more than one hundred dollars. (Prior code § 5-4.1510)

13.24.110 Waiver of charges.
The city council may by resolution waive the payment of sewer connection charges if it finds that all or a substantial portion of a multiple unit residential development is being built for senior citizens or low and moderate income housing and all or part of the funds for said construction are being provided by state or federal agencies. (Prior code § 5-4.1511)

Chapter 13.26
SEWER USE FEE
Sections:

13.26.010    Scope.

13.26.020    Definitions.

13.26.030    Amount of fee – Penalties.

13.26.040    Collection and remission of fees.

13.26.050    Collection of delinquent fees.

13.26.060    Sewer use fee funds/expenditures.

13.26.070    Senior citizen and other exemptions.

13.26.010 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all real property within the city which is connected to the city’s sewer system. All owners and/or users shall be liable for the amount of the fee charged against the real property. (Ord. 1503 § 2 (part), 1996)

13.26.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

“Collector” means Golden State Water Company.

“Owner” means the owner of the real property connected to the city’s sewer system as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll.

“Real property” means any parcel, lot or subdivision of land used for any purpose which discharges into the city’s sewer system.

“Sewer use fee” or “fee” means the amount charged to the real property based upon the amount of domestic water used on the real property.

“User” means the occupant of the real property that discharges into the city’s sewer system.

“Water user” means the person or legal entity who has applied for water service and to whom the water bills are addressed. (Ord. 1726 § 21, 2011; Ord. 1503 § 2 (part), 1996)

13.26.030 Amount of fee – Penalties.
A. The sewer use fee shall be as follows:

Residential includes single-family house, single-unit apartment and condominium, and single-unit mobile home.

Nonresidential includes any other unit and classification.

 

Fixed Sewer Charge per Water Meter Unit per Month 

Water Meter Size

Residential

Nonresidential

SLRP

50% Rebate

N/A

5/8"

$2

$2

3/4"

$3

$3

1"

$4

$4

1-1/2"

$5

$5

2"

$6

$6

3"

$7

$7

4" and above

$8

$8

 

Sewer Usage Rate per Sewer Unit (ccf*)

Class

Feb. 10, 2017

July 1, 2017

July 1, 2018

July 1, 2019

July 1, 2020

Residential

$0.3500

$0.4358

$0.5345

$0.6481

$0.7786

Nonresidential

$0.5000

$0.5965

$0.7075

$0.8350

$0.9815

*ccf = centum cubic feet, or 748 gallons

B. Any fee not paid within the time specified on the bill sent by the collector shall be considered delinquent nineteen days from the date of mailing. A late charge of up to one and one-half percent of an unpaid balance may be imposed upon delinquent accounts with a minimum amount of one dollar being imposed. (Ord. 1769 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1503 § 2 (part), 1996)

13.26.040 Collection and remission of fees.
A. The sewer use fee and any late charges imposed shall be calculated by the collector and said amount shall be added to the water bills of all water users and shown as a separate line item on the bill. The sewer use fee shall be collected for the same time period as the fees for water. The sewer use fee shall be due and payable at the same time as payment of the water bill.

B. The city shall enter into an agreement with the collector which establishes the terms and conditions upon which the collection shall be made as required by Health and Safety Code Section 5472.5. (Ord. 1503 § 2 (part), 1996)

13.26.050 Collection of delinquent fees.
All sewer use fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be a civil debt owed to the city by both the customer and the user and may be collected by the city through any means legally available, including the assessment procedure set forth herein.

A. Assessment Against Property. Any fees authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid for a period of sixty or more days after the date upon which they were billed may be collected by the city as provided herein.

1. Once a year, prior to August 10th of each calendar year, the city council shall cause a report of delinquent charges to be prepared. The city council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto. The report shall identify the user, the owner if different than the user and a description of each parcel of real property receiving sewer service for which the fees are more than sixty days delinquent.

2. The city clerk shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to the user listed on the report as well as to any owner of the real property for which the fee has not been paid. The notice shall be mailed not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.

3. At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of the users as well as the owners liable to be assessed for the delinquent charges. The city council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, the report shall be confirmed by resolution and attested to by the city clerk.

4. The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute assessments against the properties listed therein and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the finance director for the amounts of the respective assessments and it shall be the duty of the finance director to add the amounts of the assessment to the next regular bill of taxes to be levied against the real property. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of such taxes shall be applicable to such assessment.

B. Civil Action. The city may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the user and/or owner. Reasonable attorneys’ fees shall be awarded if the city prevails in such litigation.

C. The remedies in this section are cumulative and are in addition to any other remedies which the city may have in accordance with law. (Ord. 1503 § 2 (part), 1996)

13.26.060 Sewer use fee funds/expenditures.
A. All sewer use fees collected shall be deposited with the city treasurer and credited to a sewer use fee fund.

B. All sewer use fees shall be expended for the following uses only:

1. For the design, investigation, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade and periodic reconstruction of the city’s sanitary sewer system;

2. For compliance with the state of California Health and Safety Code requirements relating to the operation and maintenance of sewer systems;

3. For such other sewer purposes the city council may lawfully authorize. (Ord. 1503 § 2 (part), 1996)

13.26.070 Senior citizen and other exemptions.
A. The city council, by resolution, may waive payment of the sewer use fees for multiple-unit residential developments housing senior citizens of low to moderate income.

B. Sewer Lifeline Rebate Program (SLRP). Any single-family residential unit where the individual who is the head of the household is either sixty years of age or older, or a veteran, or who qualifies under the California Alternative Rates for Energy (CARE) Program guidelines based on the recent criteria published by the California Public Utilities Commission, shall receive a fifty percent rebate on the monthly fixed sewer charge. In order to qualify for this rebate, the individual shall file an application in a form, time, and manner prescribed by the chief fiscal officer.

C. The sewer use fee shall not apply to any meter owned by the city. (Ord. 1769 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1503 § 2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 13.28
MOVING OVERSIZED LOADS
Sections:

13.28.010    Permit required.

13.28.020    Permit – Application.

13.28.030    Permit – Issuance.

13.28.040    Insurance.

13.28.050    Overweight approval.

13.28.060    Obstructing wires.

13.28.070    Oversized loads consisting of buildings.

13.28.080    Inspections.

13.28.090    Protection of streets.

13.28.100    Repairs to streets.

13.28.110    Lights.

13.28.120    Compliance with other laws required.

13.28.130    Liability.

13.28.010 Permit required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to move, or cause to be moved, any load which exceeds the width, height, length or weight limits set forth in the California Vehicle Code (“Oversized Load”), over, upon, or across any public highway or other public place in the city without first obtaining a permit in writing from the city engineer in the manner provided for in this chapter.

B. Permits shall be either for a single trip or for an annual term.

C. Every permit shall become void upon the expiration date shown on the permit; however, the city engineer may extend the time when the moving of any oversized load is rendered impracticable or impossible by reasons beyond the control of the permittee. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.020 Permit – Application.
A. Any person desiring to move, or to cause to be moved, any oversized load over, upon, along, or across any public highway or other public place in the city shall first file a written application with the city engineer, specifying among other items, the kind of load to be moved, the location of the same, the location to which the load will be moved and the route to be traveled. The form of the permit application shall be that which has been developed by the California Department of Transportation (“Caltrans”).

B. The application shall be filed at least seventy-two hours prior to date and time for which it is needed.

C. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee set by resolution of the city council. The fees charged shall not exceed the fees set by Caltrans. If special services such as engineering investigations, escorts, or tree trimming are required due to unusually large or heavy loads, such services shall be charged to the applicant at their actual cost to the city, including overhead costs, not to exceed the hourly rate set forth by Caltrans.

D. The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury. (Ord. 1726 § 22, 2011: Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.030 Permit – Issuance.
A. Upon the approval of such application, the city engineer shall issue a permit for the moving of the oversized load listed in the application.

B. The city engineer may impose such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect the public highways, public places, foundations, surfaces and structures and to assure against undue interference with traffic. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.040 Insurance.
Prior to being issued a permit, the applicant shall provide proof of vehicle insurance in the maximum amounts allowed in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 16500.5. Additional insurance in an amount determined necessary by the city engineer may be required for unusually large or heavy loads which pose a substantial threat to public facilities in the opinion of the city engineer. The insurance must name the city, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers as additional insured. (Ord. 1726 § 23, 2011: Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.050 Overweight approval.
The city engineer shall not issue a permit to move any load when the weight of load, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code, unless every wheel of the vehicle is equipped with pneumatic tires and the city engineer determines that such movement will not cause injury to the highways, bridges and appurtenances installed therein or thereunder. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.060 Obstructing wires.
A. Before issuing a permit for the movement of a vehicle or object with a rolling height of over sixteen feet, the city engineer shall require evidence or notice of approval of height clearance from the public utility companies having overhead lines crossing the proposed route. Utilities may give notice by telephone.

B. Should it be necessary to cut, remove, or raise any telephone, power, or other wires, the permittee shall give forty-eight hours written notice to the owner, manager, or operator of any telephone, power, or other wires which must be cut, removed, or raised. The permittee shall arrange with the owner of the wires for the wires to be cut, removed or raised during the time of moving. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.070 Oversized loads consisting of buildings.
A. If the permittee proposes to place a building being moved upon any property in the city, a permit must first be obtained from the building official indicating that the building is of a type and is to be placed in such a manner that will not be in violation of any of the laws of the city.

B. Whenever any building is divided into two or more sections or portions and is to be moved over, upon, along, or across any public highway or other public place, a separate permit shall be issued for the moving of each section or portion of the building. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.080 Inspections.
The city engineer may require oversized loads to be moved over, upon, along, or across any public highway or public place under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the city engineer. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.090 Protection of streets.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to protect any public highway or public place. Damage caused by the permittee shall be the sole responsibility of permittee. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.100 Repairs to streets.
In the event of unrepaired damage to any public highway or other public place caused by the moving of any oversized load, the city engineer shall cause the work to be done which is necessary to completely restore the public highway or other public place and shall charge the cost thereof to the permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for all construction, engineering and administrative costs. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.110 Lights.
It is unlawful for any person moving, or causing to be moved, any oversized load to fail, refuse, or neglect to provide red lights at each corner of the oversized load or at the end of any projection during the moving upon any public highway or other public place. Sufficient lighting and warning lights shall be provided by permittee. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.120 Compliance with other laws required.
When authorized by a permit issued by the city engineer to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load of dimension or weight or other characteristic generally prohibited by law, the permittee shall comply with the general laws regulating travel over a public highway, including posted signs or notices which limit a speed, direction of travel, the weight which may be placed upon a structure or public highway, or the width or height that may be moved on, over, or across public highway, unless otherwise exempt by the permit. (Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

13.28.130 Liability.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any permittee for any damages sustained whatsoever by anyone through injury or otherwise occasioned by any defect or negligence of permittee; nor shall the city, or any agent thereof, be held as assuming any liability whatsoever by reason of the inspection, supervision, or regulation authorized by the provisions of this chapter.

B. Permittee shall be required to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees, and volunteers from any liability related to the movement of the oversized load.

C. In accepting this permit and not withstanding any insurance required pursuant to this chapter, the permittee agrees to repair at his own expense and to the satisfaction of the city engineer any damage to street or highway appurtenances or structures resulting from travel under this permit. Notwithstanding, work or repair may be done by the department of public works at the option of the city engineer, the cost to be borne by the permittee. In the event of damage to city facilities such as streets, traffic signals, light standards and other appurtenances, a written report must be filed with the city engineer within seventy-two hours after such damage has been done. Failure to make this report will be considered cause for cancellation of all permit privileges pending a satisfactory arrangement for repair or replacement of the damaged facility. (Ord. 1726 § 24, 2011: Ord. 1473 § 2 (part), 1994)

Chapter 13.32
PIPELINE FRANCHISES
Sections:

13.32.010    Short title.

13.32.020    General conditions.

13.32.030    Pole lines.

13.32.040    Definitions.

13.32.050    Term.

13.32.060    Acceptance of franchises.

13.32.070    Nonexclusive franchises.

13.32.080    Change in status.

13.32.090    Maps.

13.32.100    Insurance.

13.32.110    Faithful performance bonds.

13.32.120    Alternate security.

13.32.130    Determination of length.

13.32.140    Forfeiture.

13.32.150    Value of franchises.

13.32.160    State highways.

13.32.170    Eminent domain.

13.32.180    Publication costs.

13.32.190    Assignments.

13.32.200    Prior franchises.

13.32.210    City officers.

13.32.220    Hold harmless.

13.32.230    Standards.

13.32.240    Conflicting improvements.

13.32.250    Relocation.

13.32.260    Defective facilities.

13.32.270    Hazardous substances.

13.32.280    Compensation – Rates.

13.32.290    Proration of payments.

13.32.300    Franchise fee – Records.

13.32.310    Construction requirements.

13.32.320    New installations or replacements.

13.32.330    Construction permits.

13.32.340    Work on and restoration of streets.

13.32.350    Failure to timely comply – Additional fees.

13.32.360    Construction completion statement.

13.32.370    Damage or injury – Franchisee responsibility.

13.32.380    Appurtenances.

13.32.390    Ordinary repairs.

13.32.400    Relocation of pipelines and appurtenances.

13.32.410    Breaks or leaks.

13.32.420    Emergency equipment.

13.32.430    Removal or abandonment of facilities.

13.32.440    Removal or abandonment of facilities – Failure to comply.

13.32.450    Abandonment in place – Conditions.

13.32.460    Special provisions for oil pipelines – Rights granted.

13.32.470    Special provisions for oil pipelines – Materials used.

13.32.480    Special provisions for oil pipelines – Approvals.

13.32.490    Special provisions for oil pipelines – Reports.

13.32.500    Special provisions for oil pipelines – Payments due.

13.32.510    Special provisions for oil pipelines – Nonapplicability.

13.32.520    Public utilities – Reports of gross receipts.

13.32.530    Public utilities – Reports of permits for mains.

13.32.540    Public utilities – Payments.

13.32.550    Special provisions for gas pipelines – Rights granted.

13.32.560    Special provisions for gas pipelines – Approval.

13.32.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as “the pipeline franchise law.” (Prior code § 7-7.101)

13.32.020 General conditions.
Every franchise hereafter granted by the city to lay or construct from time to time and to maintain, operate, renew, repair, change the size of, remove or abandon in place pipes and pipelines for the collection, transportation, or distribution of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances, water, waste water, mud, steam and other liquid substances which are not more hazardous than the aforementioned substances, together with all manholes, valves, appurtenances and service connections necessary or convenient for the operation of such pipes or pipelines, including conduits, cathodic protection devices, wires, cables and other appurtenances necessary or convenient for the exercise of the franchisee’s business, in, under, along or across any and all streets within the city, except as otherwise provided in the ordinance granting the franchise, shall be granted upon and be subject to the rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and conditions of this chapter, in addition to those rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and conditions set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise. This chapter shall not apply to any public utility organized for the purpose of supplying or distributing water, to any mutual water company, or to any other water company when transporting water. (Prior code § 7-7.102)

13.32.030 Pole lines.
Nothing in this chapter or in any ordinance granting such a franchise shall be construed to permit the grantee to construct new poles or other facilities aboveground. (Prior code § 7-7.103)

13.32.040 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Department” means the community development department of the city.

“Director” means the director of the community development department of the city.

“Facility” or “appurtenance” means any property of the franchisee, including, but not limited to, pipelines, pump stations, and service connections with the franchisee’s facilities, whether installed by the franchisee or not, erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in, upon, over, under, along or across any street pursuant to any right or privilege granted by the franchise.

“Fire chief” means the fire chief of the city.

“Franchise” or “grantee” means the person to whom a franchise is granted pursuant to this chapter and any person to whom such franchise is lawfully assigned.

“Franchise payment period” means a calendar year.

“Franchise report period” in all cases means a calendar year.

“Main” means any pipeline or conduit laid in, along or approximately parallel with any street for the collection, transmission or distribution of any substance or commodity.

“Major street” means any street, or portion thereof, designated as a major secondary highway in the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

“Minor street” means all streets in the city other than those designated as “major” or “secondary highways” in the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

“Person” means any individual, person, firm, partnership or corporation.

“Service connection” means the wires, pipes or conduits connecting the building or place where the service or commodity supplied by the franchisee is used or delivered, or is made available for use or delivery, with the supply line or supply main in the highway or with such supply line or supply main on private property.

“Street” means any street, road, highway, alley, lane, court or other public easement, and above and below the same, which now exists or may hereafter exist in the city and in which the city has the authority to grant a franchise. (Prior code § 7-7.104)

13.32.050 Term.
Unless the ordinance granting the franchise provides otherwise, the term of the franchise shall be twenty-five years. (Prior code § 7-7.105)

13.32.060 Acceptance of franchises.
The franchisee, within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance granting the franchise, shall file with the city clerk and with the director a written acceptance of the terms and conditions of such ordinance. (Prior code § 7-7.106)

13.32.070 Nonexclusive franchises.
The granting of the franchise shall not be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical or similar franchise to any person other than the franchisee. Nothing contained in this chapter shall ever be construed so as to exempt the franchisee from compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the city now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with the terms of the franchise. (Prior code § 7-7.107)

13.32.080 Change in status.
If, after the granting of a franchise to other than a public utility, the franchisee qualifies before the Public Utilities Commission of the state as a common carrier, or if, after the granting of a franchise to a public utility, the franchisee is found or determined to not be a public utility or common carrier, the franchisee shall then have no right to continue to operate under this chapter after the date of such qualification, except with the consent of the council, granted upon such additional terms and conditions as the council may deem proper. (Prior code § 7-7.108)

13.32.090 Maps.
Within ninety days following the date in which any facilities or appurtenances have been laid, removed or abandoned under the franchise, the franchisee shall file a map or maps with the department showing the accurate “as built” location, depth and size of the facilities or appurtenances so laid, removed or abandoned. (Prior code § 7-7.109)

13.32.100 Insurance.
A. On or before the commencement of any franchise operation, the franchisee shall obtain or provide satisfactory evidence of having polices of liability and worker’s compensation insurance from companies authorized to transact business in the State by the Insurance Commissioner of the State.

1. The policy of liability insurance shall:

a. Be issued to the franchisee and name the city and its officers, agents and employees as additional insured; and

b. Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury and death and damages to property arising from activities conducted pursuant to the franchise by providing coverage therefor, including, but not limited to, coverage for:

i. Negligent acts or omissions of the franchisee, and the agents, servants, and employees thereof, committed in the conduct of franchise operations,

ii. Provide a combined single limit liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars, and

iii. Be noncancellable without thirty days’ written notice thereof directed to the city.

2. The policy of worker’s compensation insurance shall:

a. Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the Insurance Commissioner of the state;

b. Cover all employees of the franchise who, in the course and scope of their employment, are to conduct or do work pursuant to the franchise operations;

c. Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereafter conferred by Division 4 of the Labor Code of the state upon an injured employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits; and

d. Be noncancellable without thirty days’ written notice thereof directed to the city. The franchisee shall file with the city prior to the commencement of any franchise operation either certified copies of such policies or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to such policy:

i. The policy number,

ii. The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire,

iii. The names of the named insured and any additional insureds,

iv. The subject of the insurance,

v. The type of coverage provided by the insurance,

vi. The amount of the limit of coverage provided by the insurance, and

vii. A description of all endorsements which form a part of the policy.

B. No franchise operation shall commence until the franchisee has complied with the provisions of this section and any such operations shall be suspended during any period the franchisee fails to maintain such policies in full force and effect. (Prior code § 7-7.110)

13.32.110 Faithful performance bonds.
On or before the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, the franchisee shall file and thereafter at all times during the life of the franchise keep on file with the city clerk a corporate surety bond approved by the city attorney running to the city in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars, with a surety to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the franchisee shall well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each condition of the franchise and that, in case of any breach of any condition of the bond, the whole amount of the penal sum shall be deemed to be liquidated damages and shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties of the bond. If such bond is not filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, the award of the franchise may be set aside and the ordinance granting the franchise repealed at any time prior to the filing of such bond, and any money paid in consideration for such award of the franchise shall be deemed forfeited. In the event such bond, after it has been so filed, shall at any time during the life of the franchise become insufficient, the franchisee agrees to renew such bond, subject to the approval of the city attorney, within ten days after written notice from the city to do so. (Prior code § 7-7.111)

13.32.120 Alternate security.
In lieu of the bond required pursuant to Section 13.32.110, the franchisee may file alternate security approved by the city attorney. (Prior code § 7-7.112)

13.32.130 Determination of length.
Whenever the length of any wire, pipe, or conduit is a factor in calculating any payment due under any such franchise granted by the city, all service connections shall be excluded in determining such length. (Prior code § 7-7.113)

13.32.140 Forfeiture.
The franchise shall be granted and shall be held and enjoyed upon each and every condition contained in the ordinance granting the franchise, including such conditions contained in this chapter as are incorporated by reference in such franchise ordinance, and shall ever be strictly construed against the grantee. Any neglect, failure or refusal to comply with any of the conditions of the franchise shall constitute grounds for the suspension or forfeiture thereof. The council, prior to any suspension or forfeiture of the franchise, shall give to the grantee not less than thirty days’ notice in writing of any default thereunder. If the grantee, within the noticed period, does not begin the work of compliance or, after such beginning, does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the council shall hold a hearing at which the grantee shall have the right to appear and be heard, and thereupon the council will determine whether such conditions are material and essential to the franchise and whether the grantee is in default with respect thereto and may declare the franchise suspended or forfeited. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the grantee by certified mail not less than five days before such hearing. (Prior code § 7-7.114)

13.32.150 Value of franchises.
The grantee of any franchise awarded to a public utility, by accepting the terms and conditions thereof, stipulates and agrees that in any proceeding for the purpose of adjusting the rates of the grantee, no greater value shall be placed upon the franchise that the actual cash paid therefor by the grantee. (Prior code § 7-7.115)

13.32.160 State highways.
If any street, or portion thereof, shall become a state highway, except for the right to continue to collect franchise payments in such other rights as by law remain with the city, the state shall succeed to all rights reserved to the city by the franchise, but this provision shall not preclude the grantee from receiving reimbursement for the relocation of its facilities if and to the extent otherwise lawfully entitled to.

This section shall apply to any street, or portion thereof, which becomes a state highway in which the grantee maintains its facilities under the authorization of the franchise at the time such street, or such portion thereof, becomes a state highway, whether at such time it is under the jurisdiction of the city or any other public entity.

This section shall not require any change or location in a state highway for a temporary purpose. (Prior code § 7-7.116)

13.32.170 Eminent domain.
No franchise granted by the city shall in any way impair or affect the right of the city, or any successor in authority, to acquire the property of the grantee by purchase or condemnation, and nothing contained in such a franchise shall be construed to contract away, modify, or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of eminent domain in respect to any public utility. (Prior code § 7-7.117)

13.32.180 Publication costs.
The grantee shall pay to the city, within thirty days after receiving a statement therefor, all advertising and publishing costs, including the cost of publishing the ordinance, if necessary, incurred in connection with the granting of the franchise. (Prior code § 7-7.118)

13.32.190 Assignments.
The grantee shall not sell, transfer, assign, or lease the franchise, or any part thereof, except with the consent of the council. Such sale, transfer, assignment or lease shall be made only by filing with the council a copy of the duly executed instrument of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease and a written request for the consent of the council to such sale, transfer, assignment, or lease. If such duly executed instrument and such written request is not filed with the council before the expiration of sixty days after the effective date of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, then, upon the expiration of said sixty days, the franchise shall be subject to forfeiture, and the council, without notice, by ordinance, may repeal the franchise. As a condition to the granting of consent to such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, the council may impose such additional terms and conditions upon the franchise and upon the grantee or assignee which the council may deem to be in the public interest. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to grant to the grantee the right to sell, transfer, assign or lease the franchise, or any part thereof, except in the manner set forth in this section. This section shall apply to any assignment, whether by operation of law, by a voluntary act of the grantee, or otherwise. (Prior code § 7-7.119)

13.32.200 Prior franchises.
All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained by the grantee in the streets, including services connected with the grantee’s facilities, whether installed by the grantee or not, in the area described in and by virtue of the authority provided by the ordinance granting the franchise, prior to the effective date of such ordinance, except those maintained under prior right other than franchise, shall become subject to all the terms and conditions of such ordinance upon such effective date. (Prior code § 7-7.120)

13.32.210 City officers.
Any right or power conferred, or duty imposed, upon any officer, employee, or department of the city shall be subject to transfer to any other officer, employee, or department of the city if the city manager so designates. (Prior code § 7-7.121)

13.32.220 Hold harmless.
The grantee shall be responsible to the city and save and defend the city and its officers and employees free and harmless from all damages or liability arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise and from the use, operation or maintenance of the facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained thereunder. (Prior code § 7-7.122)

13.32.230 Standards.
All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained under the provisions of the franchise shall be erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in accordance with and conforming to all the laws, codes, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted or prescribed by the council. (Prior code § 7-7.123)

13.32.240 Conflicting improvements.
If the city or any other public entity constructs or maintains any storm drain, sewer structure, or other facility or improvement under or across any facility of the grantee maintained pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall provide at no expense to the city or other public entity such support as shall be reasonably required to support, maintain and protect the grantee’s facility. (Prior code § 7-7.124)

13.32.250 Relocation.
If the grantee, after reasonable notice, fails or refuses to relocate permanently or temporarily its facilities located in, on, upon, along, under, over, across or above any highway or to pave, surface, grade, repave, resurface or regrade as required pursuant to any provision of the franchise, the city or other public entity may cause the work to be done and shall keep an itemized account of the entire cost thereof, and the grantee shall hold harmless the city, and its officers and employees, from any liability which may arise or be claimed to arise from the moving, cutting, or alteration of any of the grantee’s facilities or the turning on or off of water, oil, or other liquid, gas or electricity.

The grantee agrees to, and shall, reimburse the city or other public entity for such cost within thirty days after the presentation to the grantee of an itemized account of such costs. (Prior code § 7-7.125)

13.32.260 Defective facilities.
If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defective facilities laid or constructed under the franchise, the grantee, at it own expense, shall repair any such defect, and put such street in as good condition as it was before such damage was incurred, to the satisfaction of the city. If the grantee, within ten days after the receipt of written notice from the city instructing it to repair such damage, shall fail to commence to comply with such instructions, or thereafter shall fail diligently to prosecute such work to completion, then the city immediately may do whatever work is necessary to carry out such instructions at the cost and expense of the grantee, which cost and expense, by the acceptance of the franchise, the grantee agrees to pay upon demand. If such damage constitute an immediate danger to the public health or safety, requiring the immediate repair thereof, the city, without notice, may repair such damage, and the grantee shall agree to pay the reasonable cost thereof upon demand. (Prior code § 7-7.126)

13.32.270 Hazardous substances.
Prior to the issuance of any excavation permit for the construction or installation of any pipeline for the transmission of flammable liquids or gases, which are heavier than air, approval shall be obtained from the fire chief. Such approval should be based on the determination that no undue fire hazard will be created to life or property in the area through which the proposed pipeline will be located. To make such determination, consideration shall be given to:

A. The type of commodity to be transmitted;

B. The density of the population or the structural development in the area through which the pipeline will be located;

C. The adequacy of water supplies for fire control purposes;

D. The extent of available public fire protection facilities; and

E. The number and location of shut-off valves in line. (Prior code § 7-7.127)

13.32.280 Compensation – Rates.
As consideration for the franchise granted, the franchisee shall pay to the city the following:

A. Public Utilities. The franchisee of any franchise awarded to a bona fide public utility, as consideration for such franchise, including the extension, renewal or continuation of a previously granted franchise, shall pay to the city in lawful money of the United States two percent of the gross annual receipts of the franchisee arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of the applicant derived from the sale within the limits of the municipality of the utility service for which the franchise is awarded or such other amounts as are provided in Section 6231 of the Public Utilities Code of the state. The city reserves the right to change its fees if, following a public hearing, such action is not in conflict with the laws of the state.

B. Others. The franchisee of any franchise awarded to any other person than a public utility, as further consideration for such franchise, including the extension, renewal or continuation of a previously granted franchise, shall pay to the city in lawful money of the United States the following fees:

1. In the case of an initial grant of a franchise or franchises which extend, renew or continue previously granted franchises, a base granting fee of five thousand dollars for pipelines with a total length of one-quarter mile or more or two thousand five hundred dollars for pipelines with a total length of less than one-quarter mile shall be paid within thirty days after the council adopts the ordinance granting the franchise and prior to signing the written acceptance of the franchise pursuant to Section 13.32.060. If, at any time during the first five years following the grant of a franchise, additional pipeline is added which will result in a total length of pipeline of one-quarter mile or more, the five thousand dollar granting fee shall be required at the time such footage is added.

2. A base annual fee shall be paid within sixty days after the end of each calendar year and during the life of the franchise for each and every year, including the year of granting the franchise, according to the “franchise payment period,” as defined in Section 13.32.040, in the amount of twelve cents per lineal foot of pipe for pipelines with an internal diameter of eight inches or less and an additional two cents per inch of internal diameter per foot of pipe for each inch or portion thereof in excess of eight inches. In determining the number of feet of pipeline upon which the annual fee will be computed, the greatest number of feet of pipeline covered by the franchise during the calendar year for which the payment is due will be utilized. The base annual fee shall be paid no later than seventy-five days following the end of the calendar year, and a penalty at the rate of ten percent per month, or fraction thereof, beyond the payment date shall be charged, but in no event shall such penalty exceed fifty percent.

3. The city reserves the right to adjust the base fees established by this subsection B at the time after the effective date of the ordinance granting a franchise.

C. Base Construction Charges. The holder of the franchise shall pay at the time of the installation, relocation, or replacement of any pipeline or other facility covered by the franchise a base construction charge of one thousand five hundred dollars for each one-half mile of pipeline, or fractional part thereof, installed, replaced, or relocated on major streets and one thousand dollars per one-half mile, or fractional part thereof, on minor streets. The city reserves the right to change the base fees established by this subsection at any time after the effective date of the ordinance granting a franchise.

D. Adjustments. The amount of each base fee provided for in subsections B and C of this section shall be revised at the time payment is due pursuant to this section in accordance with the following formula:

1. If, ninety days prior to the date on which payment from the franchise holder shall be due, the Wholesale Price Index, all commodities (1967 equals 100.0), prepared by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, shall stand at a level different than the base level, as defined in this subsection, then the rate of payment to the city shall vary from the amounts set forth in this section in direct proportion as said Index has increased or decreased from the base level. “Base level,” for the purposes of this section, shall be the level of the Index on December 31, 1983.

2. If said Bureau shall discontinue the preparation of said Wholesale Price Index using prices prevailing during the year 1967 as the base of 100, and if no transposition table prepared by said Bureau is available which is applicable to said year 1967, then the amount of each annual payment shall be computed by using the successor or most nearly comparable successor Index thereto.

3. In no event shall any fee less than the base fees established by subsections B and C of this section be charged. (Prior code § 7-7.201)

13.32.290 Proration of payments.
In the event of the abandonment of facilities with the approval of the city as elsewhere in this chapter provided, or in the event of the removal of such facilities by the franchisee, or in the event of the grant of a franchise with an initial franchise payment period of less than one year, the annual franchise fee required by subsections A and B of Section 13.32.28 shall be prorated for the calendar year in which such removal, abandonment, or grant occurs as of the end of the calendar month in which removed, abandoned or granted. (Prior code § 7-7.202)

13.32.300 Franchise fee – Records.
The franchisee shall keep and preserve for a period of five years subsequent to the date of the most recent franchise fee determination all of the records necessary to determine the amount of such franchise fee.

At all reasonable times, the franchisee shall permit the city or its duly authorized representative to examine all property of the franchisee erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained pursuant to the franchise, together with any appurtenant property of the franchisee, and to examine and transcribe any and all books, accounts, papers, maps and other records kept or maintained by the franchisee or under its control which concern the operation, affairs, transactions, property, or financial condition of the franchisee with respect thereto. Such records shall be made available to the city at a location in the county. (Prior code § 7-7.203)

13.32.310 Construction requirements.
Pipelines and appurtenances shall be constructed and maintained in a good workmanlike manner in conformity with the terms and conditions of any law, rule or regulation now in effect or as hereafter amended, adopted or prescribed by the city. All pipes laid under the franchise shall be of first-class material. All pipelines and appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with the latest revision of the American Standard Code of Pressure Piping ASA B 31.4. (Prior code § 7-7.301)

13.32.320 New installations or replacements.
New installations or replacements of pipelines and appurtenances and all other facilities necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance and safety of pipelines and conduits shall be laid and maintained only pursuant to permits issued by the department. All such installations or replacements shall be reviewed by the director as to the most desirable location in the streets of the city, and his decision shall be final and binding on the franchisee. (Prior code § 7-7.302)

13.32.330 Construction permits.
Where the provisions of any law, rule, or regulation which shall be in force at that time require the issuance of an excavation, encroachment, or other type of permit, the franchisee shall not commence any excavation or encroachment work under the franchise until the franchisee shall have obtained such permit from the department, except in cases of emergency affecting the public health, safety, or welfare or the preservation of life or property, in which case the franchisee shall apply for such permit not later than the next business day.

The application of the franchisee for such permits shall show the following facts: the length and proposed location of the pipeline and/or appurtenance intended to be used and such other facts as the department may require. (Prior code § 7-7.303)

13.32.340 Work on and restoration of streets.
The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining, repairing or removing all pipelines and appurtenances authorized under the provisions of this chapter in, over, under, along or across any street shall be conducted with the least possible hindrance to the use of the street for purposes of travel, and, as soon as such work is completed, all portions of the street which have been excavated or otherwise damaged thereby shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner be repaired, replaced or restored and placed in as good condition as the same was before the commencement of such work. Such restoration, repair or replacement work shall be done to the satisfaction of the director at the expense of the franchisee and in accordance with the terms and conditions of all statutes and laws.

In the event the franchisee shall fail or neglect to make such highway repair, replacement or restoration work, then, ten days after notice therefor has been given the franchisee by the director, the city may repair, replace or restore such highway at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee agrees to pay to the city the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable shall be the direct cost of such work, plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the city for reimbursable work. (Prior code § 7-7.304)

13.32.350 Failure to timely comply – Additional fees.
In the event the franchisee shall fail to complete the work within the time specified in the permit, the city may require the franchisee to pay to the city not more than two hundred dollars per day as liquidated damages for each day construction extends beyond the time specified in the permit.

Whenever the franchisee shall fail to complete any work required by the terms and conditions of the franchise and the permits issued thereunder, within the time limits required thereby, the city may complete, or cause to be completed, any and all such work at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee agrees to pay to the city the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable to the franchisee shall be the direct cost of such work, plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the city for reimbursable work. (Prior code § 7-7.305)

13.32.360 Construction completion statement.
Upon the completion of the construction of any pipeline or appurtenance constructed pursuant to the franchise, the franchisee shall submit a statement to the director identifying the permit or permits issued by the department, the total length of the pipeline the construction of which was authorized under such permit or permits, and the total length of pipeline or appurtenance actually laid. (Prior code § 7-7.306)

13.32.370 Damage or injury – Franchisee responsibility.
The franchisee shall be responsible to the city and shall save and defend the city, and its officers, agents and employees, free and harmless from all damages or liability arising from any damage or injury suffered by any person by reason of any excavation or obstruction being improperly guarded during any work authorized pursuant to the franchise or the failure or neglect of the franchisee to properly perform, maintain or protect any phase of such work. (Prior code § 7-7.307)

13.32.380 Appurtenances.
The franchisee shall have the right to construct, maintain and repair such traps, manholes, conduits, valves, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances (collectively referred to in this section as “appurtenances”) as may be necessary or convenient for the proper maintenance and operation of the pipeline under the franchise, and such appurtenances shall be kept flush with the surface of the street and be so located as to conform to any law, rule or regulation of the city, or to any permit issued by the department in regard thereto, and shall not interfere with the use of the street for travel. The franchisee shall have the right, subject to such laws, rules or regulations as are now or may hereafter be in force, to make all necessary excavations in streets for the construction, maintenance, and repair of such appurtenances; provided, however, the franchisee shall first obtain an excavation permit from the department for doing any such work. (Prior code § 7-7.308)

13.32.390 Ordinary repairs.
The franchisee shall be privileged to excavate in roads or streets for line repairs for the number of days agreed upon by the franchisee and the department; provided, however, the franchisee shall first obtain an excavation permit from the department for doing any such work. (Prior code § 7-7.309)

13.32.400 Relocation of pipelines and appurtenances.
A. The city reserves the right to change the grade, to change the width, or to alter or change the location of any street over which the franchise is granted. If any of the pipelines, facilities or appurtenances heretofore or hereafter constructed, installed or maintained by the franchisee pursuant to the franchise on, along, under, over, in, upon or across any street is located in a manner which prevents or interferes with the change of grade, traffic needs, operation, maintenance, improvements, repair, construction, reconstruction, widening, alteration or relocation of the street, the franchisee shall relocate permanently or temporarily any such facility at no expense to the city upon the receipt of a written request from the director to do so and shall commence such work on or before the date specified in such written request, which date shall be not less than thirty days after the receipt of such written request. The franchisee shall thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion.

B. The city reserves the right for itself, and all other public entities which are now or may later be established, to lay, construct, repair, alter, relocate, and maintain subsurface or other facilities or improvements of any type or description in a governmental but not proprietary capacity within the streets over which the franchise is granted. If the city or any other public entity finds that the location or relocation of such facilities or improvements conflicts with the facilities laid, constructed or maintained under the franchise, whether such facilities were laid before or after the facilities of the city or such other public entity were laid, the franchisee of such franchise, at no expense to the city or public entity, on or before the date specified in a written request from the director, which date shall be not less than thirty days after the receipt of such notice and request to do so, shall commence the work to change the location, either permanently or temporarily, of all facilities so conflicting with such improvements to a permanent or temporary location in such streets to be approved by the director and thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion. If such street shall be subsequently constituted a state highway, while it remains a state highway the rights of the state shall be as provided in Section 680 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Prior code § 7-7.310)

13.32.410 Breaks or leaks.
If any portion of the street shall be damaged by reason of breaks or leaks in any pipe, conduit or appurtenance constructed or maintained under the franchise, the franchisee thereof, at its own expense, immediately following written or oral notification thereof, shall promptly repair any such damage and put such street in as good condition as it was in before such damage or leak, all to the satisfaction of the department. The franchisee shall obtain an excavation permit from the department for doing any such work. (Prior code § 7-7.311)

13.32.420 Emergency equipment.
At all times during the term of the franchise, the franchisee shall maintain or arrange for, on a twenty-four hour a day basis, adequate emergency equipment and a properly trained emergency crew within a radius of twenty-five miles from any facility installed or maintained pursuant to the franchise for the purpose of shutting off the pressure and the flow of the contents of such facilities in the event of an emergency resulting from an earthquake, act of war, civil disturbance, fire, flood or any other cause or nature whatsoever. (Prior code § 7-7.312)

13.32.430 Removal or abandonment of facilities.
A. At the expiration, revocation or termination of the franchise or of the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the franchisee, within thirty days thereafter, shall make a written application to the city for authority either: (1) to abandon all or a portion of such facilities in place; or (2) to remove all or a portion of such facilities. The director shall determine whether any abandonment or removal which is thereby proposed may be effected without detriment to the public interest and under what conditions such proposed abandonment or removal may be safely effected. He shall then notify the franchisee of his determinations.

B. Within thirty days after the receipt of such notice, the franchisee shall apply for a permit from the department to abandon or remove the facility. Such permit shall contain the conditions of abandonment or removal as may be prescribed by the director.

The franchisee, within ninety days after obtaining such permit, shall commence and diligently prosecute to completion the work authorized by the permit. (Prior code § 7-7.313)

13.32.440 Removal or abandonment of facilities – Failure to comply.
A. If any facility to be abandoned in place subject to prescribed conditions shall not be abandoned in accordance with all such conditions, the director may make additional appropriate orders, including an order that the franchisee shall remove any or all such facilities. The franchisee shall comply with such additional orders.

B. In the event the franchisee shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of abandonment or removal as may be required by this chapter and within such time as may be prescribed by the director, then the city may remove, or cause to be removed, such facilities at the franchisee’s expense. The franchisee shall pay to the city the cost of such work, plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the city for reimbursable work.

C. If, at the expiration, revocation or termination of the franchise, or of the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the franchisee, within thirty days thereafter, shall fail or refuse to make a written application for the above-mentioned authority, the director shall make the determination as to whether the facilities shall be abandoned in place or removed. The director shall then notify the franchisee of his determination. The franchisee shall thereafter comply with the provisions of subsection B of Section 13.32.430. (Prior code § 7-7.314)

13.32.450 Abandonment in place – Conditions.
Facilities abandoned in place shall be subject to the condition that if, at any time after the effective date of the abandonment, the director determines that the facility may interfere with any public project, the franchisee or its successor in interest shall remove the facility at its expense when requested to do so by the city or pay the city for the costs of such removal. (Prior code § 7-7.315)

13.32.460 Special provisions for oil pipelines – Rights granted.
A franchisee granted an oil pipeline franchise shall have the right during the life thereof to transport oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances, water, waste water, mud and other liquid substances through the pipelines maintained under the franchise. If the franchisee or assignee later qualifies before the Public Utilities Commission of the state as a common carrier, the franchisee or assignee shall then have no right to continue to operate under this chapter after the date of such qualification, except with the consent of the council granted upon such additional terms and conditions as the council may deem proper. Such additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by ordinance. (Prior code § 7-7.401)

13.32.470 Special provisions for oil pipelines – Materials used.
All pipelines used or to be used for the transportation of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances or other flammable liquids shall be first-class and standard material as set forth by current American Petroleum Institute pipeline specifications. (Prior code § 7-7.402)

13.32.480 Special provisions for oil pipelines – Approvals.
On all pipelines laid pursuant to the franchise, the fire chief shall approve where flush-valve connections shall be placed in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodity transmitted in the line and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determinations. Such flush-valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the fire chief. (Prior code § 7-7.403)

13.32.490 Special provisions for oil pipelines – Reports.
The franchisee, during the life of the franchise, within ninety days after the expiration of each franchise payment period, shall:

A. File with the director a report verified by the oath of the franchisee or by the oath of a duly authorized representative of the franchisee showing for the immediately preceding franchise period the length of lines in streets, the internal diameter of such lines, the rate per foot per year, and the total amount due the city; and

B. File with the director a report showing the permit number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise payment period, together with the length and size of such mains. On such report the franchisee shall show any change in franchise footage since the last franchise payment period, segregating such footage as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place and the footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise payment period. (Prior code § 7-7.404)

13.32.500 Special provisions for oil pipelines – Payments due.
Except for pipelines lawfully maintained other than by the authority granted by the franchise, the annual payments shall accrue from the respective dates of installation, whether before or after the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, and such payments, together with the initial construction charges, if any, shall be due and payable annually. (Prior code § 7-7.405)

13.32.510 Special provisions for oil pipelines – Nonapplicability.
The provisions of Sections 13.32.460, 13.32.490 and 13.32.500 shall not apply to public utilities. (Prior code § 7-7.406)

13.32.520 Public utilities – Reports of gross receipts.
The franchisee of any franchise awarded to a public utility shall file with the director for each franchise payment period, within ninety days after such period, two copies of a report verified by the oath of the manager or any responsible officer of the franchisee (except where the franchisee is an individual, in which case the report shall be verified by the oath of the franchisee) showing the total gross receipts of the franchisee for the franchise payment period received or accrued in connection with the furnishing of the commodity or service arising from the use or operation of the franchise, together with such additional data as is necessary in the opinion of the director to calculate or verify the calculation of the annual payment required by subsection A of Section 13.32.280 (or the pro rata amount thereof for the first period if less than one year) and which payment shall be paid within fifteen days after such ninety day period. In the event the amount paid is incorrect in the judgment of the city, it may order the payment of such additional sum as it may find thereunder, and, if not paid, or if paid under protest, the amount may be determined by suit. (Prior code § 7-7.501)

13.32.530 Public utilities – Reports of permits for mains.
Within ninety days after the expiration of each franchise report period, the franchisee shall file with the director a report in triplicate showing the permit number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise report period, together with the length and size of such mains. On such report the franchisee shall show any change in franchise footage since the last franchise report period, segregating such footage as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place, and the footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise. (Prior code § 7-7.502)

13.32.540 Public utilities – Payments.
The franchisee, during the life of the franchise, shall make annual payments to the city as provided in subsections A, C and D of Section 13.32.280. (Prior code § 7-7.503)

13.32.550 Special provisions for gas pipelines – Rights granted.
The franchisee shall have the right, during the period covered by the franchise and subject to the terms and conditions thereof, to make service connections with all property in the city adjoining streets and to furnish and distribute gas through such pipes and pipelines to all territory in the city adjacent to such pipelines for any purpose. (Prior code § 7-7.601)

13.32.560 Special provisions for gas pipelines – Approval.
On all pipelines carrying gas heavier than air laid pursuant to the franchise, the fire chief shall approve where flush-valve connections shall be placed in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodities transmitted in the line, and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determination. Such flush-valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the fire chief. (Prior code § 7-7.602)

Chapter 13.36
PUBLIC PROJECT CONTRACTS
Sections:

13.36.010    Public projects.

13.36.020    Extra work or materials – Liability.

13.36.030    Extra work and materials – Contract provisions.

13.36.040    Changes in public project contracts.

13.36.050    Notices to contractors.

13.36.010 Public projects.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public project contracts awarded by the city pursuant to Sections 20160, et seq. of the Public Contracts Code of the state. (Prior code § 7-8.01)

13.36.020 Extra work or materials – Liability.
The city shall not pay or become liable for any extra work done on, or extra materials furnished for, any public project in the course and performance of a contract let pursuant to this chapter, except in accordance with Section 13.36.040, unless the contract specifically provides for such payment or the contract is changed or modified in the manner provided for in this chapter. (Prior code § 7-8.02)

13.36.030 Extra work and materials – Contract provisions.
The council may cause the insertion of provisions in any public project contract, or the specifications therefor, for the performance of such extra work and furnishing of materials therefor by the contractor as the director of public works requires for the proper completion or construction of the whole work contemplated. (Prior code § 7-8.04)

13.36.040 Changes in public project contracts.
The director of public works may order changes or additions in the work being performed under construction contracts. The extra cost to the city for all such changes or additions to the work so ordered shall not exceed five thousand dollars, when the total amount of the original contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars, nor ten percent of the amount of any original contract which exceeds fifty thousand dollars. In no event shall such changes or alterations exceed twenty-five thousand dollars. (Prior code § 7-8.03)

13.36.050 Notices to contractors.
Notices of the provisions of this chapter shall be given to all contractors submitting bids for public projects in the city. (Prior code § 7-8.05)

Chapter 13.40
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
Sections:

13.40.010    Adoption of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.

13.40.020    Adoption of Standard Plans for Sanitary Sewers.

13.40.010 Adoption of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.
A. The rules, regulations, provisions, and conditions set forth in the publication entitled “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 2018 Edition,” (Green Book) including any supplements and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted as the standard specifications regulating materials of construction and their use in the erection, installation, alteration, repair, removal, conversion, demolition, and construction of public works improvements in the city, providing for the administration of contracts as well as permits issued in connection with such improvements.

B. The provisions contained in the Green Book may be superseded by specific provisions in a public works contract. (Ord. 1790 § 2, 2018: Ord. 1759 § 2, 2015: Ord. 1736 § 2, 2012: Ord. 1712 § 2, 2010: Ord. 1676 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1628 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1584 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1513 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1480 § 1, 1994: prior code § 7-5.01)

13.40.020 Adoption of Standard Plans for Sanitary Sewers.
The rules, regulations, provisions, and conditions set forth in that certain publication entitled “Standard Plans for Sanitary Sewers,” dated March, 1981, as adopted and amended from the Standard Plans of the Department of County Engineer – Facilities, County of Los Angeles, three full printed copies of which, printed as special specifications in booklet form, were ordered filed and which have been actually filed in the office of the city clerk, and which as so on file are referred to and by this reference expressly incorporated in this chapter and made a part of this chapter as fully and for all intents and purposes as though set forth in this chapter at length, shall be and the same are established and adopted as the standard plans for the construction of sanitary sewers in the city, and the same are established and adopted as supplements, modifications or deletions to the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction adopted by Section 13.40.010 of this chapter, and the same shall be designated, known and referred to as the “standard plans for sanitary sewers” in and for the city. (Prior code § 7-5.02)

Chapter 13.44
STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

13.44.010    General provisions.

13.44.020    Arterial streets.

13.44.030    Major collector streets.

13.44.040    Minor collector streets.

13.44.050    Residential collector streets.

13.44.060    Local streets.

13.44.070    Alleys.

13.44.080    Cul-de-sacs and knuckles.

13.44.090    Corner cut-offs.

13.44.100    Parkways.

13.44.110    Future streets.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 698, 776 and 1121.

13.44.010 General provisions.
A. With the exception of cul-de-sacs for existing dead-end alleys, no new alleys shall be established within the city.

B. The alignments for street and alley rights-of-way shall be determined by the city engineer and may not necessarily be symmetrical about the surveyed centerline.

C. The minimum rights-of-way for streets and alleys shall be as set forth in this section. (Prior code § 7-2.01(a))

13.44.020 Arterial streets.
The following arterial streets shall have minimum rights-of-way of one hundred feet in width, unless otherwise noted:

El Segundo Boulevard from the westerly city limits to the easterly city limits;

Rosecrans Avenue from the westerly city limits to the easterly city limits;

Redondo Beach Boulevard from the westerly city limits to the easterly city limits;

Artesia Boulevard (State Highway 91) from the westerly city limits to the easterly city limits, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be one hundred ten feet in width exclusive of slope easements and planned freeway rights-of-way;

Crenshaw Boulevard from the northerly city limits to the southerly city limits;

Western Avenue from the northerly city limits to the southerly city limits;

Vermont Avenue westerly section (southbound roadway) from the northerly city limits to 164th Street, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be sixty feet in width exclusive of previous or existing railroad rights-of-way (median area);

Vermont Avenue from 164th Street to the southerly city limits;

Normandie Avenue from the northerly city limits to the southerly city limits, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be eighty feet in width. (Prior code § 7-2.01(b))

13.44.030 Major collector streets.
The following major collector streets shall have minimum rights-of-way of eighty feet in width, unless otherwise noted:

135th Street from the westerly city limits to the easterly city limits;

Compton Boulevard from the westerly city limits to Western Avenue;

Manhattan Beach Boulevard from the western city limits to Van Ness Avenue;

182nd Street from the westerly city limits to the easterly city limits;

Van Ness Avenue from the northerly city limits to Manhattan Beach Boulevard;

Van Ness Avenue from Manhattan Beach Boulevard to Redondo Beach Boulevard,

except that the minimum right-of-way shall be ninety feet in width. (Prior code § 7-2.01(c))

13.44.040 Minor collector streets.
The following minor collector streets shall have minimum rights-of-way of sixty feet in width, unless otherwise noted:

132nd Street from Ardath Avenue to Cimarron Avenue;

132nd Street from Wilton Place to Budlong Avenue;

139th Street from Ardath Avenue to Budlong Avenue;

147th Street from Crenshaw Boulevard to Van Ness Avenue;

Compton Boulevard from Western Avenue to Normandie Avenue, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be seventy feet in width;

Compton Boulevard from Normandie Avenue to Budlong Avenue, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be forty-five feet in width;

Compton Boulevard from Budlong Avenue to Vermont Avenue, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be fifty-three feet in width;

155th Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue;

156th Street from Van Ness Avenue to Gramercy Place, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be fifty-four feet in width;

Magnolia Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue;

158th Street from Western Avenue to Normandie Avenue;

161st Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue;

162nd Street from the westerly city limits to Normandie Avenue, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be eighty feet in width;

164th Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue;

Gardena Boulevard from the westerly city limits to Normandie Avenue;

Gardena Boulevard from Normandie Avenue to Berendo Avenue, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be seventy-two feet in width;

Gardena Boulevard from Berendo Avenue to Vermont Avenue, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be eighty feet in width;

166th Street from the westerly city limits to Normandie Avenue;

170th Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue;

178th Street from Western Avenue to Normandie Avenue, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be fifty-four feet in width;

Gramercy Place from Rosecrans Avenue to 92.11 feet north of the centerline of 157th Street;

Gramercy Place from 92.11 feet north of the centerline of 157th Street to Redondo Beach Boulevard, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be fifty-four feet in width;

Gramercy Place from 166th Street to Artesia Boulevard;

Denker Avenue from Rosecrans Avenue to Compton Boulevard, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be fifty feet in width;

Denker Avenue from Compton Boulevard to Redondo Beach Boulevard;

Denker Avenue from 158th Street to Artesia Boulevard;

Normandie Way from Redondo Beach Boulevard to 155th Street, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be eighty feet in width;

Budlong Avenue from El Segundo Boulevard to 155th Street;

Budlong Avenue from Magnolia Street to Gardena Boulevard;

Van Buren Avenue from 155th Street to Magnolia Street, except that the minimum right-of-way shall be fifty-four feet in width. (Prior code § 7-2.01(d))

13.44.050 Residential collector streets.
The following residential collector streets shall have minimum rights-of-way of sixty feet in width:

141st Street from Budlong Avenue to Vermont Avenue;

141st Place from Normandie Avenue to Budlong Avenue;

144th Street from Western Avenue to Denker Avenue;

144th Street from Raymond Avenue to Budlong Avenue;

145th Street from Gramercy Place to Normandie Avenue;

146th Street from Gramercy Place to Normandie Avenue;

147th Street from Western Avenue to Halldale Avenue;

149th Street from Western Avenue to Harvard Boulevard;

150th Street from Western Avenue to Harvard Boulevard;

157th Street from Van Ness Avenue to Gramercy Place;

165th Place from Western Avenue to Harvard Boulevard;

168th Street from Normandie Avenue to Vermont Avenue;

Wadkins Avenue from 147th Street to Compton Boulevard;

St. Andrews Place from immediately south of 144th Street to 147th Street;

Harvard Boulevard from 147th Street to Compton Boulevard;

La Salle Avenue from 147th Street to 149th Street;

La Salle Avenue from Redondo Beach Boulevard to 158th Street;

Halldale Avenue from Rosecrans Avenue to Compton Boulevard;

Mariposa Avenue from 135th Street to 137th Street;

Raymond Avenue from 135th Street to 137th Street;

Berendo Avenue from 163rd Street to 170th Street;

Berendo Avenue from 170th Street to end of street;

New Hampshire Avenue from 168th Street to 170th Street;

New Hampshire Avenue from 170th Street to end of street. (Prior code § 7-2.01(d-1))

13.44.060 Local streets.
All streets which are not arterial streets, major collector streets, or minor collector streets are local streets and shall have minimum right-of-way widths of fifty feet, except as follows:

166th Street from Normandie Avenue to Berendo Avenue shall have a minimum right-of-way of fifty-four feet in width measured twenty-seven feet each side of the existing railroad right-of-way (median).

Manhattan Place from 154th Place to Redondo Beach Boulevard shall have a minimum right-of-way of sixty feet in width.

Nuanu Drive from Redondo Beach Boulevard to its southerly terminus shall have a minimum right-of-way of forty feet in width.

Halldale Avenue from 139th Street to Rosecrans Avenue shall have a minimum right-of-way of fifty-four feet in width.

Mariposa Avenue from 168th Street to 170th Street shall have a minimum right-of-way of fifty-four feet in width.

Raymond Avenue from 145th Place to Compton Boulevard shall have a minimum right-of-way of sixty feet in width. (Prior code § 7-2.01(e))

13.44.070 Alleys.
Alleys shall have minimum rights-of-way of twenty feet in width. With the exception of cul-de-sacs for existing dead-end alleys, no new alleys shall be established within the city. (Prior code § 7-2.01(f))

13.44.080 Cul-de-sacs and knuckles.
Street cul-de-sacs and knuckles shall have minimum right-of-way radii of forty feet. Alley cul-de-sacs shall have rights-of-way conforming to the hammerhead design with fifty feet across the top, twenty feet across the ends, and two fifteen foot radius corner cut-offs. (Prior code § 7-2.01(g))

13.44.090 Corner cut-offs.
Street intersections with other streets shall have minimum right-of-way corner cut-offs with radii of fifteen feet. Alley intersections with streets shall have minimum diagonal right-of-way corner cut-offs measuring ten feet on a side. Alley intersections with other alleys shall have minimum right-of-way corner cut-offs with radii of fifteen feet. (Prior code § 7-2.01(h))

13.44.100 Parkways.
Parkways, which are that portion of a street right-of-way between the established curb line and the right-of-way line, shall have a minimum width of five feet. The required street right-of-way width shall be increased as necessary to provide for the minimum parkway width. (Prior code § 7-2.01(i))

13.44.110 Future streets.
The following are designated as future streets and shall be opened or extended as set forth:

A. 137th Street westerly of Western Avenue, a cul-de-sac street with a minimum planned right-of-way width of fifty feet, being a portion of Lots 7 and 26 of Blocks D and E of the Strawberry Park Tract within the city as per map recorded in Book 8, page 138 of Maps, in the office of the county recorder, and further described as follows:

Beginning at the southeasterly corner of said Lot 7; thence northerly along the easterly line of said Lot 7 to the beginning of a circular curve having a radius of forty feet, said curve being concave to the northeast and tangent to a line parallel with, and distant northerly twenty-five feet from, the centerline of 137th Street, said centerline being parallel with and midway between the southerly line of Lot 15 and the northerly line of Lot 17 of Tract No. 5853 as per map recorded in Book 61, page 66 of Maps, in the office of the county recorder; thence westerly and northerly 35.83 feet along said curve through a central angle of 51°19’04” to a reverse circular curve having a radius of forty feet, said reverse curve being concave to the southeast; thence northerly, westerly, southerly and easterly 161.49 feet along said reverse curve through a central angle of 231°19’04” to a point of tangency with a line parallel with, and distant southerly twenty-five feet from, said centerline of 137th Street; thence easterly along last said parallel line to the easterly line of Lot 26 of Strawberry Park Tract; thence northerly along said easterly line of Lot 26 to the point of beginning;

B. 140th Street westerly of Raymond Avenue, a cul-de-sac street with a minimum planned right-of-way width of fifty-four feet, being a portion of the Chrisman Tract, as per map recorded in Book 10, page 66 of Maps, records of the county of Los Angeles, California, and further described as follows:

Beginning at a point in the easterly line of Lot 7 of said Chrisman Tract two feet northerly from the southeasterly corner thereof; thence northwesterly in a direct line to a point in the westerly line of said Lot 7, distant northerly thereon twenty-seven feet from the southwesterly corner thereof; thence westerly and parallel with the southerly lines of Lots 6 through 3, both inclusive, 103.16 feet to the beginning of a tangent circular curve, concave to the northeast, having a radius of forty-two feet; thence northwesterly along said curve 24.49 feet through a central angle of 34°46’19” to a point of tangency with a circular curve, concave to the southwest, having a radius of forty-two feet; thence westerly, southerly, and easterly along said last mentioned curve 224.93 feet through a central angle of 249°32’38” to a point of tangency with a circular curve, concave to the southeast, having a radius of forty-two feet; thence northeasterly along said last mentioned curve 25.49 feet through a central angle of 34°46’19” to a point of tangency with a line parallel with, distant southerly twenty-seven feet from, and measured at right angles to the southerly lines of said Lots 6 through 3, both inclusive; thence easterly along said parallel line 93.14 feet to a point thereon, said point lying 10.02 feet westerly from its intersection with the easterly line of Lot 13 of said Chrisman Tract; thence southeasterly in a direct line seventy feet to a point in a line parallel with, distant southerly fifty-two feet from, and measured at right angles to the southerly lines of said Lots 6 through 3; thence easterly along said last mentioned parallel line 10.02 feet to the easterly line of Lot 14 of said Chrisman Tract; thence northerly along the easterly lines of said Lots 14 and 7 to the point of beginning;

C. 140th Street easterly of Raymond Avenue, a cul-de-sac street with a minimum planned right-of-way width of fifty-four feet, being a portion of the Resubdivision of Lots 35 and a portion of Lot 34 of Block A, Strawberry Park Tract, as per map recorded in Book 9, page 17 of Maps, records of the county of Los Angeles, California, and further described as follows:

Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 9 of Tract No. 18522, as per map recorded in Book 637, page 66 of Maps, records of said county; thence easterly along the easterly prolongation of the southerly line of said Lot 9 28.15 feet to the beginning of a tangent circular curve, concave to the northwest, having a radius of forty-two feet; thence northeasterly along said curve 25.49 feet through a central angle of 34°46’19” to a point of tangency with a circular curve, concave to the southeast, having a radius of forty-two feet; thence easterly, southerly, and westerly along said last mentioned curve 224.93 feet through a central angle of 249°32’38” to a point of tangency with a circular curve, concave to the southwest, having a radius of forty-two feet; thence northwesterly along said last mentioned curve 25.49 feet through a central angle of 34°46’19” to a point of tangency with a line parallel with, distant southerly twenty-seven feet from, and measured at right angles to the said easterly prolongation; thence westerly along said parallel line 28.15 feet to the easterly line of said Tract No. 18522; thence northerly along said easterly line to the point of beginning; and

D. Repealed. (Ord. 1760 § 6(E), 2015; prior code § 7-2.01(j))

Chapter 13.48
REQUIRED DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

13.48.010    Definitions.

13.48.020    Requirements.

13.48.030    Exceptions to requirements.

13.48.040    Final inspections.

13.48.050    Granting of exceptions.

13.48.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Lot” means any parcel or parcels of real property, or combinations thereof, which are the subject of an application filed under the building or zoning provisions of Titles 15 or 18 of this code.

“Public improvement” means concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks and driveways, pavement, traffic controls, sanitary sewers, storm drains, culverts, utilities, parkway trees, street lighting, or other improvements that may be required in the public interests, all in conformance with the standards, specifications and codes of the city, and as required by the city engineer. (Prior code § 7-2.02(a))

13.48.020 Requirements.
The following requirements shall be made conditions of all applications for building permits for any structure, accessory structure, or addition to an existing structure with a floor area in excess of five hundred square feet. The following requirements shall also be made conditions for zone changes, site plan approvals, variances, conditional use permits and subdivisions of land. The property owner of any lot which is the subject of such an application shall satisfy these requirements to the complete satisfaction of the city engineer prior to the final approval of the application. The property owner shall assume all costs involved in satisfying such requirements:

A. The property owner shall dedicate to the city all necessary street and alley rights-of-way to meet the requirements of Chapter 13.44. He shall also dedicate all other public easements that may be deemed necessary by the city engineer.

B. The property owner shall construct new public improvements along the street and alley frontages of his lot, unless such improvements already exist and are deemed to be adequate by the city engineer. The property owner shall also extend or relocate utilities as required.

C. The property owner shall construct new public improvements to close any existing driveway along the frontage of his lot which is deemed unnecessary by the city engineer.

D. The property owner shall replace any existing public improvement that is damaged or in poor repair as determined by the city engineer.

E. The construction or replacement of public improvements shall include, at the property owner’s expense, the preparation of plans by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, as approved by the city engineer. Plan-check costs incurred by the incurred by the city engineer shall be paid by the property owner. (Prior code § 7-2.02(b))

13.48.030 Exceptions to requirements.
A. Whenever the city does not have an established grade for the construction of required street or alley improvements, and, in the judgment of the city engineer, such grade will not be established within a reasonable time, a bond shall be posted with the city guaranteeing that such improvements will be constructed at no cost to the city at such time as the street or alley grade is established.

B. Such bond shall be executed by the owner of the land on which such improvements are to be constructed and/or installed (including, but not limited to, the lessee thereof) and by a corporate surety licensed to do business as a surety in the state and in an amount which, in the judgment of the city engineer, is equal to the total cost of such improvements.

C. The term of the bond shall commence upon the date of its filing and shall remain in effect until the completion of the improvements as required by this chapter. The city engineer shall have the authority to grant extensions of time therefor not to exceed one year in the aggregate. The sale or other transfer of such lot, or any interest therein, shall not release the bond.

D. The bond shall contain the provisions that it is irrevocable and unamendable for the term thereof without the consent of the city, that such extensions of time or sale or transfer shall not release the surety, and that the aforesaid improvements shall be constructed as required by this chapter within one hundred twenty days after notice to begin the construction of such improvements is sent by the city to the surety.

E. In lieu of the aforesaid surety bond, the owner may deposit with the city a cash bond in an amount which, in the judgment of the city engineer, is equal to the cost of such improvements. In the event of any default on the owner’s part, the city is authorized to use any or all of the deposited money to cause all of the required work to be completed and for the payment of all costs and expenses therefor. Any money remaining after the completion of the above shall be refunded to the owner.

F. When a substantial portion of the required improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer and the completion of the remaining improvements is delayed due to conditions beyond the owner’s control, the city engineer may accept the completed portion and consent to the filing of a surety bond or cash deposit in an amount estimated and determined by the city engineer to be adequate to assure the completion of the required improvements remaining to be made. (Prior code § 7-2.03)

13.48.040 Final inspections.
The final building inspection, release for public utility connections, and certificate of occupancy for any building construction subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter shall not be approved by the building official until such requirements are met to the full satisfaction of the city engineer. (Prior code § 7-2.04)

13.48.050 Granting of exceptions.
A. The city engineer, upon the written application of any owner of interest in such lots (including, but not limited to, the lessee thereof), may except any such lots, and the owner of any interest therein, from the application of the provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof, under the following circumstances:

1. Where there are special circumstances applicable to the lots sought to be excepted, which circumstances do not apply generally to other lots; and

2. Where the granting of such exception is necessary to do substantial justice and to avoid practical difficulty, unnecessary hardship, or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter or good civic planning; and

3. Where the granting of such exception will not result in material damage or prejudice to the public safety or welfare; and

4. Where the requirement for street dedication pursuant to an expansion or addition to an existing single-family dwelling results in the reduction of a lot or parcel below the minimum lot area or width or results in the further reduction of the area or width of an existing substandard lot or parcel.

B. In the event an exception is not granted by the city engineer, an appeal may be made to the council. (Prior code § 7-2.05)

Chapter 13.52
STREET VACATIONS
Sections:

13.52.010    Proceedings.

13.52.020    Findings.

13.52.030    Payment of vacation proceedings fee.

13.52.010 Proceedings.
Proceedings for the vacation of any easement for a public street, lane, alley, court, or other place shall be taken pursuant to the provisions of Part 3, Division 9 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Prior code § 7-3.01)

13.52.020 Findings.
In any vacation proceeding taken pursuant to the provisions of Part 3, Division 9 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, the council shall find and determine that the public necessity, convenience, safety, health and welfare require such vacation. (Prior code § 7-3.02)

13.52.030 Payment of vacation proceedings fee.
No resolution of intention to vacate any street, lane, alley, court or other place shall be presented to the council unless and until the person requesting such vacation shall have paid to the city a fee in an amount not less than one hundred dollars which, in the judgment of the city engineer, shall be sufficient to compensate the city for the cost of such vacation proceedings; provided, however, in the event such vacation is initiated by the council, the fee may be waived in whole or in part by the council. (Prior code § 7-3.03)

Chapter 13.56
ENCROACHMENTS
Sections:

I. General Provisions and Definitions

13.56.010    Title and scope.

13.56.020    Definitions.

13.56.030    Applicability.

13.56.040    Exception.

II. Application for and Issuance of Permits

13.56.050    Permit required.

13.56.060    Permit – Exception.

13.56.070    Permit – Denial when.

13.56.080    Permit – Cancellation.

13.56.090    Application in writing.

13.56.100    Application requirements.

13.56.110    Save harmless agreement.

13.56.120    Changes in application.

13.56.130    Exhibits.

13.56.140    Additional requirements.

13.56.150    Permittee bound by all terms.

13.56.160    Permit – Expiration.

13.56.170    Blanket permits.

13.56.180    Permits nontransferable.

13.56.190    Work performed with or without permit.

13.56.200    Work without required permit unlawful.

13.56.210    Removal of nonpermitted encroachments.

13.56.220    Permit availability and display.

13.56.230    Subsequent owners bound.

III. Encroachment Permits – General Requirements

13.56.239S    A Safety, Inspection and Liability

13.56.240    Safety devices, lights and barricades.

13.56.250    Safety device standards.

13.56.260    Inspector on job.

13.56.270    Inspection not to be obstructed.

13.56.280    Permittee liability.

13.56.290    Protection and repair of facilities and adjoining property.

13.56.300    Aids to visibility.

13.56.310    Liability insurance.

13.56.319S    B Performance of Work

13.56.320    Clearance for emergency facilities.

13.56.330    Work in accordance with plans.

13.56.340    Prompt completion of work/notice.

13.56.350    Noise, dust and debris.

13.56.360    Changes.

13.56.370    Restoration of right-of-way.

13.56.380    Base and pavement thickness.

13.56.390    Equivalent section.

13.56.400    Compliance required.

13.56.410    Encroachment removal – Generally.

13.56.420    Encroachment removal without replacement.

13.56.430    Road closure or interference with highway use.

13.56.440    Records of installations.

13.56.450    Notice before commencing work.

13.56.460    Tree and structure relocation.

13.56.470    Relocation where right-of-way improved.

13.56.480    Encroachments not a hazard.

13.56.490    Defects appearing after completion.

13.56.499S    C Fees and Costs

13.56.500    Permit and plan checking fees.

13.56.510    Exemptions and waivers of fees.

13.56.520    Work without a permit.

13.56.530    Permittee to pay for all costs.

13.56.540    Costs to be actual costs.

13.56.550    Deposit required.

13.56.560    Cash deposit – General or special.

13.56.570    Deposit of bonds and insurance.

13.56.580    Return of deposit.

13.56.590    Surety bond.

13.56.600    Certificate of deposit.

13.56.610    Additional securities.

13.56.620    Expiration date of security.

13.56.630    Costs to be deducted.

13.56.640    Permits not issued if bill unpaid.

13.56.650    Permit fee refunded when.

13.56.660    Plan check fee refunded when.

IV. Encroachment Permits – Construction Activity

13.56.670    Encroachment permits issued for construction activity.

13.56.680    Plans may be required.

13.56.690    Approved lines and grades for work.

13.56.700    Certificate of acceptance.

V. Encroachment Permits – Excavations and Encroachments

13.56.710    Provisions.

13.56.720    Requirements for plat.

13.56.730    Maintenance of work area.

13.56.740    Preservation of survey monuments.

13.56.750    Amount of open trench.

13.56.760    Preservation of drainage.

13.56.770    Services to be jacked or bored.

13.56.780    Minimum cover.

13.56.790    Repaving by city.

13.56.800    Cleanup.

13.56.810    Backfilling and compaction.

13.56.820    Agreement to relocate.

13.56.830    Cable television lines.

13.56.840    No interference with others.

13.56.850    Emergency excavations.

I. General Provisions and Definitions

13.56.010 Title and scope.
This chapter is known and may be cited as the “encroachment ordinance.” The provisions of this chapter shall operate as a supplement to all applicable California Code sections concerning encroachments on city highways. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall apply in this chapter:

“Actual cost” means the amount determined by applying the provisions of the encroachment fee resolution as adopted by the city council.

“Applicant” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-way and has applied for a permit for the proposed encroachment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Base course” means that portion of the highway structural section located between the pavement and the native soil.

“City” means the city of Gardena.

“City council” means the city council of the city of Gardena.

“Department” means the department of public works of the city of Gardena.

“Driveway” means that portion of the road right-of-way between the property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the highway onto adjacent property.

“Encroachment” means and includes any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line, pipe, fence, wire, cable, conduit, drop-off box for mail and/or packages, stand or building, temporary rolloff containers, or any structure or object of any kind of character not particularly mentioned in this chapter which is placed on, in, along, under, over or across the highway. “Encroachment” does not include the temporary use of the highway for ordinary maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment; the suspension or stringing on existing pole lines of additional cables, wires, transmission lines, conduits or service connections solely for temporary telephone or electric power purposes; or publication dispensing device, provided that the requirements of Chapter 12.04 are met.

“Encroachment work” means the work of constructing, placing or installing an encroachment in a right-of-way.

“Engineer” means the city engineer of the city, or his designee.

“Excavation” means any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the public place. The term shall also include any excavation on private property which removes or imperils lateral support of a public place.

“Highway” means any public highway, public street, public alley, public way or public place in the incorporated territory of the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for the purpose of travel. “Highway” includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way, and above and below the same, whether or not such entire area is actually used for highway purposes.

“Native soil” means the compacted native material.

“Overhead structure” means any structure, other than franchise utility poles and their facilities, extending over the dedicated portion of a highway, including canopies but excluding such projections from buildings as are enumerated in the building code.

“Pavement” means the surfaced portion of the highway structural section which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with portland cement and/or asphaltic compounds.

“Permittee” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-way and has been issued a permit for the proposed encroachment by the department pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Public” means any person as defined in this chapter other than the city road maintenance division and includes the United States and the state of California.

“Right-of-way” means any land or interest therein which, by deed, conveyance, agreement, dedication, usage or other process of law, has been reserved for or dedicated to the city for use by the general public.

“Section” means a section of this code unless some other ordinance or statute is expressly cited. (Ord. 1726 § 25, 2011; Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.030 Applicability.
Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.040 Exception.
This chapter shall not apply to any officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties. Work performed by any person under contract with or at the request of the city is exempt from the fee and bond requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

II. Application for and Issuance of Permits

13.56.050 Permit required.
Every person except as otherwise provided in this chapter shall obtain an encroachment permit from the engineer before he:

A. Makes or causes to be made any excavation or encroachment in any highway;

B. Places, changes or renews an encroachment;

C. Places, constructs or repairs any curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining or garden wall, storm drain, culvert, pipe, conduit, cable or other work of similar nature in, over, along, across or through any highway;

D. Constructs, reconstructs or repairs any highway light, or highway lighting system in any highway which is open to public travel. This subsection does not apply if any agreement with the city exists for the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of such installation;

E. Constructs, reconstructs, repairs or maintains any overhead structure or other appurtenant facility;

F. Places or leaves any impediment to travel upon any highway, including trash, trash dumpsters or debris;

G. Erects or maintains any post, sign, banner, pole, fence, guardrail, wall, loading platform or any other structure on, over, under or within a right-of-way;

H. Plants or removes any trees, shrubs or growing thing within a right-of-way;

I. Uses the right-of-way in any manner for purposes of seismological exploration;

J. Conducts land-surveying operations or makes traffic counts in such a way that it is necessary to excavate within a right-of-way or in any way interfere with the normal flow of traffic on a public highway;

K. Causes or permits water (other than water from natural sources) to flow onto or upon any street or road wherein the water is contained within the improved section by curbs or berms. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.060 Permit – Exception.
A permit shall not be required pursuant to this chapter for a permanent encroachment for a building, fence, wall, sign or structure, but shall be subject to an encroachment permit pursuant to Chapter 18.50 of the Gardena Municipal Code. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.070 Permit – Denial when.
The engineer may refuse to issue a permit under the following conditions:

A. When he finds that it is not in the best interest of the general public to do so;

B. When he finds that it will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;

C. When the permit is for excavation in newly renovated (capped, overlaid or sealed) streets for three years after completion of street renovation. Public agencies and public utilities shall determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs. Exceptions to the above are:

1. Emergencies which endanger life or property,

2. Interruption of essential utility service,

3. When repairs must be made by a public agency or public utility to failed pipelines and conduits or when a new connection which could not have been anticipated must be made,

4. Work that is mandated by city, state or federal legislation,

5. Service for buildings or areas where no other reasonable means of providing services exists,

6. Where boring is not feasible due to technical engineering reasons, or

7. Any other situation in which the engineer has deemed excavation to be in the best interest of the general public. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.080 Permit – Cancellation.
A. A permit may be canceled by the engineer for any of the following reasons:

1. When permitted work is not started within the time specified and/or is started but not diligently prosecuted to completion;

2. By failure on the part of the permittee to comply with all of the requirements of the permit;

3. By failure on the part of the permittee to provide for public safety;

4. For cause as may be determined by the engineer for public health and safety reasons.

B. Action taken under this section shall not constitute a bar to criminal proceedings provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.090 Application in writing.
Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the department, on the forms provided by the department. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.100 Application requirements.
An applicant for a permit shall state in the application his name and address, such other information as is required by this chapter and such other information as the engineer may require. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.110 Save harmless agreement.
The applicant or his agent shall sign a statement that the applicant agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any claim, demand, damage, liability, loss, cost or expense for any damage whatsoever, including but not limited to death or injury to any person, damage to property arising out of the encroachment, or any activities taken pursuant to the encroachment permit. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.120 Changes in application.
The engineer may make such changes or additions in any application for a permit as in his opinion are necessary for the protection of the highways, for the prevention of undue interference with traffic, and for the safety of persons using such highways, as to the location, depth, dimensions, character and number of excavations; as to encroachments made or placed; and, as to other permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.130 Exhibits.
When required by the engineer, the applicant shall attach to or enclose with the application four copies of a map, plat, sketch, diagram or similar exhibit which plainly shows any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate or identify the proposed encroachment. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.140 Additional requirements.
The engineer may establish additional requirements for the work to be done under the permit, including equipment to be used, type of backfill, compaction, paving, traffic control plans, hours of work, flagmen, lights, inspection and other similar requirements. He also may require whatever advance notice he deems proper for requests for inspection. The engineer may add these requirements and conditions by attachments to the permit and they shall be an integral part thereof. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.150 Permittee bound by all terms.
By accepting the permit, the permittee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions set forth in the permit and in this chapter. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.160 Permit – Expiration.
Permits shall remain in effect from the date of issuance until the completion of the work provided that work is commenced within sixty days from the date of issuance and the work is diligently prosecuted to completion. If the work is not commenced within this time period or diligently prosecuted, the engineer may revoke the permit. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.170 Blanket permits.
Blanket permits, renewable annually, may be issued to any city, municipal utility district, municipal water district, public utility or metropolitan water district subject to the compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The engineer may revoke any such blanket permit if the permittee fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a blanket permit does not relieve the permittee from making such reports of activity under the blanket permit as may be required by the engineer and for paying for inspection, repairs and other costs incurred by the department due to the permittee’s activity. Blanket excavation permits shall be limited to utility trenches not exceeding two feet in width. No road shall be closed when performing work under a blanket permit. Two-way traffic shall be maintained at all times. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.180 Permits nontransferable.
Permits issued under the authority of this chapter are nontransferable. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.190 Work performed with or without permit.
Whenever this chapter requires a permittee to perform any work, take any action, or be liable for any fees or costs, such requirement also applies to any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter whether such person obtains such permit or not. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.200 Work without required permit unlawful.
Any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit therefor, shall stop work and apply for such permit. Failure on the part of such person to stop the work and to obtain a proper permit shall make him in violation of this chapter and subject to all penalties thereof. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.210 Removal of nonpermitted encroachments.
A. Ownership/Control of Encroachment Unascertainable. The city may remove and dispose of any encroachment placed in the highway without a permit for which ownership cannot be reasonably identified. Prior to disposal, the city shall store the encroachment for thirty days.

B. Ownership/Control of Encroachment Ascertainable.

1. If ownership or control of the unpermitted encroachment can be reasonably identified, the city shall notify the owner or individual in control that the encroachment is in violation of this chapter and that application must be made for an encroachment permit.

2. If no application is made for the encroachment permit within three working days after notification, or if such application is denied, the city may remove the encroachment.

3. If the encroachment constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare as determined by the engineer or his designee, the city may order that the encroachment be immediately removed. If such order is made and the encroachment is not moved by the end of the next working day, the city may remove the encroachment. If the encroachment constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare as determined by the engineer or his designee, and the city is not able to contact the owner, the city may immediately remove the encroachment without notification.

4. Upon removal of the encroachment, the city shall supply written notification to the owner or individual in control that the encroachment will be disposed of at the end of thirty days if it is not claimed by the owner.

C. Return of Encroachment. No encroachment shall be returned to the owner or individual in control unless and until a fee is paid to the city in an amount equal to the cost of removal and storage of the encroachment. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.220 Permit availability and display.
The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by the engineer or his representative or by any peace officer or other person having responsibility for safety or maintenance of the highway. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.230 Subsequent owners bound.
All obligations, responsibilities and other requirements of the permittee as described in this chapter shall be binding on subsequent owners of the encroachment. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

III. Encroachment Permits – General Requirements

13.56.239S A Safety, Inspection and Liability
13.56.240 Safety devices, lights and barricades.
In the conduct of the encroachment work, supplies and excavated material shall be properly placed and the permittee shall provide and maintain such safety devices including, but not limited to, lights, barricades, signs, flagmen and watchmen, as are necessary to protect the public and as ordered by the engineer or his representative. Any omission on the part of the engineer to specify in the permit what safety devices shall be provided by or preventive action required of the permittee shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all laws, regulations and ordinances relating to the protection of persons or property under the circumstances. If the engineer finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, he may provide, maintain and relocate such safety devices or take such action as is deemed necessary, charging the permittee in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.250 Safety device standards.
All safety devices, including warning lights, shall conform to the requirements of the manual of Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Work Zones issued by the Department of Transportation of the state and of the California Vehicle Code, so far as such manual and codes are applicable. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.260 Inspector on job.
If, in the judgment of the engineer, it appears desirable to maintain an inspector to determine whether work is being done in compliance with the permit, the engineer shall assign an inspector and the permittee shall pay the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.270 Inspection not to be obstructed.
A person shall not obstruct the engineer or his representative, in making any inspection authorized by this chapter or in taking any sample or in making any test. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.280 Permittee liability.
The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the highways which are within the limits of his activity. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner or to the satisfaction of its owner. The cost of moving publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee unless he makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility or unless the owner is required by his franchise or agreement to move his facility without cost. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.290 Protection and repair of facilities and adjoining property.
The permittee shall support and protect all structures, wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles and other apparatus, both aerial and underground, by a method satisfactory to the owner. The owner has the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In case any of the wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles or apparatus should be damaged (and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement of devices are considered as part of a structure), they may be repaired by the owner at the expense of the permittee or, if authorized by the owner, may be repaired by the permittee under the supervision of the owner. The expense of repairs to any damaged facilities shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.300 Aids to visibility.
When the location or position of an encroachment impairs visibility to vehicular traffic, the engineer may require that the encroachment be equipped with reflectors, lights or other aids to visibility, or the engineer may require the encroachment to be relocated at the sole expense of the permittee. No encroachment shall be maintained across any sidewalk area or shoulder of a public highway. No encroachment of any nature shall be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs, denies or impairs the sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.310 Liability insurance.
A. When the permittee is a contractor, the permittee shall maintain adequate public liability insurance, including motor vehicle insurance if needed, to protect him from any claims for damages for personal injury, including death, and for damage to property, which may arise from the encroachment work or other operations under the permit, whether such encroachment work or other operations be by himself or by any agent or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or his agent. The city shall be named as an additional insured under a state or political subdivision permit endorsement and the policy shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state. The amount shall be as prescribed by city council resolution. In the absence of such a resolution, the minimum liability shall be five hundred thousand dollars. Certificates of insurance and endorsements shall be filed with the engineer.

B. When the permittee is a homeowner, the permittee shall provide the city engineer with a copy of the homeowner’s insurance policy.

C. This section shall not apply to any work done by utility companies by their employees. However, if a utility company uses an outside contractor to perform any work, the contractor must maintain adequate insurance in accordance with subsection A of this section, or the utility company must provide evidence that its own insurance policy covers the contractor. (Ord. 1775 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.319S B Performance of Work
13.56.320 Clearance for emergency facilities.
All work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, and any other emergency facilities designated by the engineer. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.330 Work in accordance with plans.
All work shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction including revisions or according to the plans and specifications referred to in the permit and, in addition, to any special requirements or specifications which are made a part of the permit. In case of conflict between two specifications, the stricter specification shall apply. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.340 Prompt completion of work/notice.
A. After work is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence all work covered by the permit. The permittee shall promptly complete such work and restore the site to satisfactory condition so as not to obstruct the public place or travel more than is reasonably necessary.

B. If the work is not completed in a reasonable and diligent manner the department shall notify the permittee to complete the same within a specified period of time. If the work is not completed within that time the department shall have full power to do the work or may contract for the performance of the work and the reasonable cost thereof, including administrative expense, shall be deducted from the deposit or other security made by the permittee. If the permittee has no deposit or other security, the city may bill the permittee directly for work performed. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.350 Noise, dust and debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out encroachment work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. In the performance of the work, the permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest possible extent, noise, dust and unsightly debris. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.360 Changes.
No changes may be made in the location, dimensions, character or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except on authorization by the engineer. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.370 Restoration of right-of-way.
Upon completion of the encroachment work authorized by a permit, the permittee shall restore the right-of-way, including any structure thereon, by replacing, repairing or rebuilding in accordance with the specifications or any special requirement but not less than to its original condition before the encroachment work was commenced. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, materials and debris upon the right-of-way, and shall do any other work necessary to restore the right-of-way to a safe and usable condition, as directed by the engineer. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly to restore the right-of-way as provided in this section, or should the nature of any damage to the right-of-way require restoration before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the engineer may, at his option, make the necessary restoration. The permittee shall reimburse the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.380 Base and pavement thickness.
Unless otherwise determined by the engineer, where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and, in no event, to a thickness less than three inches; the base course removed shall be replaced to the same thickness as that of the surrounding base course. Paving shall be completed to finish grade in one paving operation. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.390 Equivalent section.
When the structural section removed varies from or exceeds the average existing section, the engineer may elect to require the replacement of an equivalent section which would meet the average structural section requirements. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.400 Compliance required.
All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule made or presented by the engineer in the matters specified on the permit or by attachments, or by any other matter in any way relating to or affecting their use of the highway, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents and employees; except in the case of a public utility regulated by the public utilities commission when such order, decision, direction or rule is contrary to or in conflict with any order, decision, direction or rule made or prescribed by the public utilities commission applicable to such public utility. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.410 Encroachment removal – Generally.
The city may require the removal or relocation of any encroachment, lawful or unlawful, on a finding that the encroachment is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. Removal and relocation of encroachments under this section shall be in accordance with the procedure and penalties provided in Sections 1481 through 1485 of the California Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.420 Encroachment removal without replacement.
When an encroachment is removed and not replaced, the entire encroachment shall be removed from the right-of-way and the hole backfilled and compacted and returned to its pre-existing condition or better, unless the engineer permits otherwise. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.430 Road closure or interference with highway use.
All encroachments shall be planned and executed in such a manner that they will not unreasonably interfere with the safe and convenient travel for the general public or unreasonably interfere with or cause inconvenience to the occupants of adjoining property. At no time shall a public highway be temporarily closed or the use thereof be denied to the general public, except by permission of the traffic authority. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.440 Records of installations.
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other such similar structure under the surface of any right-of-way for supplying or conveying natural gas, electricity, communication facilities, water or petroleum products or for any other purpose, shall file in the office of the engineer within sixty days after the complete installation, a corrected set of maps or atlas sheets drawn to a scale of not more than one inch to two hundred feet showing the complete installation of all such substructures. The same is required showing location in detail of such substructures when such are abandoned. Maps and atlas sheets submitted periodically by public utilities shall cover the intent of this section. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.450 Notice before commencing work.
Before commencing any encroachment work authorized by any permit the permittee shall notify Underground Services Alert (“USA”) and the engineer of the time of commencing work and provide the name, address, telephone number and license number of the contractor, if any, who will perform the work. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.460 Tree and structure relocation.
The engineer may require the permittee to make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of the relocation of any structure, publicly owned facility, tree or shrub, where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The engineer may elect to do the necessary relocation at the permittee’s expense. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.470 Relocation where right-of-way improved.
If any city highway improvement to the right-of-way necessitates the relocation of an encroachment, the permittee shall relocate or remove the encroachment at his sole expense, except as provided by state statute. When relocation is required, the engineer shall give the permittee a written demand specifying that the encroachment must be relocated within the right-of-way to a satisfactory location provided by the engineer and a reasonable time within which the encroachment must be relocated or removed. If the permittee fails to comply with such instructions, the city may relocate the encroachment at the expense of the permittee in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. In determining what is a reasonable time under this section the engineer shall take into consideration the nature of the encroachment, the urgency of the need for its removal, the cost of its removal, the difficulty of it removal, the value of the intact property to the owner, and other facts peculiar to the particular situation. The provisions of this section apply to all permittees, including public agencies and public utilities having authority to occupy city rights-of-way pursuant to a franchise or an express provision of the California Code. However, this section shall not apply to the public agencies and public utilities if such improvement of the highway right-of-way is required due to the construction of a state freeway. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.480 Encroachments not a hazard.
The engineer may require that evidence be submitted with the application to satisfy him that the proposed overhead structure or encroachment will not, insofar as he can foresee, create a hazard of any kind. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.490 Defects appearing after completion.
A. If pavement placed under an encroachment permit should become depressed or broken at any time after the work has been performed for any reason other than natural wear of the surface or improper work of another permittee, the permittee for whom the work was performed shall immediately proceed to repair and restore the pavement upon written notice from the engineer. The repair and restoration shall be to the satisfaction of the engineer. The fact that the original work was subject to the inspection of, inspected by, or under the authority of the engineer as provided for in this chapter shall not excuse the permittee from its duty and obligation imposed by this section.

B. When the work was done pursuant to Section 13.56.040 (Exception), the written notice shall be sent to the person or firm who actually opened the highway and it shall be the responsibility of such person or firm to make the repair and restoration.

C. In case the pavement is not completely restored within thirty days after such notice has been given, the public works department shall do the work or have the work done at the expense of the delinquent person, firm or permittee. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.499S C Fees and Costs
13.56.500 Permit and plan checking fees.
All applicants, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall pay both a permit fee and a plan checking fee in amounts established by resolution of the city council as well as all other costs for the work. Both the permit and plan checking fees shall be based on the cost to the city of providing the services. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.510 Exemptions and waivers of fees.
The following shall be exempt from paying all fees:

A. The engineer may grant a permit without a permit fee if he finds that the work to be done has been requested by the city in connection with proposed public works.

B. If the engineer determines that the waiver of any part of the fees is necessary to promote the safety and public welfare he may in specific instances waive all fees and deposits.

C. In cases where the fee is waived, the permittee shall be liable for the actual cost of any work required to be done by the department in restoring the highway to be in as good a condition as before any such work was commenced. Furthermore, the engineer may, in the future, require such deposit from any such permittee if a bill rendered in accordance with this chapter becomes delinquent. (Ord. 1747 § 1, 2013: Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.520 Work without a permit.
Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining the permit, the specified fees shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.530 Permittee to pay for all costs.
The permittee is liable for and shall pay for all the department’s costs related to the permit, including, but not restricted to, the following:

A. The permit fee if that has not otherwise been paid;

B. Engineering, which includes design, inspection, survey and tests;

C. The cost of any inspection, transportation or tests made;

D. The cost of repairing or restoring the highways and all appurtenant facilities to the same or equal condition that they were in before being cut or damaged as a result of the permittee’s activities;

E. The cost of furnishing and/or maintaining any lights, barricades or warning devices;

F. The cost of alteration, removal, replacement and/or repair to traffic signals and devices, the installation and/or removal of temporary and/or permanent traffic stripes and any other expense for traffic control;

G. The cost of removing or remedying any hazardous condition;

H. The cost of tree-trimming;

I. Any other cost to the city caused by the permittee’s activity. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.540 Costs to be actual costs.
Whenever in the provisions of this chapter, any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs are the actual costs including overhead and depreciation in accordance with current practice in charging for work performed for the public and as defined in the encroachment permit fee resolution as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.550 Deposit required.
Unless exempted from this section by law or by the engineer, each applicant shall, before obtaining a permit, deposit with the department a cash deposit, consisting of cash or a certified or cashier’s check in a sum to be fixed by the engineer as sufficient to reimburse the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as established by the engineer for restoring the right-of-way to its original condition, or for correcting any condition occasioned by or arising out of any failure of the permittee to comply with any and/or all conditions of the permit. Where the size and nature of the project warrant, the engineer may require the additional deposit to indemnify and reimburse the city for work done by or for the city in correcting traffic hazards, unsafe conditions and any emergency condition occasioned by or arising out of the doing of any work under any permit issued to the permittee. This section shall not apply to any work done by utility companies by their own employees. However, if a utility company uses an outside contractor to perform any work, the contractor or the utility company must file a deposit in accordance with this section. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.560 Cash deposit – General or special.
A cash deposit may be in the form of a special deposit to be maintained as security for a specific permit issued to the applicant or may be in the form of a general deposit to be maintained as a security for all the permits issued to an applicant. If an applicant maintains a general cash deposit it shall be with the understanding that he will pay all bills sent him by the engineer for work described in this chapter. The amount of the general deposit shall be sufficient to cover all costs connected with the permit. An applicant making a general deposit need not make a special deposit. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.570 Deposit of bonds and insurance.
In lieu of a cash deposit the engineer may accept from an applicant other types of security as specified in sections 13.56.590 and 13.56.600. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.580 Return of deposit.
Any deposit required by the engineer pursuant to this chapter shall be payable to the city and filed or deposited with the engineer. Deposits returned are to be less any costs authorized to be deducted pursuant to this chapter. Thirty days after the satisfactory completion of all authorized work and fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, the engineer will release the deposit upon application of the permittee. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.590 Surety bond.
The engineer may accept a surety bond in an amount determined by him to be necessary, but not less than five hundred dollars, on a form supplied by the department and executed by a corporation authorized to engage in surety undertakings in the state. It shall guarantee the payment of all fees and other charges required by this chapter which may become due because of any permits issued during the life of the surety bond. This section shall not apply to any work done by utility companies by their own employees. However, if a utility company uses an outside contractor to perform any work, the contractor or the utility company must file a surety bond in accordance with this section. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.600 Certificate of deposit.
The engineer may accept a certificate of deposit or pass books made payable to order of the city in lieu of a surety bond. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.610 Additional securities.
The engineer may require any type of security that has, in his opinion, become insufficient for protection of the public interest, to be increased to such an amount as he has determined will be sufficient to protect the public interest. He may require special deposits or other security. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.620 Expiration date of security.
No bond, insurance certificate, certificate of deposit, savings and loan share assignment or other form of indemnification is acceptable which bears an expiration date not determined by the city. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.630 Costs to be deducted.
If, within thirty days after a bill has been sent, the permittee does not pay the same in full, such amount may be deducted from his deposit, or the engineer may recover the amount due from any security the permittee has filed. When amounts are deducted from a general deposit, the permittee must restore the deposit to its original amount within fifteen days. If the deposit or security is insufficient to pay the amount due, the city may enforce collection by legal means. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.640 Permits not issued if bill unpaid.
The engineer may elect not to issue further permits to the permittee and may hold any deposits, guarantees or bonds of the permittee as long as any bill remains unpaid. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.650 Permit fee refunded when.
Permit fees may be refunded if such fee was erroneously collected or if the work was not constructed by the permittee and no inspection requests were made. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.660 Plan check fee refunded when.
If other refunds are in order, the plan check fee may be refunded also, provided that the plan check has not been made. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

IV. Encroachment Permits – Construction Activity

13.56.670 Encroachment permits issued for construction activity.
The provisions of this chapter apply to encroachment permits issued for the laying, constructing, reconstructing or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, highway surfaces, retaining walls, sewers, storm drains, culverts, highway light or lighting system, or other appurtenant structures. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.680 Plans may be required.
If in the opinion of the engineer the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans and/or the setting of stakes, the engineer may require the application be accompanied by the necessary plans, which shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.690 Approved lines and grades for work.
Before a permittee performs any work prescribed in this chapter he shall obtain from the engineer approval of the lines and grades therefor. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.700 Certificate of acceptance.
If the engineer by survey or by inspection or by both ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue, if requested to do so by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

V. Encroachment Permits – Excavations and Encroachments

13.56.710 Provisions.
The provisions of this chapter apply to permits for the making or causing to be made, in any highway, of excavations, and for the placing, constructing, repairing, changing or removing of encroachments. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.720 Requirements for plat.
Each applicant for an excavation or encroachment permit shall file with the application four copies of the plan showing the highways in which the proposed excavation or encroachment will be placed, together with the exact location of dimensions of the proposed excavation(s) or the specifications and characteristics of the encroachment, together with any other details which the engineer requires. When excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits, cable or pipe, or for making repair thereto, the engineer may waive the filing of a plat. Approved plats shall become public record. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.730 Maintenance of work area.
All materials excavated from trenching or other encroachment operations in the right-of-way which are suitable for use as backfill shall be piled compactly, kept trim, and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger either workers or the general public and to cause as little inconvenience as possible to those using the right-of-way or adjacent property. In areas too narrow to permit proper storage of material, the engineer may require that the permittee remove the material from the encroachment site. All excavated material not suitable for use as backfill shall be removed from public right-of-way. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.740 Preservation of survey monuments.
A monument set for the purpose of preserving survey points, lines or elevation shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission from the engineer. Replacement of a removed or disturbed monument shall be done by a registered civil engineer who is licensed to survey or a licensed land surveyor and shall be at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.750 Amount of open trench.
In any trenching operation, the open trench shall not be in excess of one day’s work ahead of the trench work proper, unless specifically authorized by the engineer. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.760 Preservation of drainage.
If the encroachment work interferes with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage in a manner approved by the engineer. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.770 Services to be jacked or bored.
Laterals, utility services and utility conduits shall be jacked, bored or driven beneath a paved surface per city standards, unless other methods are approved by the engineer. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.780 Minimum cover.
The minimum cover over any pipe or conduit installed under any public highway shall be thirty inches of material measured vertically from the existing or proposed flow line of the nearest gutter to the top of the pipe or conduit. If a gutter flow line is not established, the cover shall be thirty inches of material measured from the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the travelled way to the top of the pipe or conduit. The engineer may permit the installation of pipes or conduits at lesser depths where the required cover cannot be provided. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.790 Repaving by city.
With the permittee’s concurrence or as an emergency measure, the engineer shall have the power to order the paving by city forces of any excavation. The permittee shall reimburse the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.800 Cleanup.
As the work progresses, all highways shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris. All cleanup operations at the location shall be done on a daily basis and be accomplished at the expense of the permittee. From time to time as may be ordered by the engineer, and in any event immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall clean up and remove all material, earth and debris of any kind. If the permittee fails to perform such clean up within twenty-four hours after having been notified to do so by the engineer or his designee, the work may be done by the department and the permittee charged in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the city council. When a pole, guy-stub or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.810 Backfilling and compaction.
Backfilling and compaction of an excavation shall be in accordance with standards established by the engineer both as to material and method. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.820 Agreement to relocate.
Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that if any tank, pole, pipe, cable, conduit, duct, obstruction or tunnel placed in the excavation or the encroachment of which a permit is issued, interferes with the future surface use of the highway by the general public, then the applicant and his successors or assigns will at his own expense remove or relocate to a location satisfactory to the engineer such tank, or pole, pipe, cable, conduit, duct, tunnel or obstruction. The statement signed by the applicant will not apply in cases when the applicant has an easement superior to the highway easement at the time of application and can furnish evidence when required of such superior easement. Utilities operating under franchises granted by the city shall relocate their facilities in accordance with the terms of such franchise. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.830 Cable television lines.
The engineer shall require all lines for the transmission and distribution of standard television or audio signals to be placed underground in highways when all power and telephone lines are underground and shall also require underground installation in all instances except where the applicant provides satisfactory proof of permission to use existing pole lines or where the engineer finds that the remoteness of the area or other conditions render underground installation impractical or infeasible. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.840 No interference with others.
The engineer may establish such requirements as he may find necessary to apply to the work to be done by any person in order to prevent interference with users of the highway and with holders of other permits. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

13.56.850 Emergency excavations.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from maintaining by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, any pipe, cable or conduit in any highway, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided that the person making such excavation applies for a permit not later than the next business day after such work is commenced. (Ord. 1506 § 1 (part), 1996)

Chapter 13.60
TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS
Sections:

13.60.010    Purpose.

13.60.020    Definitions.

13.60.030    Jurisdiction.

13.60.040    Applicability.

13.60.050    Supervision of director.

13.60.060    Duties and responsibilities – Public works director or designee.

13.60.070    Master street tree plan and official street tree specie list.

13.60.080    Permit.

13.60.090    Insurance.

13.60.100    Appeal.

13.60.110    Tree removal criteria.

13.60.120    Nuisance trees.

13.60.125    Nuisance trees – Property owner’s duty to public.

13.60.130    Damaging or dumping harmful substance on trees.

13.60.140    Interference with public official.

13.60.150    Liability disclaimer.

13.60.160    Penalties.

13.60.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the requirements set forth in this Chapter is to regulate the placement and provide for the proper selection of new Trees to minimize problems in public facilities, and to establish requirements for the preservation and proper maintenance of existing Trees located on public property, as well as certain Trees located on private property, that are deemed important to the general welfare and the benefit of the community. The Gardena City Council has found and determined that the community has an interest in preserving Trees as important natural resources which provide scale, color, aroma, visual buffers between land uses, and increased property values, and which contribute to the environment by improving general aesthetics, modifying temperatures by providing shade and reducing heat and glare, reducing wind velocity, purifying and replenishing oxygen, controlling soil erosion, and providing wildlife habitat. The City Council has further found and determined that the regulations set forth in the Chapter are necessary to attain such purpose and interest. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.01)

13.60.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.

“Director” shall mean the City’s Public Works Director.

“Nuisance Tree” shall mean any Tree with a root system that is capable of causing damage to surrounding landscapes or in its present condition poses a danger to public health or safety or interferes with the free use of a Street. A Nuisance Tree shall include, but is not limited to:

A. Any dead, diseased, infested, leaning, or dying Tree on private property or in a parkway so situated as to constitute a danger to Street Trees or Streets, or any portion thereof, or the life, health, or safety of the public or adjoining public property;

B. Any Tree on any private property or in a parkway which is likely to destroy, impair, or otherwise interfere with any Street Tree, Street, or any portion thereof, sewer or other public improvements or services including, but not limited to, water utilities;

C. Any Tree growing upon private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any Street or Public Place that endangers the life, health, safety, or property of the public;

D. Any Tree or foliage on private or public property that interferes with visibility on, free use of, or access to, any portion of any Street; or,

E. Any Tree that is suffering from irreversible damage due to extreme pruning or neglected beyond correction.

“Parkway” shall mean the portion of the Street between the sidewalk and the roadway for vehicular travel, or any private property adjoining the roadway over which the City or public holds a property right.

“Public Place”’ shall mean any property that is owned or controlled by the City and is open to public use.

“Street” means all or any portion of property owned or controlled by the City and designated for the use of the public as a thoroughfare for vehicular or pedestrian travel, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, gutters, drains, roadways, alleys, medians, and parkways.

“Street Tree” shall mean any Tree growing on property owned or controlled by the City, including, but not limited to, all Streets, Public Places, and all easements granted to the City and/or public.

“Tree” shall mean a woody perennial plant, which usually has, but is not limited to, a single dominant trunk and has an expected mature height of fifteen feet (15’) or more, or has an existing trunk diameter of four inches (4”) or more measured at two feet (2’) above finished grade. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.02)

13.60.030 Jurisdiction.
The City shall have jurisdiction and control of the selection, planting, setting out, location, pruning, maintenance, and removal of all Trees on any Public Place. The City also shall have jurisdiction over Trees located on private property to the extent such Trees adversely impact adjoining Public Places. Representatives of the City may enter upon private or public property to examine any Tree adversely affecting a Public Place or any Street and to administer or enforce any provision of this Chapter. The entrance of a representative upon private property shall require the owner’s consent or the representative shall obtain an appropriate warrant. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.03)

13.60.040 Applicability.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no Street Tree shall be planted, maintained, or removed except in conformity with the provisions set forth in this Chapter. To preserve public safety and reliability in the construction, operation, and maintenance of overhead and underground electric lines and facilities, public utilities are exempt from the provisions, requirements, and restrictions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.04)

13.60.050 Supervision of director.
The Director shall have the authority to inspect, maintain, plant, remove, prune, root prune, or otherwise alter any Street Trees. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.05)

13.60.060 Duties and responsibilities – Public works director or designee.
The duties and responsibilities of the Director shall be:

A. To determine and designate, subject to the approval of the council, the type and kind of Trees and shrubs suitable and desirable for planting in the Streets and Public Places.

B. To investigate the possibilities of parkway beautification and Street Tree planting and develop plans for the general beautification of Public Places through the planting of flowers, grass, shrubs and Trees.

C. To recommend to the council for adoption such programs relating to such beautification plans, as the Director may deem practical and necessary.

D. To administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

E. In all cases, the Director shall have the right to determine the classification of any applicable Tree. Such determination shall be final and not subject to appeal.

F. To regulate the trimming, pruning, care, planting and removal of all Street Trees, shrubs and plants in and upon Public Places.

G. To issue permits as required by the provisions of this chapter and to specify the conditions thereof.

H. To maintain and care for all Street Trees, shrubs, plants and vegetation in and upon any Public Place; and

I. To inspect, eliminate, prevent and remove any unsafe, hazardous, dead or nonconforming vegetation.

J. To cause surveys to be made from time to time, to determine which Street Trees are to be retained or removed in order to conform to the Tree planning and maintenance program. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.06)

13.60.070 Master street tree plan and official street tree specie list.
The Director shall establish a Master Street Tree Plan that will set the policies, procedures and guidelines for the City’s planting, removing, and maintenance of Street Trees. In addition, the Master Street Tree Plan will include an official Street Tree Specie List, which will designate specific species of Trees, which may be planted on any Street. The Master Street Tree Plan and Official Street Tree Specie list shall periodically be reviewed and changes recommended therein as may be necessary or advisable. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.07)

13.60.080 Permit.
A. The Director shall have the authority to grant a Tree Trimming Permit, a Tree Removal Permit, and/or a Tree Planting Permit as required by and subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The Director shall further have the authority to impose any conditions on the approval of said permit as deemed necessary by the Director to fulfill the purposes and intent of this Chapter.

B. No person, firm, or corporation, including utility companies, shall cut, trim, prune, plant, remove, injure or interfere with any Tree, shrub or plant upon any Street or Public Place of the City without a permit issued by the Director; provided, however, any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, pole or overhead wire in any Street by virtue of any law, ordinance or franchise may proceed without a permit when circumstances require the work to be done immediately for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare if the permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand, but such person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the office of the Director open for business and such permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was performed.

C. No permit shall be issued by the director without the payment of fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

D. Trees that must be removed by order of the City are exempt from the permit process. (Ord. 1726 § 26, 2011; Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.08)

13.60.090 Insurance.
The Director may require a policy of public liability insurance in a sum to be determined by the City Risk Manager, conditioned that the applicant will save and keep the City and all its officers, departments and employees harmless from any and all costs, damages or expenses which the City or any of its officers, departments or employees may be obliged to pay by reason of, or which may arise out of, the granting and issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter. Such policy shall be so conditioned as to assure the ability of the applicant to respond to damages in any action for personal injury or property damage sustained by any person caused by or resulting from, or which may be claimed to have been caused by or to have resulted from, the work permitted by this chapter, or from any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the rules, regulations and orders of the Director, or from any dangerous or defective condition or nuisance created thereby or resulting there from. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.09)

13.60.100 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Director concerning the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit or who is aggrieved by an administrative decision of the Director may appeal in the manner set forth in Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.10)

13.60.110 Tree removal criteria.
A. Removal of Street Trees. The Director shall authorize the removal of a Street Tree subject to the provisions of this Chapter, if the removal is justified for one or more of the following reasons, but not limited to:

1. The location of the Tree and/or its drip line interferes with an allowed structure, sewage disposal area, paved area, or other approved improvement or ground disturbing activity;

2. The location of a Tree and/or its drop line interferes with the planned improvement of a Street or development of an approved access to the subject or adjoining private property;

3. The location of the Tree is hazardous to pedestrian or vehicular travel or safety;

4. The Tree interferes with, or is causing extensive damage to, utility services or public facilities such as roadways, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavement, sewer line(s), drainage or flood control improvements, building foundations of existing public structures, or any other municipal improvements;

5. The condition or location of the Tree is adjacent to, and in such close proximity to, an existing or proposed structure that the Tree has or will sustain significant damage.

6. The Tree is dead, diseased, or dying.

7. The Tree has become too large for the width of the Parkway, causing major damage to the sidewalks or curbs and gutters, or where root pruning will damage the Tree such that it is susceptible to falling over in heavy winds.

8. Surface roots are causing major disruption of the parkway and interfering with maintenance of the Parkway.

9. The Tree is leaning to the point of being unstable in heavy winds.

10. The Tree is blocking any traffic control device and simple trimming, cannot restore visibility. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.11)

13.60.120 Nuisance trees.
Abatement of Nuisance. Any Nuisance Tree shall be subject to abatement in accordance with Chapter 8.64. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.12)

13.60.125 Nuisance trees – Property owner’s duty to public.
The owner of a lot fronting on or adjacent to any portion of a street shall maintain any trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping along said street or within the street right-of-way adjacent to his or her property in such condition that the sidewalk and parkway will not endanger persons or property. Any fronting or adjacent property owner who fails to abate dangerous vegetation or a nuisance tree shall be liable for all damages or injuries caused by the tree or other vegetation to any person who suffers damage or injury to person or property. However, such liability will not attach if the dangerous condition is caused by a street tree as defined in Section 13.60.020. (Ord. 1801 § 1, 2019)

13.60.130 Damaging or dumping harmful substance on trees.
The following actions are prohibited:

A. Posting or affixing to any Street Tree any bill, poster, nails, placard, picture, announcement, notice, advertisement or sign, painting or, printing or affixing to in any Street Tree in any manner any other thing whatsoever, including any guy wire, or rope or chain.

B. Topping or pruning any Street Tree in a manner that threatens the health of the Tree and is not consistent with pruning standards adopted within the City’s Master Street Tree Plan.

C. Allowing any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance harmful to Trees to come in contact with any part of any Street Tree, including, but not limited to, over-watering.

D. Depositing, placing, storing, or maintaining upon the ground surrounding any Street Tree any stone, brick, concrete, or other material, which may impede the free passage of air, water, and fertilizer to the roots of the Tree.

E. Allowing any vegetated growth, including but not limited to clinging vines, climbing vines or similar growth that is harmful to Trees to come in contact with any part of any Street Tree.

F. Breaking, carving, injuring, defacing, disturbing, any Street Tree, shrub, plant or vegetation in any Street or Public Place, except in connection with, and in the course of, actual duties being performed by an employee or agent of the City or pursuant to a permit to do so. (Ord. 1675, 2006; prior code § 11-3.13)

13.60.140 Interference with public official.
No person shall obstruct, impede, or interfere with any representative of the City enforcing the provision of this Chapter, whether the actions by the City representative take place on public or private property. (Ord. 1675, 2006)

13.60.150 Liability disclaimer.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City, its officers, employees, or agents for any action or failure to act; which occurs on public or private property. Nor shall any provision in this Chapter relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any Tree growing thereon in such condition as will prevent it from constituting a health or safety hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any Street, parkway, or public place. (Ord. 1675, 2006)

13.60.160 Penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements and thus causing damage or death to any Street Tree shall be assessed all costs for the replacement of such Tree. Costs shall be established using the guidelines set forth by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers using either the replacement or trunk method. (Ord. 1675, 2006)

Chapter 13.64
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections:

13.64.010    Definitions.

13.64.020    Public hearing by council.

13.64.030    Report by city engineer.

13.64.040    Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution.

13.64.050    Unlawful acts.

13.64.060    Exception – Emergency or unusual circumstances.

13.64.070    Other exceptions.

13.64.080    Notice to property owners and utility companies.

13.64.090    Responsibility of utility companies.

13.64.100    Responsibility of property owners.

13.64.110    Responsibility of city.

13.64.120    Extension of time.

13.64.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

“Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations and partnerships and their agents and employees.

“Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures” mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

“Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in Section 13.64.040.

“Utility” means all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Prior code § 7-4.01)

13.64.020 Public hearing by council.
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 7-4.02)

13.64.030 Report by city engineer.
Prior to holding such public hearing, the city engineer shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Prior code § 7-4.03)

13.64.040 Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution.
If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 7-4.04)

13.64.050 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.64.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except such overhead facilities as may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.64.040 and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 7-4.05)

13.64.060 Exception – Emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty days without authority of the city engineer in order to provide emergency service. The city engineer may grant special permission on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Prior code § 7-4.06)

13.64.070 Other exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.64.040 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

A. Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

B. Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C. Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D. Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

E. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F. Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

G. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts; and

H. Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Prior code § 7-4.07)

13.64.080 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.64.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution, of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that if they or any person occupying such property desires to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.64.040, together with a copy of the provisions of this chapter, to affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 7-4.08)

13.64.090 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.64.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Prior code § 7-4.09)

13.64.100 Responsibility of property owners.
A. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.64.090 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.64.040, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

B. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises and the notice shall be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears and shall be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears, on the last equalized assessment roll and, when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Gardena, California. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises.

C. The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.

D. If, upon the expiration of the thirty day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communication services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

E. The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

F. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment.

G. If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid. Such assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as such property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (Prior code § 7-4.10)

13.64.110 Responsibility of city.
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed by the provisions of this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.64.040. (Prior code § 7-4.11)

13.64.120 Extension of time.
In the event any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.64.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Prior code § 7-4.12)

Title 14
HOUSING
Chapters:

14.04    Residential Rent Mediation and Hearings

14.08    Tenant Displacement and Relocation Fees

14.12    Mobile Home Park Relocation Impact Reports

14.16    Evictions

Chapter 14.04
RESIDENTIAL RENT MEDIATION AND HEARINGS
Sections:

14.04.010    Purpose.

14.04.020    Definitions.

14.04.030    Rent mediation board created – Composition.

14.04.040    Appointment of members – Terms – Removal.

14.04.045    Forfeiture of office.

14.04.050    Qualifications.

14.04.055    Ex officio member.

14.04.060    Compensation.

14.04.070    Meetings – Quorum – Rules of procedure.

14.04.075    Secretary and minutes.

14.04.080    Matters subject to mediation.

14.04.090    Notification of rent increases.

14.04.100    Mediation of rent increases – Hearings.

14.04.110    Consolidated hearings.

14.04.120    Role of attorneys.

14.04.130    Recommendations.

14.04.140    Acceptance or modification of recommendations.

14.04.150    Failure to accept recommendations.

14.04.160    Hearing – Procedure.

14.04.170    Hearings.

14.04.180    Standards for review.

14.04.190    Determination of hearing officer.

14.04.200    Costs of hearing.

14.04.210    Effective date of rent increases.

14.04.220    Applicability.

14.04.230    Retaliatory acts.

14.04.240    Lessors’ rights.

14.04.250    Repossession of dwellings.

14.04.260    Remedies for retaliatory evictions.

14.04.270    Enforcement.

14.04.280    Notice of mediation and hearing procedures.

14.04.290    Reports.

14.04.300    Severability.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 1180, 1303, 1330 and 1375.

14.04.010 Purpose.
The council finds and declares that there is presently within the city a shortage of residential rental units and a low vacancy rate resulting in a rapid increase in rents, thus causing an economic hardship to tenants residing in the community. The council is desirous of protecting such tenants from unreasonable rent increases while permitting the owners of such properties to receive rent allowing them to maintain the units as well as to receive a reasonable return on their property. The council has therefore determined that it is in the interests of the city to assist tenants and owners in resolving disputes which, from time to time, may arise. (Prior code § 12-1.101)

14.04.020 Definitions.
“Board” means the Gardena rent mediation board.

“Consumer Price Index” shall mean the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers, Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County, California, published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

“Hearing” means a process conducted to make a decision based on evidence taken before a hearing officer who makes findings of fact, conclusions of law and renders a decision that is reviewable in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 1094.5 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state.

“Hearing officer” means a neutral officer selected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter charged with conducting a hearing in accordance with Sections 14.04.170 through 14.04.190.

“Mobile home” shall mean a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street under permit, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 35790. “Mobile home” includes a manufactured home, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18007, and a mobile home, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18008.

“Mobile home homeowner” shall mean a person who owns a mobile home located in a mobile home park under a rental agreement that is not otherwise exempt from regulation under this chapter pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17 or 798.45.

“Mobile home park” shall mean any area of land within the city where two or more mobile home spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation.

“Owner” means the owner, lessor, sublessor, or any other person entitled to receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit or an agent, representative or successor of any of such persons.

“Rent” means the consideration demanded or received in connection with the use and occupancy of any rental unit or for the transfer of a lease for occupancy.

“Tenant” means the lessee and/or any person entitled to occupy a rental unit under a rental or lease agreement with the owner of such rental unit. (Ord. 1761 § 1, 2015: prior code § 12-1.102)

14.04.030 Rent mediation board created – Composition.
The Gardena rent mediation board is created. The board shall consist of fifteen members comprised of five tenant members, five owner members, and five members-at-large. (Ord. 1799 § 1, 2018: prior code § 12-1.103)

14.04.040 Appointment of members – Terms – Removal.
A. Each councilmember shall appoint one member from each of the three member groups set forth in Section 14.04.030.

B. The term of office for each member of the board shall be coterminus with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who appointed the member.

C. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and any member may be removed from office with or without cause by a majority vote of the membership of the council.

D. All members shall serve until their respective successors are appointed.

E. Members may be reappointed.

F. Vacancies existing due to removal, resignation, death or changed status as to a membership group shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the councilmember originally appointing the vacating member. (Ord. 1670 § 20, 2005; Ord. 1548 § 7, 1998: prior code § 12-1.104)

14.04.045 Forfeiture of office.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any member of the board (excepting a nonvoting member) who is absent from any three consecutive regular meetings of the board or who is absent from a total of six regular meetings of the board in any twelve-month period shall thereby automatically forfeit the position or office as a member of the board and the name of such person shall be automatically removed from the membership of the board immediately after the adjournment of any such third consecutive regular meeting or of any such six regular meetings in any such twelve month period, as the case may be, at which such member has not appeared.

The secretary of the board shall thereupon promptly notify the council of such fact, whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by appointment as set forth in Section 14.04.040 for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1670 § 21, 2005)

14.04.050 Qualifications.
A. All tenant members shall be tenants of residential rental property within the city, and neither the tenant member, spouse, nor dependents shall have any financial interest in residential income-producing property either in the city or elsewhere.

B. All owner members shall own, manage, or have a residential income-producing property interest within the city and preferably shall be residents of the city.

C. Members-at-large shall not be tenants, nor shall they have an ownership interest in any residential income-producing property in the city. It is preferable that neither members-at-large nor their spouses or dependents shall have any direct business or financial relationship with either landlords, property managers or real estate professionals within the city or elsewhere. (Ord. 1799 § 2, 2018; prior code § 12-1.105)

14.04.055 Ex officio member.
To aid and assist the board in its deliberations, the city manager, or the city manager’s designated representative, shall serve as an ex officio member of the board and shall have no voting power. (Ord. 1670 § 22, 2005)

14.04.060 Compensation.
The members of the board shall receive such compensation as determined by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 12-1.106)

14.04.070 Meetings – Quorum – Rules of procedure.
The board shall meet regularly once each month at a time and place within the city to be decided upon by the board. A majority of the board members, to include at least one member from each membership category, shall constitute a quorum. All regular board meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall establish rules of procedure for its regular meetings and for mediations conducted by the board. Such rules and all changes and additions thereto shall be submitted to and subject to approval by the council prior to taking effect. (Prior code § 12-1.107)

14.04.075 Secretary and minutes.
A. The city manager, or the city manager’s designee, shall serve as secretary to the board and to any of its committees, and accurate minutes of the activities of the board shall be maintained by the secretary. Minutes shall include the following subject matter:

1. The time and place of each meeting of the board;

2. The names of the members present;

3. All official acts of the board;

4. The votes given by the members, except when the action is unanimous; and

5. A summary of all proceedings before the board.

B. All minutes shall be reduced to writing and shall be presented to the board at the earliest reasonable time for approval, amendment, or correction. The minutes, or true copies thereof, shall be open to public inspection. Copies of the minutes shall be furnished to the council, members of the board, and any other public official upon request. (Ord. 1670 § 23, 2005)

14.04.080 Matters subject to mediation.
The board shall provide mediation services regarding claims that rent increases in the amounts specified in Sections 14.04.090(D) and (E) are excessive or unjustified. No other matter shall be within the jurisdiction of the board. (Ord. 1761 § 2, 2015: Ord. 1709 § 1, 2008: prior code § 12-1.108)

14.04.090 Notification of rent increases.
A. An owner shall provide written notice to tenants of an increase of ten percent or less of the rent charged during the twelve months prior to the effective date of the increase at least thirty days prior to the effective date of the increase.

B. If the proposed rent increase is greater than the amount described in subsection A of this section, the owner shall provide written notice of the increase to tenants at least sixty days prior to the effective date of the increase.

C. Notwithstanding subsection A or B of this section, mobile home park management shall provide homeowners written notice of any rent increase at least ninety days prior to the effective date of the increase.

D. Notice of any rent increase exceeding five percent of the rent charged during the twelve months prior to the effective date of the increase shall include a notice to the tenant, including a mobile home homeowner, of the right to mediation/hearing and that the tenant has ten business days following service of the notice, or twenty-five business days for a mobile home homeowner, to file a mediation petition in order to exercise the tenant’s rights under this chapter. If service is by mail, service shall be effective five days from the date of mailing, or two days in the case of Express Mail, in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1013.

E. Notice of any rent increase to a mobile home homeowner in a mobile home park shall include a notice to the mobile home homeowner of the right to mediation/hearing and that the mobile home homeowner has twenty-five business days following service of the notice in accordance with California Civil Code Section 798.14 to file a mediation petition in order to exercise the mobile home homeowner’s rights under this chapter. If service is by mail, service shall be effective five days from the date of mailing, or two days in the case of Express Mail, in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1013. Such notice of the right to mediation/hearing need not be given, and the right to mediation/hearing shall not be applicable to, any rent increase in an amount less than one-half of the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index from the most recently published index available ninety days prior to the date that the mobile home homeowner’s then current rent was first effective to the date of the most recently published index at the time the notice is given. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1761 § 3, 2015: Ord. 1709 § 2, 2008: Ord. 1626 § 1, 2003; prior code § 12-1.109)

14.04.100 Mediation of rent increases – Hearings.
A. If, within twenty-five business days after the receipt of a notice of an increase in rent to a mobile home homeowner in a mobile home park, or within ten business days after the receipt of a notice of an increase in rent to any other tenant, a petition for mediation is filed by a tenant of a dwelling unit subject to the rental increase, then a mediation hearing shall be set within thirty days after such filing.

B. The hearing shall be conducted by a panel composed of three board members, one from each membership group. The member-at-large shall act as chairperson. If both parties consent in writing, the composition of the panel as set forth in this subsection may be waived.

C. The panel may require the landlord to provide specific documents and information in order to determine whether the proposed rent is reasonable and fair. If the landlord fails to submit documents and information within ten business days of the mailing of the panel’s notice to provide such documents and information, the mediation hearing shall be cancelled and the notice of increase of rent shall be void for all purposes. The documents may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. The actual operating expenses by category for the rental unit for a two-year period ending no more than four months before the proposed effective date of the increase;

2. The anticipated expenses for the rental unit for the twelve-month period of the proposed increase, including details of changes in any cost element;

3. The current and proposed rent schedule for the controlled rental unit;

4. A schedule of other fees and income from the rental unit;

5. The vacancy rate of each rental unit during the preceding two-year period;

6. The schedule of current leases for rental units affected by the proposed increase extending beyond the effective date of the increase, showing the number of leases expiring each month; and

7. The details of any other factor affecting the need for the proposed rent increase.

D. A notice setting the time and place of the mediation hearing and a list of any materials requested by the panel shall be prepared by the board and served upon all parties. A copy of the petition initiating the mediation shall be served with such notice. Such service shall be made by mail to the addresses provided in the petition not less than ten days prior to the hearing. Service of the notice upon the resident manager on the premises or upon the person named in notices posted pursuant to Section 1962 of the Civil Code of the state shall be deemed to be service upon the landlord.

E. The mediation hearing shall not be open to the public.

F. If the tenant who petitioned for mediation, or the spokespersons designated pursuant to Section 14.04.110, fail to appear at the time and place of the hearing, the rent increase shall be deemed approved and shall take effect as provided in Section 14.04.210(C). If the landlord fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing, the rent increase shall be void, subject to the landlord’s issuance of a new notice of rent increase pursuant to Section 14.04.090, which shall be subject to all rent mediation and hearing procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1761 §§ 4, 5, 2015; Ord. 1709 §§ 3, 4, 2008; Ord. 1626 § 2, 2003; prior code § 12-1.110)

14.04.110 Consolidated hearings.
A. Whenever more than one petition for mediation has been filed with respect to rental units which are under common ownership or management and which are operated as a single housing complex, including a mobile home park, such requests, on order of the city or chairperson, may be consolidated for hearing.

B. Whenever two or more petitioners have joined in a consolidated hearing, they may elect up to three spokespersons to represent their interests during the hearing and to enter into a binding agreement. (Ord. 1626 § 3, 2003; prior code § 12-1.111)

14.04.120 Role of attorneys.
A. No attorney shall take part in any mediation hearing unless:

1. The attorney is the owner, manager, or tenant of the dwelling unit which is involved in the mediation; or

2. The owner, manager, or tenant of the dwelling unit involved in the mediation is a partnership in which the attorney is a general partner and in which all the partners are attorneys; or

3. The owner, manager, or tenant of the dwelling unit is a corporation, and the attorney is an officer or director of the corporation, and all of the officers and directors of the corporation are attorneys.

B. Nothing set forth in this section shall prevent an attorney from rendering advice to a party participating in a mediation hearing, either before or after commencing the mediation process; nor shall anything set forth in this section prevent an attorney from testifying to facts of which he has personal knowledge and about which he is competent to testify. Nothing set forth in this section shall prevent the city attorney or his designee from advising the board or its members as to any matter relating to the performance of the duties of the board or its members.

C. Any person may be represented by an agent other than an attorney in the mediation hearing provided such agent is granted authorization to do so in writing, and the authorization includes authority to enter into a binding settlement of the dispute being mediated.

D. Attorneys may be appointed board members and may sit on a mediation panel. (Prior code § 12-1.112)

14.04.130 Recommendations.
Within seven business days after the conclusion of a rent mediation hearing, the board shall issue its recommendation and mail a copy of such recommendation to the owner and tenant or tenants affected by or subject to the recommendation. (Ord. 1626 § 4, 2003; prior code § 12-1.113)

14.04.140 Acceptance or modification of recommendations.
If the parties accept the recommendations of the board, they shall affix their signatures in the space provided thereon, which shall indicate that the rent for such unit shall be that contained in the recommendation, or any other amount mutually agreed upon by the parties, and shall remain the same for a period of no less than six months. It is the intent of the council that such document shall constitute a binding contract between the parties and shall be enforceable by each party in a court of law. (Prior code § 12-1.114)

14.04.150 Failure to accept recommendations.
If the parties do not accept the recommendation of the board or agree upon another rental amount, either party, within seven calendar days after the mailing of the recommendation of the board, may file with the board a request to submit the matter to a hearing officer whose decision shall be binding on the parties. (Ord. 1761 § 6, 2015: prior code § 12-1.115)

14.04.160 Hearing – Procedure.
Upon the receipt of a request to submit the matter to a hearing officer, the board shall notify the parties of the request and shall submit to them the name of a hearing officer, accompanied by his resume and fee. If the parties agree upon the hearing officer, they shall notify the board in writing of such acceptance. If either party fails to agree upon a hearing officer, a new name shall be submitted until such time as both parties agree upon a hearing officer. If, after three names are submitted, both parties are unable to agree on a hearing officer, the board will unilaterally assign a hearing officer to hear the case. Failure to notify the board within three days after the receipt of the name shall constitute acceptance of the hearing officer. (Ord. 1761 § 7, 2015: prior code § 12-1.116)

14.04.170 Hearings.
A. The city shall notify both parties of the time and place for the hearing. Such time shall be not less than seven or more than thirty calendar days after the date of the notice of hearing was sent to the parties by the board. The hearing shall take place in the city or any other mutually agreeable location and shall not be open to the public. The parties at the hearing may produce oral or documentary evidence. Cross examination of witnesses shall be permitted. The conduct of the hearing shall be under the control of the hearing officer, with due regard to the rights and privileges of the parties appearing before it. Hearings need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.

B. The parties may be represented at the hearing by an attorney or other agent.

C. The parties may present any relevant evidence to the hearing officer.

D. The complete file, including the recommendation and all correspondence to and from the board relating to the case shall be made available to the hearing officer.

E. Such hearings may be consolidated by the hearing officer pursuant to Section 14.04.110.

F. The hearing officer shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and documents. (Ord. 1761 § 8, 2015: Ord. 1626 § 5, 2003; prior code § 12-1.117)

14.04.180 Standards for review.
In making a decision based on a petition for rent review, the hearing officer shall consider the purposes of this chapter and shall specifically consider all relevant factors to determine whether the proposed rent increase is just, fair and reasonable, including, but not limited to, the following:

A. Changes in the Consumer Price Index;

B. Any lawfully established state or federal government wage and price guideline;

C. The rent lawfully charged for comparable rental units in the city;

D. The length of time since the last increase for the rental unit or units for which the owner seeks a rent increase;

E. The completion of any capital improvement or rehabilitation work related to the rental units, as distinguished from normal repair, replacement or maintenance, and the cost thereof, including such items of cost as materials, labor, construction interest, permit fees, a fair return on the capital investment and other items as the hearing officer deems appropriate;

F. Changes in property taxes, other taxes, or fees, related to the subject rental unit or units;

G. Changes in mortgage payments or rent paid by the owner for the rental unit or units or the lease of the land upon which such units are located;

H. Changes in the utility charges for the rental unit or units paid by the owner and the extent, if any, of reimbursement from the tenants;

I. Changes in reasonable operating and maintenance expenses, including, but not limited to, insurance, government assessments, materials and services;

J. The need for repairs caused by circumstances other than ordinary wear and tear;

K. The amount and quality of services provided by the owner to the affected tenant or tenants;

L. Changes in the size of the rental unit or units;

M. Compliance by the owner with applicable housing, health, and safety codes; and

N. Any existing written lease lawfully entered into between the owner and the affected tenant or tenants and any leasehold obligations of the landlord which affect the property. (Ord. 1761 § 9, 2015: Ord. 1626 § 6, 2003; prior code § 12-1.118)

14.04.190 Determination of hearing officer.
The hearing officer, within ten business days after the conclusion of the hearing, shall certify his findings and decision to the parties, the board, and the city council. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final subject to judicial review pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure and further subject to the time limits for seeking such review pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 1761 § 10, 2015: Ord. 1626 § 7, 2003; prior code § 12-1.119)

14.04.200 Costs of hearing.
The costs of the hearing shall be paid one-half by the owner and one-half by the tenants. In cases where either party has proceeded in bad faith or in an unfair manner, or where the submissions of the party as to the proper rent are totally at odds with the facts, the hearing officer may alter the distribution of costs in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. 1761 § 11, 2015: prior code § 12-1.120)

14.04.210 Effective date of rent increases.
A. No rent increase shall be effective unless or until the owner or manager of the rental unit, or the owner’s duly authorized agent, complies with the provisions of this chapter by meeting in good faith with the tenant or tenants requesting mediation at such hearing and by participating in the hearing process.

B. The procedures of this chapter are intended to result in a final resolution of a dispute prior to the effective date of a rent increase. If board action or hearing does not result in a final decision by the effective date, any board recommendation or hearing officer’s decision shall be retroactive to the noticed effective date.

C. Failure of the tenant to file a request for mediation or a hearing in a timely manner as provided in this chapter shall result in the imposition of the rent increase on the effective date specified in the owner’s notice of such increase.

D. Nothing set forth in this chapter shall relieve a tenant of the obligation to pay the rent in effect prior to the notice of any increase. (Ord. 1761 § 12, 2015: prior code § 12-1.121)

14.04.220 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all disputes arising out of rent increases noticed on or after February 20, 1987. Rent increases for which notices were received on or after February 20, 1987, shall not take effect less than sixty days after the date such notice is received by the affected tenant or tenants. (Prior code § 12-1.122)

14.04.230 Retaliatory acts.
The use of the rent mediation or hearing process is declared to be a protected right pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 1942.5 of the Civil Code of the state. It is unlawful for a lessor to increase rent, decrease services, cause a lessee to quit involuntarily, bring an action to recover possession, or threaten to do any of such acts for the purpose of retaliating against the lessee because he has lawfully and peaceably exercised any right established by the city rent mediation and hearing process as set forth in this chapter. In any action brought by or against the lessee, the lessee shall bear the burden of producing evidence that the lessor’s conduct was, in fact, retaliatory. However, any action brought by the owner within three months after the determination of a petition filed with the board shall be presumed to be retaliatory. This presumption affects the burden of proof and is rebuttable by the owner. (Ord. 1761 § 13, 2015: prior code § 12-1.123)

14.04.240 Lessors’ rights.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting in any way the exercise by the lessor of his rights under any lease or agreement or any law pertaining to the hiring of property or his right to do any of the acts described in Section 14.04.230 for any lawful cause. Any waiver by a lessee of his rights under this chapter shall be void as contrary to public policy. (Prior code § 12-1.124)

14.04.250 Repossession of dwellings.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 14.04.230 and 14.04.240, a lessor may recover the possession of a dwelling and do any of the other acts described in Section 14.04.230 if the notice of termination, rent increase, or other act and any pleading or statement of issues in a hearing, if any, states the ground upon which the lessor, in good faith, seeks to recover possession, increase rent, or do any of the other acts described in Section 14.04.230. If such statement shall be controverted, the lessor shall establish its truth at the trial or other hearing. (Ord. 1761 § 14, 2015: prior code § 12-1.125)

14.04.260 Remedies for retaliatory evictions.
Any lessor or agent of a lessor who violates Section 14.04.230 shall be liable to the lessee in a civil action for all of the following:

A. The actual damages sustained by the lessee;

B. Punitive damages in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each retaliatory act where the lessor or agent has been guilty of fraud, oppression or malice with respect to such act; and

C. Reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Prior code § 12-1.126)

14.04.270 Enforcement.
A. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall not constitute a crime.

B. A tenant at any time may bring an action in the courts of the state alleging a violation by an owner of any of the terms of this chapter and may seek a court order requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

C. An owner at any time may file an action in the courts of the state alleging a violation by the tenant of the provisions of this chapter or may seek a court order directing compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 12-1.127)

14.04.280 Notice of mediation and hearing procedures.
The board shall prepare a booklet outlining the provisions of this chapter. Owners of residential rental units shall provide at least one booklet to the residents of each unit owned by them. New tenants shall be provided with a copy of the booklet at the time of occupancy. Notification of the current rent increase shall have no effect, and a tenant shall have a defense to any unlawful detainer action for failure to pay such increases in rent, if the tenant has not been provided with a booklet as required by this section. The burden of proof in disputes as to whether a booklet has been provided shall be on the landlord. Failure to provide a booklet may also be considered by the hearing officer in determining the distribution of costs pursuant to Section 14.04.200. A tenant’s signed statement, which may be included in the rental agreement, acknowledging that the owner has provided the tenant the booklet required by this section, shall constitute proof of the owner’s compliance with this section. (Ord. 1799 § 3, 2018: Ord. 1709 § 5, 2008: prior code § 12-1.128)

14.04.290 Reports.
Reports of the results of all mediation hearings shall be made to the board and transmitted to the council. All such reports and the petitions for hearings shall be public records. The board, in addition to such reports, shall provide copies of the minutes of all board meetings to the council. (Ord. 1761 § 15, 2015: prior code § 12-1.129)

14.04.300 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 1761 § 16, 2015)

Chapter 14.08
TENANT DISPLACEMENT AND RELOCATION FEES
Sections:

14.08.010    Purpose.

14.08.020    Definitions.

14.08.030    Relocation assistance.

14.08.040    Exceptions.

14.08.050    Tenant notification.

14.08.060    Payment schedule.

14.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide relocation assistance to tenants facing eviction due to demolition or removal of their building, condominium conversion or other land use changes affecting residential rental property, including mobile home and trailer parks. (Prior code § 12-1.201)

14.08.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, the following definitions shall apply:

“Landlord” means an owner, lessor or sublessor (including any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity) who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit, or the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing.

“Rental unit” means a dwelling unit together with the land and building appurtenant thereto, and all housing services, privileges, furnishings and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy thereof, including garage and parking facilities.

“Tenant” means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other person legally entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit. (Prior code § 12-1.202)

14.08.030 Relocation assistance.
In every case involving the demolition or removal of a multiple-family residential rental facility, or a condominium conversion or other land use change affecting residential rental property, including mobile home and trailer parks, and the tenants therein, are facing eviction due to such demolition, removal, conversion, or change, no required permits or approvals shall be issued unless and until the landlord submits to the city planner proof of payment of a relocation fee in the amount of three thousand dollars per rental unit to assist in the relocation of the tenants. (Prior code § 12-1.203)

14.08.040 Exceptions.
The following are exceptions to the provisions of this chapter:

A. Projects involving one single-family dwelling;

B. Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns, tourist homes and boardinghouses and roominghouses; provided, that at such time as an accommodation has been occupied by one or more of the same tenants for sixty days or more such accommodations shall become a rental unit subject to the provisions of this section;

C. Housing accommodations in any hospital, convent, monastery, extended medical care facility, asylum, nonprofit home for the aged, or fraternity or sorority house or housing accommodations owned, operated, or managed by an institution of higher education, a high school, or an elementary school for occupancy by its students;

D. Housing accommodations which a government unit, agency, or authority owns, operates, or manages or which are specifically exempted from municipal rent regulations by state or federal laws or administrative regulations;

E. Demolition required by the city or other public agency for health or safety reasons. (Prior code § 12-1.204)

14.08.050 Tenant notification.
A. Applications for demolition or removal, condominium conversion or other land use changes affecting residential rental property, including mobile home parks, shall be accompanied by a notarized statement from the applicant that each tenant on the property has been notified by registered or certified mail of the application and notice of the relocation assistance provisions of this chapter. The statement shall include the name and address of each notified tenant.

B. Any person who becomes a tenant of a multiple-family dwelling or a mobile home park after the date of such application, shall be given written notice of the pendency of the application prior to entering into any written or oral rental agreement, but shall not be eligible to receive relocation assistance.

C. A rebuttable presumption shall exist that a tenant who is evicted from the premises within six months prior to the date of application was evicted in contemplation of such application and is therefore eligible to receive the required assistance. (Prior code § 12-1.205)

14.08.060 Payment schedule.
The relocation assistance specified in this chapter shall be provided as follows:

The landlord shall pay each eligible tenant the required relocation assistance not later than the date the tenant is required to vacate the premises. (Prior code § 12-1.206)

Chapter 14.12
MOBILE HOME PARK RELOCATION IMPACT REPORTS
Sections:

14.12.010    Relocation impact reports (RIR).

14.12.020    Time for filing relocation impact reports.

14.12.030    Contents of relocation impact reports.

14.12.040    Hearings and notices.

14.12.050    Commission findings and decisions.

14.12.060    Effective date and appeals.

14.12.070    Subsequent modifications of mitigating measures.

14.12.080    Performance of mitigating measures.

14.12.090    Expiration and extension of relocation impact reports.

14.12.100    Revocation.

14.12.010 Relocation impact reports (RIR).
For the purposes of this chapter, any closure of a mobile home park or trailer park or any part thereof or any change of the park’s status to a vacant use shall be deemed to be a conversion of the park.

Prior to the conversion of a mobile home park or trailer park or any part thereof to any other use or to a vacant use, the person or entity proposing such conversion (referred to in this chapter as “owner”) shall file and obtain the approval of a relocation impact report (referred to in this chapter as “RIR”) in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. (Prior code § 12-1.301)

14.12.020 Time for filing relocation impact reports.
An RIR shall be filed by the owner and be approved by the planning and environmental quality commission prior to the giving of the written notice of change in use of a mobile home park or trailer park or any portion thereof required by subsection (f) of Section 798.56 of the Civil Code of the state. The RIR shall constitute an application for a permit requesting a change of use within the meaning of subsection (2) of subsection (f) of said Section 798.56.

If an owner files a tentative tract or parcel map to a subdivision to be created upon the conversion of a mobile home park or trailer park to another use prior to giving the written notice under subsection (f) of said Section 798.56, then the RIR shall be filed concurrently with the filing of the map.

If the written notice of change in use has been given to the tenants prior to December 18, 1984, the RIR shall be submitted on or before February 16, 1985. (Prior code § 12-1.302)

14.12.030 Contents of relocation impact reports.
The RIR shall contain the following:

A. A description of the proposed new use;

B. A timetable for the conversion of the park;

C. A legal description of the park;

D. The number of spaces in the park, the length of occupancy by the current occupant of each space, and the current rental rate for each space;

E. The date of manufacture and size of each coach;

F. The appraised market and on-site value of each of the coaches in the park. The appraiser shall be selected by the city, and the cost shall be borne by the applicant;

G. The number of residents per space in the park, the number under sixteen years of age, the number sixty years of age or over, and the number who are handicapped;

H. The name and mailing address of each tenant;

I. A list of known available spaces in the South Bay-Long Beach-Orange County area, including any written commitments from mobile home park owners willing to accept displaced tenants;

J. Estimates from two moving companies as to the per mile cost of moving coaches of various sizes, including the tear-down and set-up of coaches;

K. Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the conversion upon the park residents; and

L. Information as to whether tenants have been offered the option of a long-term lease of the land and purchase of the improvements if the park is to be sold. (Prior code § 12-1.303)

14.12.040 Hearings and notices.
Upon the filing of an RIR, the community development director shall examine the RIR and advise the owner within thirty days after the receipt thereof whether it is complete. When a complete RIR has been filed, it shall be accepted by the director and the director shall set a time, date and place for the review of the RIR by the planning and environmental quality commission not later than thirty days after the date of acceptance. The director shall mail a copy of the RIR to all tenants of the mobile home park or trailer park and shall give notice by first-class mail or personal delivery to the owner and the tenants of the date, time and place of the hearing at least fifteen days prior thereto. The notice shall also contain a general explanation of the matters to be considered by the commission. The director may give such additional notice as the commission deems necessary or desirable. (Prior code § 12-1.304)

14.12.050 Commission findings and decisions.
A. Upon the review of the RIR and consideration of the written and oral evidence received at the hearing, the planning and environmental quality commission, by resolution, shall render its decision. The commission shall approve the RIR if the commission is able to make an affirmative finding that reasonable measures have been provided in an effort to mitigate the adverse impact of the conversion on the ability of the park residents to be displaced to find alternative housing. If the commission does not make such finding and is unable to impose reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impact, the commission may disapprove the RIR. No other permit or approval shall be granted in furtherance of the proposed conversion, and no change of use shall occur until and unless an RIR has been approved.

B. In approving an RIR, the commission may impose reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts created by the conversion, which may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:

1. Provision for the payment of the cost or partial cost of physically moving the coach to a new site, including the tear-down and set-up of coaches;

2. For those tenants who move to apartments, provision of the first and last month’s rent, plus the security deposit, not to exceed the fair market rents for new construction and substantial rehabilitation for the Los Angeles area as established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. Mobile home households of one or two persons may be compensated based on a one bedroom apartment; households of three or more mobile home tenants may be compensated based on a two bedroom rental;

3. Provision of a replacement space within a fifty-mile radius of the mobile home park or trailer park;

4. Postponement of the conversion for a reasonable period of time;

5. A requirement to purchase the coaches at fair market values, determined by an independent appraiser based on either the value of the coach sold in place, including improvements, yards and the like, or the market value;

6. A provision for setting aside a certain number of units if the park is to be converted to another residential use;

7. A longer notification period allowing the owner to pay a smaller portion of the relocation costs, the amount of financial relocation to be determined by the amount of prior notification given; and

8. The owner to pay the difference in rent between the new and old park for a specified period of time. (Prior code § 12-1.305)

14.12.060 Effective date and appeals.
The decision of the planning and environmental quality commission shall become effective and final seven days after the date of its action, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Chapter 18.72 of this code. (Prior code § 12-1.306)

14.12.070 Subsequent modifications of mitigating measures.
After an RIR has been approved, the modification of the mitigation measures imposed, including additions or deletions, may be considered upon the filing of a written application by the owner or his authorized representative. Any such application for modification shall be subject to the hearing and notice procedures set forth in Section 14.12.040. The decision and any appeal in connection with a modification request shall take place as with the initial approval. A modification of the RIR may be granted upon a finding that the approved RIR or a change of circumstances has created a substantial hardship for the owner and that any such modification will not unreasonably prejudice the interests of the tenants. (Prior code § 12-1.307)

14.12.080 Performance of mitigating measures.
All mitigation measures imposed in the approval of an RIR shall be fully performed as to each resident prior to or concurrently with such resident’s required vacation of the mobile home park or trailer park, unless otherwise provided in the mitigation measure. No resident shall be required to vacate a mobile home or trailer space unless the owner is in full compliance with all mitigation measures imposed pertaining to such resident and has otherwise fulfilled the notice requirements of the Civil Code of the state relating to “Termination of Tenancy.” (Prior code § 12-1.308)

14.12.090 Expiration and extension of relocation impact reports.
A. An RIR shall become automatically null and void if the conversion of the mobile home park or trailer park has not occurred within eighteen months after the effective date of the RIR, unless extended as provided in subsection B of this section or unless otherwise provided in the RIR or the resolution of approval of the RIR.

B. Upon an application by the owner filed with the community development director on or before the date of expiration of the RIR, an RIR may be extended by the planning and environmental quality commission, or the council on appeal, if the commission finds that the termination of the RIR would constitute an undue hardship to the owner and that the continuation of the RIR would not be detrimental or have any further adverse impact on the residents of the park. An application for an extension shall be subject to the hearing and notice procedures set forth in Section 14.12.040. In approving an extension, the commission may subject the RIR to any additional mitigation measures deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from the extension. Multiple extensions may be granted, but no one extension shall be issued for more than eighteen months. (Prior code § 12-1.309)

14.12.100 Revocation.
A. Proceedings for the revocation of an RIR may be initiated by the council, the planning and environmental quality commission, or the community development director. Upon the initiation of a revocation, the commission shall conduct a hearing with notice given in the same manner as set forth in Section 14.12.040, except that notice to the owner shall be by registered mail or summons. After the hearing, the commission, by resolution, may revoke the RIR if any of the following findings is made:

1. Approval was obtained by fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation; or

2. The owner is not or has not been in compliance with the mitigation measures contained in the RIR or with the provisions of this chapter.

B. A revocation shall be effective fifteen days after the date of action by the commission, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Chapter 18.72 of this code.

C. Upon revocation, the owner shall not be entitled to convert or change the use of the park until such time as a new RIR is filed and accepted as complete by the director, a new written notice of change of use is given to park tenants, and a new RIR is approved by the commission. (Prior code § 12-1.310)

Chapter 14.16
EVICTIONS
Sections:

14.16.010    Eviction.

14.16.020    Notification.

14.16.030    Legal proceedings.

14.16.040    Failure to institute action.

14.16.010 Eviction.
A. A landlord may, or shall, if required by Section 14.16.030, give notice required by law and bring an action to recover possession of a rental unit upon the happening of any of the following events:

1. The tenant is using the rental unit, or allowing the rental unit to be used, for illegal drug dealing activities or purposes.

The term “illegal drug dealing activities or purposes” includes, but is not limited to, possession for sale or sale of illegal drugs from the rental unit;

2. The tenant is committing or permitting to exist a “drug-related nuisance” in the rental unit or the appurtenances thereof, or the common areas of the complex containing the rental unit.

B. The term “drug-related nuisance” includes, but is not limited to, any activity commonly associated with illegal drug dealing such as complaints of noise, steady traffic day and night to a particular unit, barricaded units or sighting of weapons, brought to the attention of the landlord by other tenants, persons within the community, or law enforcement agencies. (Prior code § 12-1.401)

14.16.020 Notification.
The landlord shall state the reason for the eviction in the written notice of termination served on the tenant pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1946.

When the termination of tenancy is for any ground set forth in Section 14.16.010, the landlord shall file with the city attorney a declaration in a form prescribed by him setting forth the reasons for the termination with specific facts to permit a determination of the date, place, witnesses and circumstances concerning the reason. (Prior code § 12-1.402)

14.16.030 Legal proceedings.
An action under this chapter to recover possession of a rental unit shall be commenced by the landlord within sixty days after notice and request of the district attorney, city attorney, or chief of police, in a letter sent certified mail with a return receipt requested, notifying the landlord of the ground or grounds specified in Section 14.16.020. (Prior code § 12-1.403)

14.16.040 Failure to institute action.
If a landlord does not commence an action when required under the provisions of this chapter to recover possession of the rental unit, the district attorney, city attorney, or chief of police may file an action to evict the tenant from the premises of the rental unit and name the landlord as a defendant in the action if it can be established that the landlord aided or acquiesced to the illegal activity or nuisance described in Section 14.16.010. If the landlord has been named as a defendant in the action, the court may impose a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars against the landlord for his or her failure to comply with this section. (Prior code § 12-1.404)

Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters:

15.02    Building Appeals Board

15.04    General Building Provisions

15.06    Expedited Permit Process for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Systems

15.08    Adoption of Housing Law Regulations

15.20    International Property Maintenance Code

15.30    Uniform Building Security Code

15.32    Asbestos Removal

15.40    Reports of Residential, Commercial and Industrial Building Records

15.44    Post-Disaster Building Standards and Requirements

15.48    Construction and Development Fees

15.50    Floodplain Management

Chapter 15.02
BUILDING APPEALS BOARD
Sections:

15.02.010    Building appeals board.

15.02.020    Appointment/qualifications.

15.02.030    Term.

15.02.040    Alternative.

15.02.050    Meetings.

15.02.060    Appeals.

15.02.070    Ex officio member.

15.02.010 Building appeals board.
A. There shall be a building appeals board which shall consist of five members. The building appeals board shall be the “local appeals board,” the “housing appeals board,” and the “board of appeals” as those phrases are defined and used in the California Building Standards Code or any other code under this title as the same may apply to the city of Gardena either by express adoption or by operation of law.

B. Regardless of any provision to the contrary in any provision of the California Building Standards Code or any other code under this title, the provisions of this chapter shall govern all appeals. (Ord. 1720 § 1 (part), 2010)

15.02.020 Appointment/qualifications.
A. Each councilmember shall nominate one member who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to ratification by the council.

B. Each member shall be knowledgeable in the California Building Standards Code and applicable ordinances of the city of Gardena. Members need not be residents of the city.

C. A vacancy on the building appeals board shall be filled in the same manner as the appointment.

D. Members of the appeals board shall receive no compensation. However, the members shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 1720 § 1 (part), 2010)

15.02.030 Term.
A. The term of office for each member of the building appeals board shall be coterminous with the expiration of the actual tenure of the member of the council who nominated the member.

B. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and such appointments may be terminated by a majority vote of the membership of the council.

C. All members of the building appeals board shall serve until their respective successors are appointed.

D. Members may be reappointed. (Ord. 1720 § 1 (part), 2010)

15.02.040 Alternative.
As an alternative to establishing its own building appeals board, the city may utilize the services of a building appeals board of a neighboring jurisdiction within Los Angeles County. (Ord. 1720 § 1 (part), 2010)

15.02.050 Meetings.
The building appeals board shall meet only when:

A. An appeal is filed pursuant to this chapter; or

B. The chief building official or the fire code official calls a special meeting of the building board of appeals in order to request advisory comments regarding issues related to this chapter, such as the potential adoption of new codes, proposed code changes, or alternate methods and materials. (Ord. 1720 § 1 (part), 2010)

15.02.060 Appeals.
A. Any person adversely affected by a determination made by the chief building official or fire code official in administering or enforcing any provision of this title, except Chapter 15.48, may appeal the determination to the building appeals board.

B. Appeals shall be in writing, state the grounds for the appeal, and be accompanied by a fee in the amount set by resolution of the city council. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

C. The appeal shall be filed with the chief building official no later than ten days after receipt of written notice of the determination and the appeal provisions of this chapter. Failure to timely request an appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to a hearing before the building appeals board and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

D. Within forty-five days of receiving an appeal, the chief building official shall schedule a hearing before the building appeals board which shall consider relevant evidence presented at the hearing. Appellant shall be given at least ten days’ written notice of the date and time of the hearing.

E. The building appeals board shall render a final written decision with findings within a reasonably prompt time after the filing of the appeal. The authority of the building appeals board to render a written decision shall be limited to the scope of authority of the chief building official or fire code official in the first instance and the building appeals board shall have no authority to waive a requirement of this title.

F. The decision of the building appeals board shall be final and conclusive. The written decision shall be sent to the appellant and shall provide that, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be commenced in an appropriate court of law not later than the ninetieth day after the date that the decision becomes final. (Ord. 1720 § 1 (part), 2010)

15.02.070 Ex officio member.
Unless otherwise designated by the city manager, the chief building official shall be the principal city staff liaison to the building appeals board. (Ord. 1720 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 15.04
GENERAL BUILDING PROVISIONS
Sections:

15.04.010    Adoption of the California Building Standards Code.

15.04.020    Fees.

15.04.030    Amendment of Part 2, California Building Code.

15.04.040    Amendment of Part 2.5, California Residential Code.

15.04.050    Amendment of Part 6, California Energy Code.

15.04.060    Amendment of Part 11, California Green Building Standards Code.

15.04.010 Adoption of the California Building Standards Code.
A. Subject to the amendments and changes set forth herein, the following parts of the 2016 California Building Standards Code as set forth in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations are hereby adopted by reference in their entirety:

1. Part 1 – California Building Standards Administrative Code.

2. Part 2 – California Building Code and the following divisions and appendices:

a. Division II, Scope and Administration to the California Building Code;

b. Appendix F, Rodent-proofing;

c. Appendix H, Signs;

d. Appendix I, Patio Covers;

e. Appendix J, Grading.

3. Part 2.5 – California Residential Building Code and the following appendices:

a. Appendix A, Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping;

b. Appendix B, Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use with Type B Vents;

c. Appendix C, Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems;

d. Appendix D, Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance Installation;

e. Appendix E, Radon Control Methods;

f. Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs;

g. Appendix H, Patio Covers;

h. Appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures;

i. Appendix K, Sound Transmission;

j. Appendix M, Home Day Care R-3 Occupancy;

k. Appendix N, Venting Methods;

l. Appendix O, Automatic Vehicular Gate.

4. Part 3 – California Electrical Code.

5. Part 4 – California Mechanical Code.

6. Part 5 – California Plumbing Code and the following appendices:

a. Appendix A, Recommended Rules for the Sizing of Water Piping System;

b. Appendix D, Sizing of Storm Water Drainage Systems;

c. Appendix G, Sizing of Vent System;

d. Appendix I, Installation Standard for PEX Tubing Systems for Hot and Cold Water Distribution.

7. Part 6 – California Energy Code.

8. Part 8 – California Historical Building Code.

9. Part 11 – California Green Building Standards Code (“Cal Green”).

10. Part 12 – California Reference Standards Code.

B. The most recent version of the Los Angeles County Fire Code, as set forth in Section 8.08.020, shall be part of the building regulations of the city. In cases of conflict between any provision between the Los Angeles County Fire Code and the other provisions of the building regulations of the city of Gardena, the most restrictive provision shall prevail. (Ord. 1791 § 2 (part), 2018)

15.04.020 Fees.
The city shall charge fees for all permits, plan checks, inspections and other services performed by the city relating to any portion of the building regulations of the city or any other provision of this title in an amount set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1791 § 2 (part), 2018)

15.04.030 Amendment of Part 2, California Building Code.
A. Section 105.2, Building, 1 through 7, of Division II, Scope and Administration, of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

1. One-story detached accessory building, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet, with three feet clear from a building or property line and conforming to the zoning requirements of the Gardena Municipal Code.

2. [deleted]

3. [deleted]

4. [deleted]

5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width is not greater than 2:1.

6. Sidewalks not more than 30 inches (762) mm above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route.

7. Painting, papering, floor and wall tiling – excluding showers and wet areas, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops not containing plumbing or electrical fixtures, and similar finish work.

B. Section 105.2, Building, 12, of Division II, Scope and Administration, of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

12. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall, do not require additional support, and are two or more feet from Property lines.

C. Section 1203.2.1 of Chapter 12 of the California Building Code is hereby deleted and a new Section 1203.2.1 is hereby added to read, as follows:

1203.2.1 Openings into attic. Exterior openings into the attic space of any building intended for human occupancy shall be protected to prevent the entry of birds, squirrels, rodents, snakes and other similar creatures. Openings for ventilation having a least dimension of 1/16 inch minimum and 1/8 inch maximum shall be permitted. Openings for ventilation having a least dimension larger than 1/8 inch shall be provided with corrosion-resistant wire cloth screening, hardware cloth or similar material with openings having a least dimension of 1/16 inch minimum and 1/8 inch maximum. Where combustion air is obtained from an attic area, it shall be in accordance with Chapter 7 of the California Mechanical Code.

D. Section 1203.4.1 of Chapter 12 of the California Building Code is hereby deleted and a new Section 1203.4.1 and Section 1203.4.1.1 are hereby added to read as follows:

1203.4.1 Openings for under-floor ventilation. The minimum net area of ventilation openings shall not be less than one square foot for each 150 square feet of crawl-space area. Ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with any of the following materials, provided that the least dimension of the covering shall not exceed 1/8 inch:

1. Perforated sheet metal plates not less than 0.070 inch thick.

2. Expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch thick.

3. Cast-iron grilles or gratings.

4. Extruded load-bearing vents.

5. Hardware cloth of 0.035 inch wire or heavier.

6. Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimension not exceeding 1/8 inch.

1203.4.1.1 Openings for under-floor ventilation shall be not less than 1 1/2 square feet for each 25 linear feet of exterior wall. Openings shall be covered with corrosion resistant wire mesh with mesh openings not less than 1/16 inch nor more than 1/8 inch in any dimension.

E. Table 1505.1 of Chapter 15 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

TABLE 1505.1a

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING

CLASSIFICATION FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

F. Section 1507.3.1 of Chapter 15 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

1507.3.1 Roof Deck requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid sheathing or spaced structural sheathing boards.

G. Section 1613.5.2 is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

1613.5.2 Structural Separation. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.12.3 Equation 12.12-1 as follows:



(12.12-1)

H. Section 1613.5.3 is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

1613.5.3 Values for Vertical Combinations. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.2.3.1 Exception 3 as follows:

3. Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height of light frame construction.

I. Section 1613.5.4 is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

1613.5.4 Wood Diaphragms. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.11.2.2.3 as follows:

12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms. In wood diaphragms, the continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm sheathing. Anchorage shall not be accomplished by use of toe nails or nails subject to withdrawal nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered effective as providing ties or struts required by this section. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, wood diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls shall comply with the following:

1. The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet. Added chords of diaphragms may be used to form sub-diaphragms to transmit the anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.

2. The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth of the sub-diaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.

J. Section 1613.5.5 is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

1613.5.5 Maximum SDS Value in Determination of Cs and Ev. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.8.1.3 as follows:

12.8.1.3 Maximum SDS Value in Determination of Cs and Ev. The value of Cs and Ev are permitted to be calculated using a value of SDS equal to 1.0 but not less than 70% of SDS as defined in Section 11.4.4, provided that all of the following criteria are met:

1. The structure does not have irregularities, as defined in Section 12.3.2;

2. The structure does not exceed five stories above the lower of the base or grade plane as defined in Section 11.2, and, where present, each mezzanine level shall be considered a story for the purpose of this limit;

3. The structure has a fundamental period, T, that does not exceed 0.5 seconds, as determined using Section 12.8.2;

4. The structure meets the requirements necessary for the redundancy factor, ?, to be permitted to be taken as 1.0, in accordance with Section 12.3.4.2;

5. The site soil properties are not classified as Site Classes E or F, as defined in Section 11.4.2; and

6. The structure is classified as Risk Category I or II, as defined in Section 1.5.1.

K. Section 1704.6 of Chapter 17 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1704.6 Structural Observations. Where required by the provisions of Section 1704.6.6.1 or 1704.6.6.2, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall employ a registered design professional structural observer to perform structural observations. Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the inspections in Section 110 or the special inspections in Section 1705 or other sections of this code.

The structural observer shall be one of the following individuals:

1. The registered design professional responsible for the structural design; or

2. A registered design professional designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.

Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural observer shall submit to the building official a written statement identifying the frequency and extent of structural observations.

The owner or owner’s authorized agent shall coordinate and call a reconstruction meeting between the structural observer, contractors, affected subcontractors and special inspectors. The structural observer shall preside over the meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be to identify the major structural elements and connections that affect the vertical and lateral load resisting systems of the structure and to review scheduling of the required observations. A record of the meeting shall be included in the report submitted to the Building Official.

At the conclusion of the work included in the permit, the structural observer shall submit to the building official a written statement that the site visits have been made and identify any reported deficiencies that, to the best of the structural observer’s knowledge, have not been resolved. Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner or owner’s authorized agent, special inspector, contractor and the Building Official. Upon the form prescribed by the Building Official, the structural observer shall submit to the Building Official a written statement at each significant construction stage stating that the site visits have been made and identifying any reported deficiencies which, to the best of the structural observer’s knowledge, have not been resolved. A final report by the structural observer which states that all observed deficiencies have been resolved is required before acceptance of the work by the Building Official.

L. Section 1704.6.1 of Chapter 17 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1704.6.1 Structural observations for seismic resistance. Structural observations shall be provided for those structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, where one or more of the following conditions exist:

1. The structure is classified as Risk Category III or IV in accordance with Table 1604.5.

2. The height of the structure is greater than 75 feet above the base.

3. The structure is assigned to Seismic Design Category E, is classified as Risk Category I or II in accordance with Table 1604.5, and a lateral design is required for the structure or portion thereof.

4. Exception: One-story wood framed Group R-3 and Group U Occupancies less than 2,000 square feet in area, provided the adjacent grade is not steeper than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% sloped), assigned to Seismic Design Category D.

a. When so designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.

5. When such observation is specifically required by the building official.

M. Section 1705.3, Section 1, of Chapter 17 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1705.3 Concrete Construction. Special inspections and tests for concrete construction shall be performed in accordance with this section and Table 1705.3.

Exceptions: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:

1. Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f’c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.

N. Exception 3 of Section 1705.12 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

3. The structure is a detached one- or two-family dwelling not exceeding two stories above grade plane, is not assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F and does not have any of the following horizontal or vertical irregularities in accordance with Section 12.3 of ASCE 7:

3.1 Torsional or extreme torsional irregularity.

3.2 Nonparallel systems irregularity.

3.3 Stiffness-soft story or stiffness-extreme soft story irregularity.

3.4 Discontinuity in lateral strength-weak story irregularity.

O. Section 1807.1.4 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems. Permanent wood foundation systems shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

P. Section 1807.1.6 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

Q. Section 1809.3 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1809.3 Stepped footings. The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall be permitted to have a slope not exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, the stepping requirement shall also apply to the top surface of grade beams supporting walls. Footings shall be reinforced with four No. 4 bars. Two bars shall be place at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure 1809.3.



FIGURE 1809.3

R. Section 1809.7 and Table 1809.7 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code are amended to read as follows:

1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction. Where a specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with Table 1809.7. Prescriptive footings in Table 1809.7 shall not exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

Table 1809.7

PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION
a, b, c, d, e

NUMBER OF FLOORS SUPPORTED BY THE FOOTING f

WIDTH OF FOOTING (inches)

THICKNESS OF FOOTING (inches)

1

12

6

2

15

6

3

18

8 g

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm

a.  Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.

b.  The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the elevation of the top of the footing.

c. Interior stud bearing walls shall be permitted to be supported by isolated footings. The footing width and length shall be twice the width shown in this table, and footings shall be spaced not more than 6 feet on center. Not Adopted.

d. See Section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.

e. For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.

f. Footings shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for supporting one floor.

g. Plain concrete footings for Group R-3 occupancies shall be permitted to be 6 inches thick.

S. Section 1809.12 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is deleted and a new Section 1809.12 is added to read as follows:

1809.12 Timber footings. Timber footings shall not be used in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

T. Section 1810.3.2.4 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is deleted and a new section 1810.3.2.4 is added to read as follows; subsection 1810.3.2.4.1 remains:

1810.3.2.4 Timber. Timber foundations shall not be used in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

U. Section 1905.1 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1905.1 General. The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as indicated in Sections 1905.1.1 through 1905.1.8, and ACI 318, Section 18.7.5.

V. Section 1905.1.7 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1905.1.7 ACI 318, Section 14.1.4. Delete ACI 318, Section 14.1.4, and replace with the following:

14.1.4 – Plain concrete in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.

14.1.4.1 – Structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F shall not have elements of structural plain concrete, except as follows:

a) Structural plain concrete basement, foundation or other walls below the base as defined in ASCE 7 are permitted in detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height constructed with stud-bearing walls. In dwellings assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, the height of the wall shall not exceed 8 feet, the thickness shall not be less than 7 1/2 inches, and the wall shall retain no more than 4 feet of unbalanced fill. Walls shall have reinforcement in accordance with 14.6.1. Concrete used for fill with a minimum cement content of two (2) sacks of Portland cement or cementious material per cubic yard.

b) Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of the supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.

Exception: In detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height, the projection of the footing beyond the face of the supported member is permitted to exceed the footing thickness.

c) Plain concrete footings are Not Permitted in seismic zones D and E. Supporting walls are permitted provided the footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars shall not be smaller than No. 4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. For footings that exceed 8 inches in thickness, a minimum of one bar shall be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement shall be provided at corners and intersections.

Exceptions:

1. In Seismic Design Categories A, B and C, Detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height and constructed with stud-bearing walls are permitted to have plain concrete footings without longitudinal reinforcement with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars not smaller than No. 4 are permitted to have a total area of less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing.

2. For foundation systems consisting of a plain concrete footing and a plain concrete stemwall, a minimum of one bar shall be provided at the top of the stemwall and at the bottom of the footing.

3. Where a slab on ground is cast monolithically with the footing, one No. 5 bar is permitted to be located at either the top of the slab or bottom of the footing.

W. Sections 1905.1.9 through 1905.1.11 are added to Chapter 19 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

1905.1.9 ACI 318, Section 18.7.5. Modify ACI 318, Section 18.7.5, by adding Section 18.7.5.7 and 18.7.5.8 as follows:

18.7.5.7 Where the calculated point of contra-flexure is not within the middle half of the member clear height, provide transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1, Items (a) through (c), over the full height of the member.

18.7.5.8 – At any section where the design strength, ?Pn, of the column is less than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with ACI 318 Sections 18.7.6.1 and 18.6.5.1 for all the beams framing into the column above the level under consideration, transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided. For beams framing into opposite sides of the column, the moment components are permitted to be assumed to be of opposite sign. For the determination of the design strength, ?Pn, of the column, these moments are permitted to be assumed to result from the deformation of the frame in any one principal axis.

1905.1.10 ACI 318, Section 18.10.4. Modify ACI 318, Section 18.10.4, by adding Section 18.10.4.6 as follows:

18.10.4.6 – Walls and portions of walls with Pu > 0.35Po shall not be considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the structure for resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform to the requirements of ACI 318 Section 18.14.

1905.1.11 ACI 318, Section 18.12.6. Modify ACI 318, by adding Section 18.12.6.2 as follows:

18.12.6.2 Collector and boundary elements in topping slabs placed over precast floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3 inches or 6 db in thickness, where db is the diameter of the largest reinforcement in the topping slab.

X. Section 2304.10.1 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

2304.10.1 Fastener requirements. Connections for wood members shall be designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in Section 2301.2. The number and size of fasteners connecting wood members shall not be less than that set forth in Table 2304.10.1. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.1 shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.

Y. Section 2304.12.5 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

2304.12.5 Wood used in retaining walls and cribs. Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for soil and fresh water use. Wood shall not be used retaining or crib walls for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

Z. Section 2305.4 is added to Chapter 23 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

2305.4 Quality of Nails. In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, mechanically driven nails used in wood structural panel shear walls shall meet the same dimensions as that required for hand-driven nails, including diameter, minimum length and minimum head diameter. Clipped head or box nails and staples are not permitted. The allowable design value for clipped head nails in existing construction may be taken at no more than the nail-head-area ratio of that of the same size hand-driven nails.

AA. Section 2305.5 is added to Chapter 23 of the California Building Code to read as follows:

2305.5 Hold-down connectors. In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, hold-down connectors shall be designed to resist shear wall overturning moments using approved cyclic load values or 75 percent of the allowable seismic load values that do not consider cyclic loading of the product. Connector bolts into wood framing shall require steel plate washers on the post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate size shall be a minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches in size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger tight plus one half (1/2) wrench turn just prior to covering the wall framing.

BB. Section 2306.2 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is repealed and a new Section 2306.2 is added to read as follows:

2306.2 Wood-frame diaphragms. Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Panels shall not be fastened to framing members with staples. Wood structural panel diaphragms used to resist seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F shall be applied directly to the framing members.

CC. Section 2306.3 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is repealed and a new Section 2306.3 is added to read as follows:

2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F, application of Tables 4.3A and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:

1. Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls shall not be less than 3/8 inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more than 16 inches on center.

2. The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8 inch wood structural panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (plf).

Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities may be permitted if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.

3. Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2 inch in from the panel edges and not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shear greater than 350 plf using ASD or 500 plf using LRFD. Nails shall be placed not less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not less than 1/4 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shears of 350 plf or less using ASD or 500 plf or less using LRFD.

4. Table 4.3B application is not allowed for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, application of Table 4.3C of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a multi-level building. Staples are not permitted in Seismic Design Category D, E or F. The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding in the AWC SDPWS.

DD. Section 2307.2 is added to the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code to read as follows:

2307.2 Wood-frame shear walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 2306.3 as applicable.

EE. Table 2308.6.1 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

TABLE 2308.6.1a

WALL BRACING REQUIREMENTS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

NP = Not Permitted.

a. This table specifies minimum requirements for braced wall panels along interior or exterior braced wall lines.

b. See Section 2308.6.3 for full description of bracing methods.

c. For Method GB, gypsum wallboard applied to framing supports that are spaced at 16 inches on center.

d. The required lengths shall be doubled for gypsum board applied to only one face of a braced wall panel.

e. Percentage shown represents the minimum amount of bracing required along the building length (or wall length if the structure has an irregular shape).

f. DWB, SFB, PBS, and HPS wall braces are not permitted in Seismic Design Categories D or E.

g. Minimum length of panel bracing of one face of the wall for WSP sheathing shall be at least 4’-0” long or both faces of the wall for GB or PCP sheathing shall be at least 8’-0” long; h/w ratio shall not exceed 2:1. Wall framing to which sheathing used for bracing is applied shall be nominal 2 inch wide factual 1 1/2 inch (38 mm) or larger members and spaced a maximum of 16 inches on center. Braced wall panel construction types shall not be mixed within a braced wall line.

h. WSP sheathing shall be a minimum of 15/32” thick nailed with 8d common placed 2/8 inches from panel edges and spaced not more than 6 inches on center and 12 inches on center along intermediate framing members.

FF. Section 2308.6.5, Figure 2308.6.5.1, and Figure 2308.6.5.2 of the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code are repealed and new Section 2308.6.5, Figure 2308.6.5.1 and Figure 2308.6.5.2 are added to read as follows:

2308.6.5 Alternative bracing. An alternate braced wall (ABW) or a portal frame with hold-downs (PFH) described in this section is permitted to substitute for a 48-inch (1219 mm) braced wall panel of Method DWB, WSP, SFB, PBS, PCP or HPS. For Method GB, each 96-inch section (applied to one face) or 48-inch section (applied to both faces) or portion thereof required by Table 2308.6.1 is permitted to be replaced by one panel constructed in accordance with Method ABW or PFH.

2308.6.5.1 Alternate braced wall (ABW). An ABW shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure 2308.6.5.1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 2 feet 8 inches and a height of not more than 10 feet. Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 3/8-inch minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized box nails in accordance with Table 2304.10.1 and blocked at wood structural panel edges. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports. Two anchor bolts installed in accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be provided in each panel. Anchor bolts shall be placed at each panel outside quarter points. Each panel end stud shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation, capable of providing an approved uplift capacity of not less than 1,800 pounds. The hold-down device shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The ABW shall be supported directly on a foundation or on floor framing supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater than 12 inches a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch continuous footing or turned-down slab edge is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This continuous footing or turned-down slab edge shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped 15 24 inches with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly under the braced wall line. Where the ABW is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, the wood structural panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces, three anchor bolts shall be placed at one-quarter points and tie-down device uplift capacity shall be not less than 3,000 pounds.

2308.6.5.2 Portal frame with hold-downs (PFH). A PFH shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure 2308.6.5.2. The adjacent door or window opening shall have a full-length header. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 16 inches and a height of not more than 10 feet. Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with a single layer of 3/8-inch minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized box nails in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch minimum thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports and in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. The wood structural panel sheathing shall extend up over the solid sawn or glued-laminated header and shall be nailed in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. A built-up header consisting of at least two 2-inch by 12-inch boards, fastened in accordance with Item 24 of Table 2304.10.1 shall be permitted to be used. A spacer, if used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up beam opposite the wood structural panel sheathing. The header shall extend between the inside faces of the first full-length outer studs of each panel. The clear span of the header between the inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6 feet and not more than 18 feet in length. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pound shall fasten the header to the inner studs opposite the sheathing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8 inch diameter and installed in accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be provided in the center of each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds.



FIGURE 2308.6.5.1

ALTERNATIVE BRACED WALL PANEL (ABW)

Where a panel is located on one side of the opening, the header shall extend between the inside face of the first full-length stud of the panel and the bearing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds shall fasten the header to the bearing studs. The bearing studs shall also have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds. The hold-down devices shall be an embedded strap type, installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The PFH panels shall be supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater than 12 inches, a minimum 12- inch by 12-inch continuous footing or turned-down slab edge is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This continuous footing or turned-down slab edge shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped not less than 15 24 inches with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly under the braced wall line. Where a PFH is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 24 inches.



FIGURE 2308.6.5.2

PORTAL FRAME WITH HOLD-DOWNS (PFH)

GG. Section 2308.6.8.1 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

2308.6.8.1 Foundation requirements. Braced wall lines shall be supported by continuous foundations. [Exception deleted.]

For structures in Seismic Design Categories D and E, exterior braced wall panels shall be in the same plane vertically with the foundation or the portion of the structure containing the offset shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice and Section 2308.1.1. [Exceptions deleted.]

(Ord. 1791 § 2 (part), 2018)

15.04.040 Amendment of Part 2.5, California Residential Code.
A. Section R105.2, Building, of Chapter 1 of the California Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Building

1. One-story detached accessory building provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet, three feet clear from a building or property line and conforming to the zoning regulations of the Gardena Municipal Code.

2. [deleted]

3. [deleted]

4. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1.

5. Patio Slabs, Walkways and Sidewalks on private property.

6. Painting, papering, floor and wall tiling – excluding showers, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops not containing plumbing or electrical, and similar finish work.

7. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.

8. Swings and other playground equipment.

9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall, do not require additional support, and are two or more feet from property lines.

10. Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than 30 inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.

B. Section R301.1.3.2 of Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R301.1.3.2 Woodframe structures.

The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of wood frame construction more than one story in height or with a basement located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, D2 or E. Notwithstanding other sections of law, the law establishing these provisions is found in Business and Professions Code Section 5537 and 6737.1.

C. Table R301.2(1) of Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows; all footnotes are deleted:

TABLE R301.2(1)

CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA

GROUND SNOW LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORYf

amended

Amended

Amended

Amended

AIR FREEZING INDEXi

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPj

Speedd (mph)

Topographic effectsk

Weatheringa

Frost line Depthb

Termitec

WINTER DESIGN TEMPe

ICE BARRIER UNDER-LAYMENT REQUIREDh

FLOOD HAZARDSg

Zero

85

No

D2 or E

Negligible

12-24"

Very Heavy

43

No

See Exhibit B

0

60

D. Items 1, 3 and 5 of Section R301.2.2.2.5 of Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code are amended to read as follows:

1. Where exterior shear wall lines or braced wall panels are not in one plane vertically from the foundation to the uppermost story in which they are required. [Exceptions deleted.]

3. When the end of a braced wall panel occurs over an opening in the wall below. [Exceptions deleted]

5. Where portions of a floor level are vertically offset. [Exceptions deleted]

E. Section R301.2.2.3.8 is added to Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code to read as follows:

R301.2.2.3.8 Anchorage of Mechanical, Electrical, or Plumbing Components and Equipment. Mechanical, electrical, or plumbing components and equipment shall be anchored to the structure. Anchorage of the components and equipment shall be designed to resist loads in accordance with the California Building Code and ASCE 7, except where the component is positively attached to the structure and flexible connections are provided between the component and associated ductwork, piping, and conduit; and either:

1. The component weighs 400 lb or less and has a center of mass located 4 ft or less above the supporting structure; or

2. The component weighs 20 lb or less or, in the case of a distributed system, 5 lb/ft or less.

F. Section R313.1 of Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code is deleted and a new Section R313.1 is added to read as follows:

R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinklers systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed in Townhouses as follows:

New buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings.

Existing buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when the building area exceeds 3,600 square feet and when one of the following conditions exists:

1. When an addition is 50% or more of the existing building area, as defined in Section 502.1, within a two year period; or

2. An addition when the existing building is already provided with automatic sprinklers; or

3. When an existing Group R occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

G. Section R313.2 of Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code is deleted and a new Section R313.2 is added to read as follows:

R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinklers systems.

An automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed in one and two family dwellings as follows:

New buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings.

Existing buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when the building area exceeds 3,600 square feet and when one of the following conditions exists:

1. When an addition is 50% or more of the existing building area, as defined in Section 502.1, within a two year period; or

2. An addition when the existing building is already provided with automatic sprinklers; or

3. When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

H. Section R403.1.2 of Chapter 4 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R403.1.2 Continuous footing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 and E. Exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 and E shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 and E with plan dimensions greater than 50 feet shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings in accordance with Section R403.1.3.4. [Exceptions deleted.]

I. Section R403.1.3 of Chapter 4 of the California Residential Code is modified by deleting the exception for masonry stem walls.

J. Section R403.1.5 of Chapter 4 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R403.1.5 Slope. The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall not have a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footings or where the slope of the bottom surface of the footings will exceed one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). For structures located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 and E, stepped footings shall be reinforced with four No. 4 rebars minimum. Two bars shall be place at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure R403.1.5.



FIGURE R403.1.5

STEPPED FOOTING

K. Section R404.2 of Chapter 4 of the California Residential Code and all subsections thereto are deleted.

L. Section R408.2 of Chapter 4 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows; the exception remains:

R408.2 Openings for under-floor ventilation. The minimum net area of ventilation openings shall not be less than one square foot for each 150 square feet of under-floor area. One ventilation opening shall be within three feet of each corner of the building. Ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with any of the following materials provided that the least dimension of the covering shall not exceed 1/8 inch:

1. Perforated sheet metal plates not less than 0.070 inch thick.

2. Expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch thick.

3. Cast-iron grill or grating.

4. Extruded load-bearing brick vents.

5. Hardware cloth of 0.035 inch wire or heavier.

6. Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimension not exceeding 1/8 inch.

M. Section R501.1 of Chapter 5 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R501.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the floors for buildings, including the floors of attic spaces used to house mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment. Mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment shall be attached (or anchored) to the structure in accordance with Section R301.2.2.3.8.

N. Section R503.2.4 and Figure R503.2.4 are added to Chapter of the California Residential Code to read as follows:

R503.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms. Openings in horizontal diaphragms with a dimension perpendicular to the joist that is greater than 4 feet shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R503.2.4.



a. Blockings shall be provided beyond headers.

b. Metal ties not less than 0.058 inch (16 galvanized gage) by 1.5 inches wide with eight 16d common nails on each side of the header-joist intersection. The metal ties shall have a minimum yield of 33,000 psi.

c. Openings in diaphragms shall be further limited in accordance with Section R301.2.2.2.5.

FIGURE R503.2.4

OPENINGS IN HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS

O. Lines 35 and 36 of Table R602.3(1) of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code are amended by adding a reference to new footnote i to read as follows:

TABLE 602.3(1)

FASTENING SCHEDULE—continued

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s; 1 ksi = 6.895 MPa.

TABLE 602.3(1)

FASTENING SCHEDULE—continued

a. Nails are smooth-common, box or deformed shanks except where otherwise stated. Nails used for framing and sheathing connections shall have minimum average bending yield strengths as shown: 80 ksi for shank diameter of 0.192 inch (20d common nail), 90 ksi for shank diameters larger than 0.142 inch but not larger than 0.177 inch, and 100 ksi for shank diameters of 0.142 inch or less.

b. Staples are 16 gage wire and have a minimum 7/16-inch on diameter crown width.

c. Nails shall be spaced at not more than 6 inches on center at all supports where spans are 48 inches or greater.

d. Four-foot by 8-foot or 4-foot by 9-foot panels shall be applied vertically.

e. Spacing of fasteners not included in this table shall be based on Table R602.3(2).

f. Where the ultimate design wind speed is 130 mph or less, nails for attaching wood structural panel roof sheathing to gable end wall framing shall be spaced 6 inches on center. Where the ultimate design wind speed is greater than 130 mph, nails for attaching panel roof sheathing to intermediate supports shall be spaced 6 inches on center for minimum 48-inch distance from ridges, eaves and gable end walls; and 4 inches on center to gable end wall framing.

g. Gypsum sheathing shall conform to ASTM C 1396 and shall be installed in accordance with GA 253. Fiberboard sheathing shall conform to ASTM C 208.

h. Spacing of fasteners on floor sheathing panel edges applies to panel edges supported by framing members and required blocking and at floor perimeters only. Spacing of fasteners on roof sheathing panel edges applies to panel edges supported by framing members and required blocking. Blocking of roof or floor sheathing panel edges perpendicular to the framing members need not be provided except as required by other provisions of this code. Floor perimeter shall be supported by framing members or solid blocking.

i. Where a rafter is fastened to an adjacent parallel ceiling joist in accordance with this schedule, provide two toe nails on one side of the rafter and toe nails from the ceiling joist to top plate in accordance with this schedule. The toe nail on the opposite side of the rafter shall not be required.

j. Use of staples in braced wall panels shall be prohibited in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2.

P. Footnote “b” of Table R602.3(2) of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

b. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16-inch on diameter except as noted. Use of staples in roof, floor, subfloor, and braced wall panels shall be prohibited in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 and D2 and E.

Q. Table R602.10.3(3) of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

TABLE R602.10.3(3)

BRACING REQUIREMENTS BASED ON SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY

TABLE R602.10.3(3)—continued

BRACING REQUIREMENTS BASED ON SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY

a. Linear interpolation shall be permitted.

b. Wall bracing lengths are based on a soil site class “D.” interpolation of bracing length between the Sds values associated with the seismic design categories shall be permitted when a site-specific Sds value is determined in accordance with Section 1613.3 of the International Building Code.

c. Where the braced wall line length is greater than 50 feet, braced wall lines shall be permitted to be divided into shorter segments having lengths of 50 feet or less, and the amount of bracing within each segment shall be in accordance with this table.

d. Method LIB shall have gypsum board fastened to not less than one side with nails or screws in accordance with Table R602.3(1) for exterior sheathing or Table R702.3.5 for interior gypsum board. Spacing of fasteners at panel edges shall not exceed 8 inches.

e. Method CS-SFB does not apply in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

f. Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1 in SDC D0, D1 or D2. Methods DWB, SFB, PBS, and HPS are not permitted in SDC D0, D1 or D2.

R. Table R602.10.4 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

TABLE R602.10.4

BRACING METHODS f

TABLE R602.10.4—continued

BRACING METHODS f

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 305 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad, 1 pound per square foot = 47.8 N/m2, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a. Adhesive attachment of wall sheathing, including Method GB, shall not be permitted in Seismic Design Categories C, D0, D1 and D2.

b. Applies to panels next to garage door opening where supporting gable end wall or roof load only. Shall only be used on one wall of the garage. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, roof covering dead load shall not exceed 3 psf.

c. Garage openings adjacent to a Method CS-G panel shall be provided with a header in accordance with Table R602.5(1). A full-height clear opening shall not be permitted adjacent to a Method CS-G panel.

d. Method CS-SFB does not apply in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

e. Method applies to detached one- and two-family dwellings in Seismic Design Categories D0 through D2 only.

f. Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1 in SDC D0, D1, or D2. Methods LIB, DWB, SFB, PBS, HPS, and PFG are not permitted in SDC D0, D1, or D2.

g. Use of staples in braced wall panels shall be prohibited in SDC D0, D1, or D2.

S. Figure R602.10.6.1 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:



FIGURE R602.10.6.1

METHOD ABW—ALTERNATE BRACED WALL PANEL

T. Figure R602.10.6.2 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

FIGURE R602.10.6.2

METHOD PFH—PORTAL FRAME WITH HOLD-DOWNS

AT DETACHED GARAGE DOOR OPENINGS

U. Table R602.10.5 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

(continued)

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

NP = Not Permitted.

a. Linear interpolation shall be permitted.

b. Use the actual length where it is greater than or equal to the minimum length.

c. Maximum header height for PFH is 10 feet in accordance with Figure R602.10.6.2, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with pony wall.

d. Maximum opening height for PFG is 10 feet in accordance with Figure R602.10.6.3, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with pony wall.

e. Maximum opening height for CS-PF is 10 feet in accordance with Figure R602.10.6.4, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with pony wall.

V. Section R602.10.2.3 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R602.10.2.3 Minimum number of braced wall panels. Braced wall lines with a length of 16 feet or less shall have a minimum of two braced wall panels of any length or one braced wall panel equal to 48 inches or more. Braced wall lines greater than 16 feet shall have a minimum of two braced wall panels. No braced wall panel shall be less than 48 inches in length in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 and D2 and E.

W. Figure R602.10.6.4 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:



FIGURE R602.10.6.4

METHOD CS-PF-CONTINUOUSLY SHEATHED PORTAL FRAME PANEL CONSTRUCTION

X. Section R606.4.4 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R606.4.4 Parapet walls. Unreinforced solid masonry parapet walls shall not be used.

Y. Section R606.12.2.2.3 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R606.12.2.2.3 Reinforcement requirements for masonry elements. Masonry elements listed in Section R606.12.2.2.2 shall be reinforced in either the horizontal or vertical direction as shown in Figure R606.11(3) and in accordance with the following:

1. Horizontal reinforcement. Horizontal joint reinforcement shall consist of at least one No. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches. Horizontal reinforcement shall be provided within 16 inches of the top and bottom of these masonry elements.

2. Vertical reinforcement. Vertical reinforcement shall consist of at least one No. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches, Vertical reinforcement shall be within 8 inches of the ends of masonry walls.

Z. Exception of Section R602.3.2 and Table R602.3.2 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

In Seismic Design Category D0, D1 and D2 and E, a single top plate shall not be used.

AA. Table R602.3.2 of Chapter 6 of the California Residential Code is deleted.

BB. Section R803.2.4 is added to Chapter 8 of the California Residential Code to read as follows:

R803.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms. Openings in horizontal diaphragms shall conform with Section R503.2.4.

CC. Section R806.1 of Chapter 8 of the California Residential Code to read as follows:

R806.1 Ventilation required. Enclosed attics and enclosed rafter spaces formed where ceilings are applied directly to the underside of roof rafters shall have cross ventilation for each separate space by ventilating openings protected against the entrance of rain or snow. Ventilation openings shall have a least dimension of 1/16 inch minimum and 1/8 inch maximum. Ventilation openings having a least dimension larger than 1/4 inch shall be provided with corrosion resistant wire cloth screening, hardware cloth or similar non-combustible material with openings having a least dimension of 1/16 inch minimum and 1/8 inch maximum. Openings in roof framing members shall conform to the requirements of Section R802.7. Required openings shall open directly to the outside air.

DD. Section R902.1 of Chapter 9 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class B minimum roofing shall be installed for all new structures, additions and replacement roofing. Class B minimum roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108. Where less than 50 percent of the roof covering is replaced within any one-year period, the new roof covering may be Class B minimum.

EE. Chapter 10, Chimneys and Fireplaces, of the 2016 Edition of the California Residential Code is deleted and a new Chapter 10 is added to read as follows:

In accordance with SCAQMD’s Rule 445:

Beginning March 9, 2009, permanent indoor and outdoor wood-burning devices (such as fireplaces and stoves) cannot be installed in new developments. However, open-hearth fireplaces with gas or alcohol fuel based log sets or other popular design features that do not use wood -- such as flames in river rock or broken glass -- are allowed.

As of September 2008, permanent indoor and outdoor wood-burning devices can only be sold or installed in existing homes and businesses if it meets one of these cleaner options:

Dedicated gaseous-fueled fireplace;

U.S. EPA certified fireplace insert or stove;

Pellet-fueled wood-burning heater; or

Masonry heater (not an open-hearth wood-burning fireplace).

FF. Section AJ104 of Appendix J (Existing Buildings and Structures) of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

AJ104 Replacement windows. When replacing an existing window, the replacement window shall comply with the requirements of CRC section R310 and the 2016 CA Energy Code.

GG. Section A0103.3 of Appendix O of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

A0103.3 Vehicular gates or other barriers across required fire apparatus access roads. The installation of gates or other barriers across a required fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements set forth in the 2016 California Fire Code Section 503.6 and have approved key boxes.

HH. The definition of “Swimming Pool” in Section AV100.1 of Appendix V of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreation bathing that contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.

II. Section AV100.3 is hereby amended by adding a section 6 as follows:

6. If such lot or premises upon which such pool is located is vacant or unoccupied, all gates or doors opening into the area where such pool is located shall be kept securely locked at all times during such vacancy or non-occupancy, whether such pool is empty or filled.

(Ord. 1791 § 2 (part), 2018)

15.04.050 Amendment of Part 6, California Energy Code.
A. Section 110.10(a)(1) is hereby amended to read as follows:

1. Single-family residences. Single-family residences shall comply with the requirements of Section 110.10(b) through 110.10(e).

(Ord. 1791 § 2 (part), 2018)

15.04.060 Amendment of Part 11, California Green Building Standards Code.
A. Section A4.106.5, Table A4.106.5.1(1), Table A4.106.5.1(2), Table A4.106.5.1(3), and Table A4.106.5.1(4) of the California Green Building Standards Code are amended to read as follows:

A4.106.5 Cool roof for reduction of heat island effect. All roofing materials for buildings in Gardena shall comply with this section:

Exceptions:

1. Roof constructions that have a thermal mass over the roof membrane including areas of vegetated (green) roofs, weighing at least 25 lbs/sf.

2. Roof areas covered by building integrated solar photovoltaic panels and building integrated solar thermal panels.

 

TABLE A4.106.5.1(1)
TIER 1 – LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL

ROOF SLOPE

CLIMATE ZONE

MINIMUM 3-YEAR AGED SOLAR REFLECTANCE

THERMAL EMITTANCE

SRI

= 2:12

13 & 15

0.63

0.75

75

> 2:12

10 – 15

0.20

0.75

16

 

TABLE A4.106.5.1(2)
TIER 2 – LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL

ROOF SLOPE

CLIMATE ZONE

MINIMUM 3-YEAR AGED SOLAR REFLECTANCE

THERMAL EMITTANCE

SRI

= 2:12

2, 4, 6 – 15

0.650.68

85

7882

> 2:12

2, 4, 6 – 15

0.230.28

85

2027

 

TABLE A4.106.5.1(3)
TIER 1 – HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS, HOTELS, AND MOTELS

ROOF SLOPE

CLIMATE ZONE

MINIMUM 3-YEAR AGED SOLAR REFLECTANCE

THERMAL EMITTANCE

SRI

= 2:12

9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15

0.550.63

0.75

6475

> 2:12

2 – 15

0.20

0.75

16

 

TABLE A4.106.5.1(4)
TIER 2 – HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS, HOTELS, AND MOTELS

ROOF SLOPE

CLIMATE ZONE

MINIMUM 3-YEAR AGED SOLAR REFLECTANCE

THERMAL EMITTANCE

SRI

= 2:12

2 – 15

0.650.68

0.750.85

7882

> 2:12

2 – 15

0.230.28

0.750.85

2027

B. Section A4.303.4 of the California Green Building Standards Code is amended to read as follows:

A4.303.4 Non-water supplied urinals. Non-water supplied urinals are installed throughout the scope of the permit or comply with Sections 1101.1 thru 1101.8 of the California Civil Code, whichever is the most restrictive. Where approved, hybrid urinals, as defined in Chapter 2, shall be considered waterless urinals.

C. Section A4.407.1 of the California Green Building Standards Code is amended to read as follows:

A4.407.1 Drainage around foundations. Install foundation and landscape drains which discharge to a dry well, sump, bioswale or other approved on-site location except when not required by other state codes.

(Ord. 1791 § 2 (part), 2018)

Chapter 15.06
EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
Sections:

15.06.010    Definitions.

15.06.020    Purpose.

15.06.030    Applicability.

15.06.040    Solar energy system requirements.

15.06.050    Duties of building official.

15.06.060    Permit review and inspection requirements.

15.06.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. A “solar energy system” means either of the following:

1. Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating;

2. Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

B. A “small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

1. A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal;

2. A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and city health and safety standards;

3. A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling;

4. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city in Section 18.04.080.

C. “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1. Email;

2. The Internet;

3. Facsimile.

D. An “association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

E. A “common interest development” means any of the following:

1. A community apartment project;

2. A condominium project;

3. A planned development;

4. A stock cooperative.

F. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

G. “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

H. “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

1. For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed;

2. For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 1763 § 1 (part), 2015)

15.06.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1763 § 1 (part), 2015)

15.06.030 Applicability.
A. This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city;

B. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1763 § 1 (part), 2015)

15.06.040 Solar energy system requirements.
A. All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city fire department or district.

B. Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C. Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1763 § 1 (part), 2015)

15.06.050 Duties of building official.
A. All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

B. Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

C. An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

D. The city’s building division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

E. The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

F. All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015, and 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 1763 § 1 (part), 2015)

15.06.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A. The city building official shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems on or before September 30, 2015. The building division shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or within one to three business days for electronic applications of receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. A building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning and environmental quality commission (“planning commission”).

B. Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

C. If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.

D. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

E. “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

F. The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

G. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

H. Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. A separate fire inspection may be performed if an agreement with the local fire authority does not exist to perform safety inspections on behalf of the fire authority.

I. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request and provide a two-hour inspection window.

J. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1763 § 1 (part), 2015)

Chapter 15.08
ADOPTION OF HOUSING LAW REGULATIONS
Sections:

15.08.010    Adoption of housing law regulations.

15.08.010 Adoption of housing law regulations.
The State Housing Law Regulations found in the California Code of Regulations at Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, are hereby adopted by reference and shall apply as the housing law of the city of Gardena. (Ord. 1720 § 4, 2010)

Chapter 15.20
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sections:

15.20.010    Adoption of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code.

15.20.010 Adoption of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code.
Subject to the amendments set forth herein, the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, including Appendix A, is hereby adopted as the city of Gardena property maintenance code (“PMC”). The provisions of this code are an alternative to other procedures set forth in the Gardena Municipal Code relating to property maintenance.

A. All references to the International Codes shall be to the California Building Standards Code, as adopted and amended by the city of Gardena.

B. The PMC shall be interpreted so that all responsibilities set forth in the PMC that are attributable to either the owner or the occupant of the premises shall belong to both the owner and the occupant of the premises, unless otherwise required by law.

C. Section 102.3 of Chapter 1 is amended as follows:

102.3 Application of other codes.

In case of conflict with any section of the PMC and the California Building Standards Code, the California Building Standards Code, as adopted and amended by the City of Gardena, shall prevail regardless of any language to the contrary in the PMC.

D. Section 103 is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 103

RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION

103.1 Building Official. The Building Official shall serve as the Code Official for purposes of this Code. The Building Official may direct the Building Inspectors or other Code Enforcement Officers of the City to carry out the responsibilities under this Code.

E. Section 107.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the owner(s) and occupant(s) of the property, as well as to any other person the code official determines is responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3.

F. Sections 111.2 through 111.8 are hereby repealed.

G. The following sections of Chapter 3 are hereby deleted:

1. Section 302.4;

2. Section 302.8;

3. Section 302.9;

4. Section 303.2;

5. Section 304.3; and

6. Section 308.2.2.

H. Section 308.2.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

308.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. All rubbish shall be disposed of in approved covered containers.

I. Section 308.3.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

308.3.1 Garbage facilities. All dwelling units shall be supplied with an approved mechanical food waste grinder, if required when the dwelling unit was constructed or remodeled and an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage container. All garbage shall be disposed of by one of these two methods.

J. Section 308.3.2 of Chapter 3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

308.3.2 Containers.

The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.

K. Section 304.14 of Chapter 3 is hereby amended by requiring insect screens 365 days a year.

L. Section 404.5 of Chapter 4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

404.5 Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted in accordance with the California State Building Code.

M. Section 602.3 of Chapter 6 is hereby amended by requiring the heat supply to be furnished 365 days a year.

N. Section 602.4 of Chapter 6 is hereby amended to read as follows:

602.4 Occupiable work spaces.

Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heating 365 days a year to maintain a minimum temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit during the period the spaces are occupied.

Exceptions:

1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.

2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.

(Ord. 1791 § 4, 2018)

Chapter 15.30
UNIFORM BUILDING SECURITY CODE
Sections:

15.30.010    Adoption of the 1997 Uniform Building Security Code.

15.30.010 Adoption of the 1997 Uniform Building Security Code.
The 1997 Uniform Building Security Code is adopted as the city of Gardena building security code. (Ord. 1791 § 5, 2018)

Chapter 15.32
ASBESTOS REMOVAL
Sections:

15.32.010    Asbestos removal – Notification.

15.32.020    Asbestos removal – Demolition and building permits.

15.32.030    Exemption.

15.32.010 Asbestos removal – Notification.
Applications for demolition permits and for building permits for the renovation of existing buildings involving one hundred square feet or more of asbestos containing materials shall be accompanied by notification of the finding of asbestos-containing materials, the removal techniques to be utilized, clean-up procedures, the location of the waste disposal site where such material will be deposited, the scheduled starting and completion dates of demolition and renovation, the procedures to be followed in the event that unexpected asbestos is found or previously nonfriable asbestos material becomes friable, and such other information as is deemed necessary by the building official issuing such permits. Copies of notification made to the South Coast Air Quality Management District shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.32.020 Asbestos removal – Demolition and building permits.
No demolition or building permits shall be issued unless notification is made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and state law. All persons performing such work must be certified in accordance with state law. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.32.030 Exemption.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the owner-occupant of a residential single-unit dwelling. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

Chapter 15.40
REPORTS OF RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDING RECORDS
Sections:

15.40.010    Purpose.

15.40.020    Definitions.

15.40.030    Reports required – Delivery of reports and waivers.

15.40.040    Application.

15.40.050    Inspection not a warranty.

15.40.060    Exception.

15.40.070    Violations – Penalties.

15.40.010 Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 6.5 (commencing with Section 38780) of Chapter 10 of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the state and the city’s police power, it is the intent of the city council to assure that the grantee of a building or a property within the city is furnished a report on matters of city record pertaining to the authorized use, occupancy and zoning classification of real property prior to sale or exchange. It is the further intent to protect the unwary buyer of such property against undisclosed restrictions on the use of the property. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.40.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Commercial building” means any improved real property situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for commercial purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property.

“Consummation of the sale or exchange” means the signing of final documents at the close of escrow which documents provide that title to any property is transferred from one owner to another owner.

“Industrial building” means any improved real property situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for industrial purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property.

“Owner” means any person, copartnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.

“Residential building” means any improved real property situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.40.030 Reports required – Delivery of reports and waivers.
At least thirty days prior to the consummation of the sale or exchange of any building or improved or unimproved real property within the city, it shall be the duty of the owner, or if the property is listed with a licensed real estate broker, it shall be the duty of such broker to apply, pursuant to Section 15.40.040, for a report showing the regularly authorized use, occupancy and zoning classification of such property, or submit to the building official at least twenty days prior to the consummation of the sale a written waiver of such report, fully executed by the prospective buyer or transferee of such property, on a form supplied by the community development department. If the report is not waived, it shall be delivered by the owner, or agent of the owner (broker), to the buyer or transferee of the building or property no later than fifteen days prior to the consummation of the sale or exchange. Upon the receipt of the report, the buyer or transferee shall execute a receipt form furnished by the city, and such receipt shall be delivered to the office of the building official as evidence of compliance with this chapter. Such report shall be valid for a period not to exceed six months after the date of issue; provided, however, upon an application made by the owner and filed with the building official on a form provided by the city stating that no structural changes, improvements, or additions have been made since the date of the issuance of the original report, such original report shall be valid at no additional cost for an additional period not to exceed six months, dated from the date of the expiration of the first six month report. Such report, unless waived as provided in this section, shall be available to the prospective buyer at the premises of the subject property or at the premises of any authorized representative. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.40.040 Application.
Upon the application of the owner, or his authorized agent, and the prepayment to the city of a fee as determined by resolution of the city council, the building official shall review the pertinent city records; make an exterior inspection of all buildings, and if requested to do so, make an interior inspection of all buildings for obvious code violations; and deliver to the applicant a report which shall contain the following information, so far as it is available:

A. Street address and legal description of the subject property;

B. Zone classification and authorized use as set forth in this code;

C. Occupancy as indicated and established by permits and records;

D. Business licenses or permits issued by the city to the occupants of the property, if any;

E. Variances, conditional use permits, exceptions, and other pertinent letters and legislative acts of record;

F. Any special zoning or general plan restrictions on uses or development which may apply to the subject property; and

G. A list of all presently observable violations of housing and building codes, as applicable, zoning regulations, or other matters pertaining to the subject property that are a matter of city record.

H. A listing of all administrative citations and other fines, penalties, fees, delinquent taxes, and costs resulting from violations of the Gardena Municipal Code, which have been assessed against the owner or any occupant of the subject property, which remain unpaid to the City, and which already have or are eligible to be recorded as a lien against the subject property. (Ord. 1656 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.40.050 Inspection not a warranty.
Inspection pursuant to Section 15.40.040 does not constitute a warranty or guarantee by the city that violations other than those disclosed do not exist. Inspection shall not stop the city from taking all appropriate actions necessary should a violation subsequently be discovered. The city assumes no liability for failing to discover a violation, and for failing to report the same. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.40.060 Exception.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the first sale of the building or property located in a new subdivision whose final map has been approved and recorded not more than two years prior to the first sale. This provision shall also not apply to buildings or properties which are subdivisions of air space for condominium purposes or to “own-your-own” apartments. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.40.070 Violations – Penalties.
A. Anyone in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this code.

B. No sale or exchange of property shall be invalidated solely for the failure of any person to comply with any provision of this chapter, unless such failure is an act or omission which would be a valid ground for the rescission of such sale or exchange in the absence of this chapter. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

Chapter 15.44
POST-DISASTER BUILDING STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

15.44.010    Purpose.

15.44.020    Definitions.

15.44.030    Post-disaster safety assessment placards.

15.44.040    Post-disaster demolition.

15.44.050    Disaster repair and reconstruction.

15.44.060    Board of appeals.

15.44.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide building standards and requirements which will apply in declared emergencies caused by natural or man-made disasters in order to allow rapid recovery and reconstruction efforts in the city. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.44.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Architect” means an individual licensed by the state to practice architecture as defined in the State of California Business and Professions Code.

“Building official” means the building official of the city or his or her designee.

“Civil engineer” means an individual registered by the state to practice civil engineering as defined in the State of California Business and Professions Code.

“Current code” means the edition of the California Existing Building Code, published by the International Code Council, as adopted by the city in accordance with operation of law pursuant to the State of California Health and Safety Code. The edition to be applied shall be that edition in effect at the time of the declaration of an emergency.

“Declared emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons or property within the territorial limits of the city by the Governor of the state or by the mayor of the city.

“Engineering evaluation” means an evaluation of a damaged building or structure, or suspected damaged building or structure, performed under the direction of a structural engineer, civil engineer or architect retained by the owner of the building or structure. Engineering evaluation shall, at a minimum, contain recommendations for repair with appropriate opinion of construction cost for those repairs.

“Essential service facilities” means those buildings or structures which have been designated by the city council to house facilities which are necessary for the emergency operations subsequent to an event.

“Event” means any occurrence, natural or manmade, which results in a declared emergency.

“Historic building or structure” means any building or structure included on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Register of Historic Places or points of interest, or a local register of historic places. Historic buildings and structures shall also include those buildings and structures within a recognized historic district wherein the specific building has historic significance.

“Replacement value” means the dollar value, as determined by the building official, of replacing the damaged structure with a new structure of the same size, construction material and occupancy on the same site.

“State Historic Preservation Officer” (SHPO) means the individual appointed by the Governor, pursuant to Section 101(b)(1) of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, to administer the State Historic Preservation Program.

“Structural engineer” means an individual registered by the state to practice civil engineering and to use the title structural engineer as defined in the State of California Business and Professions Code.

“Value of repair” means the dollar value, as determined by the building official, of making the necessary repairs to the damaged structure. (Ord. 1798 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.44.030 Post-disaster safety assessment placards.
A. This section establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a building or structure for continued occupancy or use after any declared emergency.

B. Following each declared emergency, authorized staff and representatives of the building and safety division shall make a safety assessment of each damaged building and structure within the city and post the appropriate placard at each entry point to such building or structure. For purposes of this section a “safety assessment” is a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure.

C. Placards. The following are the three types of designations to be indicated by the placards. The ordinance number, the name of the department, its address and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.

1. INSPECTED – Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

2. RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.

3. UNSAFE – Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the city. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered.

D. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to remove a placard once it has been attached to a building or structure unless the placard is removed by an authorized representative of the City or upon written approval from the city. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.44.040 Post-disaster demolition.
Post-disaster demolition shall be handled through the procedures set forth in the California Existing Building Code, Section 117, entitled “Demolition.” (Ord. 1798 § 2, 2018: Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.44.050 Disaster repair and reconstruction.
Disaster repair and reconstruction shall be handled through the procedures set forth in the California Existing Building Code, Section 105, entitled “Permits.” (Ord. 1798 § 3, 2018: Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

15.44.060 Board of appeals.
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this chapter, there shall be and is created a board of appeals which shall consist of the members of the planning and environmental quality commission. The building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The board shall be governed by the same procedures as the planning and environmental quality commission. The board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. The decision of the board shall be final and conclusive. The written decision sent to appellant shall provide that pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be commenced in an appropriate court of law not later than the ninetieth day after the date that the board decision is issued. (Ord. 1474 § 3 (part), 1994)

Chapter 15.48
CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
Sections:

15.48.010    Findings.

15.48.020    Definitions.

15.48.030    Imposition.

15.48.040    Rate.

15.48.050    Payment of fees – When.

15.48.060    Collection.

15.48.070    Payment required before occupancy.

15.48.080    Disposition of proceeds – Creation of the development impact fund.

15.48.090    Exemptions.

15.48.010 Findings.
The findings of the council set forth in this section are not necessary all-inclusive. There are numerous related concerns which reflect the basis for this chapter. The council find as follows:

A. The city is basically for single-family residences which have comprised the majority of the housing units in the city.

B. For the last several years the development and construction of multi-unit residential complexes predominate, particularly condominium-type complexes.

C. In view of the current market conditions and other realities, all studies and information available indicate that this trend will continue.

D. In may cases, these developments supplant the properties that previously existed at lower density levels.

E. The city is only approximately five square miles in size, and therefore future density increases will occur on territory already populated by a lesser amount of people with services and public facilities geared to that lesser amount.

F. The development and construction of new residential living units within the city creates an immediate and present danger to the existing quality of life and the ecology of the city and threatens to burden and overtax the existing public purposes of the city, such as the provisions of public services, utilities, water and drainage and the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewerage which affects the health, welfare and safety of the community.

G. It is further found and determined that the imposition and collection of a nonrecurring fee upon the development and construction of new multi-unit residential dwelling units as defined in this chapter is a practical and equitable method of providing revenues with which the city may meet, deal with and solve serious problems created by the occupancy and construction of such developments within the city. Further, it is determined that the number of dwelling units tends to be reasonably proportionate to the impact that the development would have on the environment of the city and on the quantity of municipal services required for that development and its cumulative impact on the city. (Prior code § 6-10.01)

15.48.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent form the context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Dwelling unit” means and includes and dwelling designed for human occupancy which has one or more rooms, with or without a kitchen or cooking facilities.

“Multi-unit residential development” means any condominium, stock cooperative, community apartment project, planned development, or apartment house (including duplexes and triplexes) of at least two or more dwelling units. (Prior code § 6-10.02)

15.48.030 Imposition.
A multi-unit residential development impact license fee is imposed upon the occupancy and construction of each new dwelling unit in developments defined in Section 15.48.020. (Prior code § 6-10.03)

15.48.040 Rate.
The rate of the fees imposed is one thousand dollars per dwelling unit. (Prior code § 6-10.04)

15.48.050 Payment of fees – When.
The amount of the fees due pursuant to this chapter shall be paid either at the time of the issuance of a building permit for the building or at the time of the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, and the full amount of the fee shall be due and payable to the city prior to the occupancy of such dwelling unit or units. (Prior code § 6-10.05)

15.48.060 Collection.
The building official or his designee shall collect the fees due pursuant to this chapter. The full amount due shall constitute a debt to the city. An action for the collection thereof shall be commenced in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction. (Prior code § 6-10.06)

15.48.070 Payment required before occupancy.
No building permit and/or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for, and no person shall occupy or offer for occupancy, any new dwelling unit or development, as defined in this chapter, in the city unless the fee imposed upon the occupancy and construction thereof by this chapter has been paid. (Prior code § 6-10.07)

15.48.080 Disposition of proceeds – Creation of the development impact fund.
All proceeds from the fees collected under this chapter shall be paid to a special fund of the city to be applied to the costs incurred by the city concomitant with the burden increased by the multi-unit residential facilities, open space, drainage and other public facilities and services related thereto. Said fund shall be entitled “the development impact fund” and shall be used for any purpose consistent with the needs expressed in this chapter. (Prior code § 6-10.08)

15.48.090 Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from payment of the multifamily development impact fee required by this chapter:

A. Multi-unit residential developments for senior citizens which are developed and operated by nonprofit corporations;

B. Affordable units for lower income families in multi-unit residential development, when such units are guaranteed to remain affordable for a period of thirty years. (Ord. 1737 § 1, 2012: prior code § 6-10.09)

Chapter 15.50
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Sections:

Article I. Findings, Purposes and Definitions

15.50.010    Findings of fact.

15.50.020    Statement of purpose.

15.50.030    Methods of reducing flood losses.

15.50.040    Definitions.

Article II. General Provisions

15.50.050    Lands to which this chapter applies.

15.50.060    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.50.070    Compliance.

15.50.080    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.50.090    Interpretation.

15.50.100    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

Article III. Administration

15.50.110    Establishment of development permit.

15.50.120    Designation of the floodplain administrator.

15.50.130    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

15.50.140    Appeals.

Article IV. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

15.50.150    Standards of construction.

15.50.160    Standards for utilities.

15.50.170    Standards for subdivisions.

15.50.180    AR zone areas.

15.50.190    Standards for manufactured homes.

15.50.200    Standards for recreational vehicles.

15.50.210    Floodways.

Article V. Variance Procedure

15.50.220    Nature of variances.

15.50.230    Appeal board.

15.50.240    Conditions for variances.

Article I. Findings, Purposes and Definitions

15.50.010 Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of city of Gardena are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B. These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.020 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.030 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.040 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

“Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

“Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “special flood hazard area.”

“AR zone” means a special flood hazard area that results from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide a one hundred-year or greater level of flood protection.

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade – i.e., below ground level – on all sides.

“Building”. See “structure”.

“City council” means the city council of the city of Gardena.

“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Developed areas” means an area of a community that is:

1. A primarily urbanized, built-up area that is a minimum of twenty contiguous acres, has basic urban infrastructure, including roads, utilities, communications, and public facilities, to sustain industrial, residential, and commercial activities, and:

a. Within which seventy-five percent of more of the parcels, tracts, or lots contain commercial, industrial, or residential structures or uses, or

b. Is a single parcel, tract, or lot in which seventy-five percent of the area contains existing commercial or industrial structures or uses, or

c. Is a subdivision developed at a density of at least two residential structures per acre within which seventy-five percent or more of the lots contain existing residential structures;

2. Undeveloped parcels, tracts, or lots, the combination of which is less than twenty acres and contiguous on at least three sides to areas meeting the criteria of subsection (1) of this definition;

3. A subdivision that is a minimum of twenty contiguous acres that has obtained all necessary government approvals, provided that the actual “start of construction” of structures has occurred on at least:

a. Ten percent of the lots or remaining lots of a subdivision, or

b. Ten percent of the maximum building coverage or remaining building coverage allowed for a single lot subdivision,

and construction of structures is underway. Residential subdivisions must meet the density criteria in subsection (1)(c) of this definition.

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood, flooding, or floodwater” means:

1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

2. The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

“Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source – see “flooding.”

“Floodplain administrator” means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Floodway fringe” means that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

“Fraud and victimization,” as related to Article V, Variances, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Governing body” means the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Hardship” as related to Article V, Variances, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

“Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “basement” definition).

1. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

a. The wet floodproofing standard in Article IV;

b. The anchoring standards in Article IV;

c. The construction materials and methods standards in Article IV;

d. The standards for utilities in Article IV.

2. For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

“Obstruction” means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

“One-Hundred-Year Flood” or “100-Year Flood.” See “base flood.”

“Public safety and nuisance” as related to Article V, Variances, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, AH, V1-V30, VE or V.

“Start of construction” means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

Article II. General Provisions

15.50.050 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of city of Gardena. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.060 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 6, 1998 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study and FIRM are on file in the office of the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.070 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.080 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.090 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.100 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

Article III. Administration

15.50.110 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.50.060. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures – in Zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or

B. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 15.50.150 (C)(3); and

C. All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.50.130 D of this chapter; and

D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.120 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The community development director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.130 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following.

A. Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

1. Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied,

2. All other required state and federal permits have been obtained,

3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding, and

4. The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point;

B. Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.50.060, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article IV. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption;

C. Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

1. Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation,

2. Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, and

3. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained;

D. Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1. Certification required by Section 15.50.150 (C)(1) (lowest floor elevations),

2. Certification required by Section 15.50.150 (C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures),

3. Certification required by Section 15.50.150 (C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard),

4. Certification of elevation required by Section 15.50.170 (B) (subdivision standards), and

5. Certification required by Section 15.50.210 (A) (floodway encroachments);

E. Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article V;

F. Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.50.070;

G. AR Zone Duties.

1. Use the adopted official map or legal description of those designated developed areas within Zones AR, AR/AR1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/A, AR/AO as defined in Section 15.50.040 to determine if a proposed project is in a developed area,

2. Determine the base flood elevation to be used for individual projects within developed areas, areas not designated as developed areas, and dual zone areas (Section 15.50.180),

3. Require the applicable standards in Article IV,

4. Provide written notification to the permit applicant that the area has been designated as an AR, AR/AI-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A zone and whether the structure will be elevated or protected to or above the AR base flood elevation. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.140 Appeals.
The city council of the city of Gardena shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

Article IV. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

15.50.150 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A. Anchoring.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2. All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.50.190.

B. Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

1. With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3. With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

4. Within Zones AH, AO, AR/AH or AR/AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

C. Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.50.040 definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement”.) For AR zone requirements see Section 15.50.180.

1. Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a. In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;

b. In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community;

c. In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

2. Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.50.150 or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a. Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.50.150 so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section 15.50.150 are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

3. All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

b. Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

4. Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.50.190. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.160 Standards for utilities.
A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1. Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and

2. Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

B. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.170 Standards for subdivisions.
A. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

B. All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

C. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E. All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.180 AR zone areas.
Within areas designated as AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO or AR/A as established under Section 15.50.060, the following standards shall apply.

A. Developed Areas. All new construction in areas designated as developed areas shall meet the standard of Article IV using the lower of either the AR base flood elevation or the elevation that is three feet above the highest adjacent grade.

B. Areas Not Designated as Developed Areas. All new construction in areas that are not designated as developed areas:

1. Where the AR flood depth is equal to or less than five feet above the highest adjacent grade, shall meet the standards of Article IV using the lower of either the AR base flood elevation or the elevation that is three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or

2. Where the AR flood depth is greater than five feet above the highest adjacent grade, shall meet the standards of Article IV using the AR base flood elevation.

C. Dual Zone Areas.

1. All new construction in areas within Zone AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, AR/A shall meet the standards of Article IV using the higher of either the applicable AR zone elevation (as determined from subsections A or B of this section) or the base flood elevation (or flood depth) for the underlying A1-30, AE, AH, or A zone.

2. All substantial improvements to existing construction within Zones AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A shall meet the standards of Article IV using the base flood elevation (or flood depth) for the underlying A1-30, AE, AH, AO, or A zone. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.190 Standards for manufactured homes.
A. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

1. Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

2. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

3. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

4. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood,

shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.

B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, All, and AE, on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

1. Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or

2. Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.200 Standards for recreational vehicles.
A. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use – a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

2. Meet the permit requirements of Article III of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.50.190(A). (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.210 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.50.060 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

B. If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

Article V. Variance Procedure

15.50.220 Nature of variances.
The variance criteria set forth in this section of this chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.230 Appeal board.
A. In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

1. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

4. Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5. Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6. Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

11. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

B. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

C. The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

15.50.240 Conditions for variances.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Article III and Article IV of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Article I of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

C. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

E. Variances shall any be issued upon a:

1. Showing of good and sufficient cause;

2. Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Article I of this chapter) to the applicant; and

3. Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Article I – see “public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Article 1) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

F. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through E of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

G. Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.50.230(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 1998)

Title 16
(Reserved)
Title 17
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters:

17.04    General Provisions

17.08    Procedures and Standards

17.12    Condominiums and Stock Cooperatives

17.16    Vesting Tentative Maps

17.20    Park and Recreation Dedication Fees

Chapter 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

17.04.010    Citation and authority.

17.04.020    Definitions.

17.04.030    Compliance required.

17.04.010 Citation and authority.
The council assumes control, where not otherwise delegated, of all divisions of land and reversions to acreage as such power is vested in the city by the provisions of Sections 66410 through 66499.58, inclusive, of Divisions 2 and 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state and amendments thereto (referred to in this chapter as the Subdivision Map Act) or as otherwise established and set forth in this chapter.

The chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act and may be cited as the “subdivision law of the city.”

The planning and environmental quality commission is made the advisory agency of the city as such advisory agency is defined and established by the Subdivision Map Act, and the authority is delegated to the advisory agency to investigate any and all matters pertaining to, and to recommend or, where set forth, act upon, the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of all proposed divisions of land or reversions to acreage and to communicate its findings and recommendations to the council. (Prior code § 10-2.01)

17.04.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, certain words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Advisory agency,” “appeal board,” “county surveyor,” “design,” “improvement,” “local agency,” “street” and “subdivider,” as contained in Sections 66414 through 66424, inclusive, of the Subdivision Map Act, are adopted as the definitions and meanings of each and all of such words and phrases whenever the same appear in this title.

“Arterial street” means any primary thoroughfare which principally carries regional traffic flow and which is shown as such on the Circulation and Scenic Highway Element of the General Plan of the city.

“Collector street” means any secondary thoroughfare which principally carries traffic flow to and between arterial streets and other collector streets and which is shown as such on the Circulation and Scenic Highway Element of the General Plan of the city.

“Final map” means the map prepared for recordation for a division of land or reversion to acreage as required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.

“General Plan” means the General Plan of the city.

“Local street” means any street other than an arterial street or collector street and which is shown as such on the Circulation and Scenic Highway Element of the General Plan of the city.

“Lot line adjustment” means the relocation of the boundary or boundaries between two or more adjoining parcels of land and which does not create any additional parcels of land.

“Parcel map” means the map prepared for recordation for a division of land or reversion to acreage as required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.

“Reversion to acreage” means the process in which subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.

“Reversion to acreage map” means a parcel map, where land has been previously subdivided and consists of four or less contiguous parcels, or a final map for all other reversions to acreage.

“Subdivision” means the division of any improved or unimproved land, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code of the state, or a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for the purposes of computing the number of parcels.

“Tentative map” means the map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed division of land or reversion of acreage and the existing conditions in and around it. A tentative map shall be required for both parcel and final maps, including reversion to acreage maps. (Prior code § 10-2.04)

17.04.030 Compliance required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall sell, lease, finance or transfer title to any parcel of land, or fraction thereof, or offer to do so, or contract to do so, without first conforming with the provisions of this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, and any other provision or requirement set forth and established of record by the council.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, or any other such provisions or requirements shall be a misdemeanor and each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.

Notices of violations may be filed by any city official having knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act and/or of this chapter. Such city official shall cause such notice of violation to be filed for record with the county recorder’s office and a copy to be sent to the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission. Such notice of violation shall contain (1) a description of the real property in detail; (2) the names of the owners; and (3) a description of the violation and, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Prior code § 10-2.02)

Chapter 17.08
PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS
Sections:

17.08.010    General Plan conformance – Time for or waivers of reports – Environmental assessment.

17.08.020    Tentative maps – Filing – Processing.

17.08.030    Tentative maps – Requirements.

17.08.040    Tentative maps – Procedure.

17.08.050    Dedications and reservations.

17.08.060    Appeals.

17.08.070    Expiration – Extensions of time.

17.08.080    Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Generally.

17.08.090    Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Title sheets.

17.08.100    Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Map sheets.

17.08.110    Parcel maps – Waivers of signatures.

17.08.120    Lot line adjustment.

17.08.130    Standards and design – Generally.

17.08.140    Standards and design – Streets and alleys.

17.08.150    Standards and design – Lots and blocks.

17.08.160    Standards and designs – Easements.

17.08.170    Improvements.

17.08.180    Securities.

17.08.190    Tentative maps – Processing fees.

17.08.200    Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Processing fees.

17.08.210    Extensions of time – Processing fees.

17.08.220    Appeals – Processing fees.

17.08.230    Improvement plans – Processing fees.

17.08.240    Certificate of compliance for the conversion of community apartment projects.

17.08.250    Merger of parcels.

17.08.260    Merger of parcels without reversion to acreage.

17.08.010 General Plan conformance – Time for or waivers of reports – Environmental assessment.
A. A report as to conformity to the General Plan, which is required pursuant to Section 65402 of the Government Code of the state for a proposed division of land or reversion to acreage, may be included as part of the action recommended by the planning and environmental quality commission and taken by the council on the tentative map for the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage.

B. Such report shall not be required for a proposed division of land or reversion to acreage which involves (1) the disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes; (2) acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening; or (3) alignment projects, provided the planning and environmental quality commission recommends, and the council expressly finds, that any such disposition for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening or alignment projects is of a minor nature.

C. An environmental assessment shall be completed in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 and the guidelines established by the city to implement the same, and the processing of the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage shall not commence until the environmental assessment is completed. (Prior code § 10-2.03)

17.08.020 Tentative maps – Filing – Processing.
The subdivider shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a tentative map for all proposed divisions of land or reversions to acreage and shall file such tentative map with the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission. Such tentative map shall be processed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 10-2.05 (part))

17.08.030 Tentative maps – Requirements.
Each tentative map filed shall contain the following information:

1. The map numbers of the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage and a description of the property;

2. The name and address of the subdivider;

3. The name and address of the person preparing the map;

4. The approximate acreage of the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage;

5. The north arrow;

6. The scale;

7. The date;

8. The boundary lines of the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage;

9. The name, location, and width of the streets within the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage;

10. The name, location and width of adjacent streets;

11. The approximate proposed street grades and direction of slope;

12. The width of alleys;

13. The width of easements;

14. The dimensions of reservations;

15. The existing structures which shall not be moved;

16. The location of the existing and proposed public utilities;

17. The existing sewer mains;

18. The existing water mains;

19. The existing storm drainage culverts and pipes;

20. The location, width, and direction of flow of watercourses;

21. The railroads;

22. The lot lines and approximate dimensions;

23. The approximate radius of curves;

24. The setback lines;

25. The lands and parks to be dedicated or reserved for public use;

26. The contours at intervals, as prescribed by the city engineer, or other topographic information as may be necessary to a clear understanding of the drainage involved;

27. The proposed land uses as follows:

a. Single-family,

b. Multifamily,

c. Commercial, and

d. Industrial;

28. The map name or map number of adjoining divisions or reversions of land;

29. The existing land use of adjacent property; and

30. The location of any registered land. (Prior code § 10-2.05(a))

17.08.040 Tentative maps – Procedure.
A. After noting the requirements contained in Section 17.08.030, any subdivider proposing to divide or revert property shall examine the General Plan of the city at the office of the city clerk and confer with the city engineer or the staff of the planning and environmental quality commission before preparing the tentative map of any such proposed division of land or reversion to acreage.

B. Prior to filing a tentative map, map numbers shall be obtained from the county surveyor and the city, excepting that only a city map number shall be required for a tentative map for which a parcel map will be waived pursuant to this chapter.

C. At least twenty-two copies of the tentative map shall be filed with the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission. For any such tentative map to be considered at a scheduled meeting of the planning and environmental quality commission, such copies shall be filed with the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission not less than twenty days prior to such meeting. Such filing shall be prior to the start of any grading or construction work within the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage.

D. The tentative map shall be accompanied by reports and written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding the following matters:

1. A development plan of the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage;

2. A proposed sewer system (grade and size);

3. A proposed storm drainage system (grade and size);

4. A proposed water and fire hydrant system (flow and size);

5. Protective covenants to be recorded;

6. Proposed tree plantings; and

7. A preliminary soil report pursuant to Section 66490 of the Subdivision Map Act.

E. Upon the receipt of any tentative map, the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission shall submit to the city engineer two copies of the tentative map. The city engineer shall examine it as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, and the Circulation and Scenic Highway Element of the General Plan of the city.

F. The secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission shall forward one copy of each tentative map received to the Board of Education of the city of Los Angeles.

G. Whenever a proposed division of land or reversion to acreage adjoins an adjacent city or unincorporated territory of the county, the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission shall refer one copy of the tentative map to the city and/or county planning commission concerned and delay action for up to fourteen days pending the receipt of comments or suggestions from such interested agencies or their representatives. The planning and environmental quality commission shall cause to be certified upon its official filed copy of the tentative map a statement as to such transmittal, giving the date in each case.

H. Within thirty days after the first regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and environmental quality commission following the date of the filing of a tentative map, the planning and environmental quality commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map and shall report such action in writing to the council and to the subdivider. On the official filed copy of the tentative map a statement shall be made covering such action.

I. As soon as the planning and environmental quality commission has approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved the tentative map, a copy shall be sent by the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission to the Real Estate Commissioner of the state. (Prior code § 10-2.05(b))

17.08.050 Dedications and reservations.
A. Dedications. As a condition of the approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the division of land or reversions to acreage that are needed for streets, alleys, drainage, public utility easements and any other necessary public easements or rights-of-way.

The Planning and Environmental Quality Commission may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on the map as abutting thereon and that, if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access.

B. Reservations. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on the General Plan of the city of any other specific plan approved by the council, the planning and environmental quality commission may require that the subdivider reserve such sites in accordance with such General Plan or Specific Plan. The reserved area shall be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make the development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved, prior to the time of the recordation of the final, parcel, or reversion to acreage map, shall enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map, plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.

If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such binding agreement within the prescribed time limit, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. (Prior code § 10-2.06)

17.08.060 Appeals.
A. Subdividers. A subdivider taking exception to any ruling, finding, determination, or act imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal such action to the Council pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of Section 66452.5 of the Subdivision Map Act and may do so by filing an appeal in writing with the city clerk. Such appeal shall contain a statement as to the reasons the subdivider is making the appeal and shall be filed within ten days after the date of the action from which the appeal is being taken.

Upon the filing of such an appeal, the council, pursuant to the provisions of Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act, shall set such matter for a public hearing. Such public hearing shall be held within thirty days after the date of the filing of the appeal and the council shall render its decision on the appeal within ten days following the conclusion of such public hearing. The council, by its decision, may confirm, modify, or set aside the findings, rulings, determinations, or acts made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and from which the appeal is being taken. The findings and determinations of the council shall be final and conclusive in the matter.

B. Interested Persons. Any interested person taking exception to any ruling, finding, determination, or act imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal such action to the council pursuant to the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 66452.5 of the Subdivision Map Act and may do so by filing an appeal in writing with the city clerk. Such appeal shall contain a statement as to the reasons the person is making the appeal and shall be filed within ten days after the date of the action from which the appeal is being taken.

Upon the filing of such an appeal, the council, pursuant to the provisions of Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act, shall set such matter for a public hearing. Such public hearing shall be held within thirty days after the date of the filing of the appeal, and the Council shall render its decision on the appeal within seven days following the conclusion of such public hearing. The council, by its decision, may confirm, modify, or set aside the findings, rulings, determinations, or acts made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and from which the appeal is being taken. The findings and determinations of the council shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (Prior code § 10-2.07)

17.08.070 Expiration – Extensions of time.
A. Expiration. Within two years after the date of the approval or conditional approval of a parcel map or a tentative map, the subdivider shall cause to have the final, parcel, or reversion to acreage map for the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage to be filed with the city engineer and to have such map recorded in the office of the county recorder. Failure to file and record such map within the prescribed time limits shall automatically terminate and void all proceedings, and any proposed division or reversion to acreage of the same land shall require the filing of a new tentative map.

B. Extensions of Time. A subdivider may request an extension of time not exceeding twelve months for a tentative map within which to comply with any requirement or condition imposed pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and may do so by filing such request in writing with the secretary of the planning and environmental quality commission. Such request shall contain a statement as to the reasons the subdivider desires an extension of time and shall be filed at least sixty days prior to the expiration of the time limit imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

The community development department shall place such request for an extension of time on the agenda of the planning and environmental quality commission for its review and consideration. The commission shall approve or disapprove the extension of time and shall report such action in writing to the council and to the subdivider.

C. Appeals. A subdivider may appeal the denial of an application for an extension of time by filing a written statement of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days after the planning and environmental quality commission’s denial of the extension. (Prior code § 10-2.08)

17.08.080 Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Generally.
A. The subdivider shall cause the required final, parcel, or reversion to acreage map to be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. Such map shall conform to the approved tentative map, the requirements and conditions contained in the report approving or conditionally approving the tentative map and the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.

B. The subdivider shall cause the filing of the required number of copies of such maps with the city engineer. Concurrently therewith, the subdivider shall also cause the filing of the required number of copies of such maps with the county surveyor’s office which, by agreement with the city pursuant to Section 66431 of the Subdivision Map Act, shall perform certain of the services and duties charged by the Subdivision Map Act to the city engineer.

C. Such maps so filed shall be accompanied by a certificate of title or subdivision guarantee issued for the benefit and protection of the city by a title company authorized by the laws of the state to do so, showing all parties having an interest in the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage, together with the nature of their interests therein. (Prior code § 10-2.09(a))

17.08.090 Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Title sheets.
The title sheet of each map shall contain a title consisting of “Tract No. ..............................” (insert map number) for final maps, “Parcel Map No. ....................” (insert map number) for parcel maps, and a subtitle consisting of “A Reversion to Acreage of ......................” (insert legal description of land being reverted) for reversion to acreage maps along with the words “In the City of Gardena,” or “Partly in the City of Gardena and partly in unincorporated territory,” or “Partly in the City of Gardena and partly in the City of .....................” (insert the name of the adjacent city), whichever is applicable. The title sheet shall also contain a subtitle consisting of a description of all the property in the division of land or reversion to acreage by reference to such map or maps of such property as shall have been previously recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder, or filed with the county clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or filed in the office of the county recorder pursuant to the Political Code of the state by reference to the plat of any United States survey. Each reference in such subtitle to any record maps shall be worded and spelled identically with, and contain a complete reference to, the book and page of the original record thereof.

The certificate of the surveyor or engineer, as required by the Subdivision Map Act, shall appear on the title sheet, along with the date of any survey and the basis of bearings, with a reference to a record satisfactory to the city engineer or a solar or polaris observation.

All required certificates, affidavits, acknowledgments and signatures appearing on the title sheet shall be legibly stamped, printed, or signed with opaque ink, and all such entries shall be readily reproducible by normal methods of reproduction. (Prior code § 10-2.09(b))

17.08.100 Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Map sheets.
A. General. Each map sheet shall bear the main title of the map, the scale, the north point and the sheet number and designation of the relation, if any, between that sheet and each other sheet comprising the map.

B. Lot Numbers and Area. All lots shall be numbered, and the numbers shall begin with the numeral “1” and continue consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the entire map. No prefix or suffix or combination of letter and number shall be used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one map sheet.

Each lot containing an area of three-quarters of an acre or more shall have designated on the map sheet the acreage of the lot to the nearest 1/100 of an acre.

C. Lot, Block, and Boundary Lines. The bearing and length of each lot, block, and boundary line shall be shown on the map; provided, however, when bearings of lot lines in a series of lots are the same, the bearings may be omitted from each interior, parallel lot line of the series. Each required bearing or length shall be shown in full, and no ditto mark or other designation of repetition shall be used.

The arc length, radius and total central angle or bearings of terminal radii of each curve, and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve, or the central angle of each segment within each lot, shall be shown.

D. Centerlines and Widths of Streets, Alleys, and Other Ways. The centerline, the total width, and the total fractional widths on each side of the centerline of each street, alley or other way shall appear on the map sheets. The bearing and length of each tangent and the radius, central angle and arc length of each curve shall also be shown on each centerline.

The map sheets shall also show the following widths and fractional widths of rights-of-way when dedications are to be made on the map:

1. The total width dedicated prior to the recording of such map; and

2. The width of additional strips to be dedicated by such map.

E. Street Names. The approved names, including the word “Avenue,” “Street,” “Place” or other approved street designation, shall be shown on the map sheet. Such names and designations shall be shown in, or arrowed into, both the newly dedicated portion and any existing portion of the street. No numerals or abbreviations shall be used in delineating street names.

F. Rights-of-way and Easements. All rights-of-way and easements which are a burden upon the land and lots within the division of land or reversion to acreage or which are required as a condition precedent to the filing of the map shall be shown on the map sheets and shall conform to the following:

1. The centerline, side line and width, and the length, bearing, and sufficient ties thereto, shall be shown as necessary to definitely locate each right-of-way or easement. If the right-of-way or easement cannot be definitely located from the official records, a statement showing the existence of such right-of-way or easement shall be placed on the map.

2. All rights-of-way or easements shall be delineated by a fine dashed line; provided, however, where such rights-of-way or easements are lots or series of lots, they shall be shown as such in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.

3. Distances, bearings, and all other indications of measurements on the lot lines which are crossed by rights-of-way or easements shall be arrowed or otherwise shown so as to clearly indicate the actual length, bearing or measurement of each lot line.

4. The rights-of-way or easements shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if of record, the record reference shall be shown thereon.

5. Notes or figures pertaining to easements shall be subordinated in form and appearance to other notes or figures on the map sheets.

G. City Boundary Lines. City boundary lines crossing or abutting the division of land or reversion to acreage shall be clearly designated and tied.

H. Map Boundary Lines. The map boundary lines of the land included within the division of land or reversion to acreage shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so designated.

I. Evidence Determining Boundaries. In all cases where a survey is required for a map, each map sheet shall show fully and clearly evidence where there may be found on the ground the stakes, monuments, and other evidence used to determine the boundaries of the division of land or reversion to acreage.

Each stake, monument, or other object found shall be fully described and referenced, and the method used to establish each point or line shall be clearly shown and explained on the map sheet. It shall also show and identify each adjacent corner or each adjoining parcel of land or portion thereof by lot and block number, number or name, and place of record, or by section, township and range, or, where no such identifying data is available, by another approved designation sufficient to establish the relation with such adjoining parcels of land.

In those cases where a parcel map is compiled from record data, the source of the information used shall be contained in a note on the map sheet.

J. Surveys and Monuments.

1. The procedures and practices for all survey work done in conjunction with the preparation of the map shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 15 of the Business and Professions Code of the state (the Land Surveyor’s Act) and shall have an allowable error of closure on any portion thereof not to exceed 1/10,000.

In the event the city engineer shall have established or accepted the centerline of any street or alley in or adjacent to the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage, the survey data and all monuments found on the ground and used in the determination of the boundaries of the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage shall be shown upon the map sheets, together with references to field books or record maps used in connection therewith. If such points are reset by ties, that fact shall be so stated upon the map. Also, the city engineer may require ties to the geodetic triangulation system where stations thereof have been established within a reasonable distance from the boundary of the division of land or reversion to acreage.

Upon the completion of the required survey, the subdivider shall cause a set of approved field notes of such survey to be filed with the city engineer.

2. Approved permanent monuments shall be set in conformance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and shall be marked in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 15 of the Business and Professions Code of the state (the Land Surveyor’s Act). The subdivider shall cause such approved permanent monuments to be placed in such a manner and location that the required field survey for the exterior boundaries of, and all property lines within, the division of land or reversion to acreage are retraceable by another engineer or surveyor. Such monuments shall also be set at all angle and curve points of the field survey and at all angle and curve points on the exterior boundaries of the division of land or reversion to acreage, each block, each lot and each parcel.

Such monuments shall also be set at all angle and curve points of the centerline of interior streets, and, where the exterior boundaries of the subdivision are along the existing street right-of-way lines, additional monuments shall be set on the centerline of the existing street at all points where the projected centerlines of the interior streets intersect the centerline of the existing street. It is also required that such monuments be so set as to insure an unobstructed sight between adjacent monuments, that on all curved streets the connecting cords between monuments shall be wholly within the street roadway between curbs, and in no case shall the distance between monuments exceed one thousand feet. All such monuments denoting the external field survey for, and the exterior boundaries of, the division of land or reversion to acreage shall be set prior to the recordation of the map for such division of land or reversion to acreage. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded provided the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specific date and that the subdivider furnishes the city bonds or cash deposits guaranteeing the installation of such monuments.

If, in the opinion of the city engineer, any of those points at which a monument is required to be set are inaccessible, then reference monuments may be set providing all such reference monuments and their offset ties are shown on the maps of the division of land, or reversion to acreage, or supplementary maps. Such reference monuments shall be of the type and construction as would have normally been required to be set at the point being referenced.

All monuments shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. (Prior code § 10-2.09(c))

17.08.110 Parcel maps – Waivers of signatures.
The signatures of all parties having any record title interest in the real property being divided shall not be required on any parcel map unless dedications or offers of dedication are made by certificate on the parcel map. (Prior code § 10-2.09(d))

17.08.120 Lot line adjustment.
Except as otherwise provided in Title 17 of this Code, a lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken for one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, shall be processed by the city pursuant to the authority granted in Government Code section 66412(d).

A. An application for a lot line adjustment shall be filed with the community development department. Such application shall include:

1. Proof that the lots involved have been legally created;

2. A plot plan indicating existing lot dimensions, and the location of existing structures, utilities, infrastructure and easements;

3. Deeds, or records of survey, suitable for recordation, describing or illustrating the proposed new lot configuration;

4. Any other information necessary to determine whether the proposed adjustment will conform with zoning and building codes; and

5. A fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council for the purpose of defraying costs to process the request.

B. The community development director or the director’s designee (hereafter collectively referred to as “director”), shall act upon the lot line adjustment application within fifty days from the date that the environmental documentation is completed or the determination is made that the project is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act.

C. The director shall approve or conditionally approve the application in writing after investigation and receipt of reports from other departments, if it is found that the proposed lot line adjustment conforms to all of the following requirements:

1. Does not create an additional lot;

2. Does not reduce the area or width of any lot below the minimum required area for the zone;

3. Does not cut off any lot from frontage on a public street or alley, access to a public utility or easement, or create a need or a new utility or easement, other than relocation of existing utilities or easements;

4. Does not cause the need for a new or extended public street or easement or the need for new or extended utilities, other than relocation of an existing easement or utility;

5. Does not cause an existing building or structure to be in violation of the zoning ordinance, building code or state housing law by reasons of its proximity to or encroachment on a proposed new lot line;

6. Does not cause the need for any new infrastructure, other than the relocation of existing infrastructure; and

7. Complies with requirements as to area, easements, utilities, improvement, design, floodwater drainage, sanitary disposal facilities and water supply availability.

D. An application for a lot line adjustment not approved or conditionally approved within the time frame set forth above shall be deemed denied, unless by mutual written agreement between the applicant and the director, the time for approval is extended.

E. If the director approves or conditionally approves the lot line adjustment, the director shall so certify the deed and the city engineer shall issue a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance, both of which shall be filed with county recorder’s office after the appeal period has expired.

F. Within ten days after a request for a lot line adjustment has been acted upon, any aggrieved person may file an appeal of the decision. The appeal shall be heard by the planning and environmental quality commission within thirty days after the date of the filing of the appeal. (Ord. 1516 § 2, 1997: prior code § 10-2.09(e))

17.08.130 Standards and design – Generally.
The minimum standards and design requirements set forth in Sections 17.08.140 through and including 17.08.160 shall be complied with except in those cases where, because of the size or shape of the land, topographical conditions, or proposed land use, the planning and environmental quality commission recommends and the council determines that compliance therewith is impractical. (Prior code § 10-2.10 (part))

17.08.140 Standards and design – Streets and alleys.
A. Street Classification, Alignment and Width. The classification of streets to be established shall be in conformance with the Circulation and Scenic Highway Element of the General Plan of the city. The exact alignment of such streets shall be as determined by the city engineer. The minimum right-of-way shall conform to Chapter 13.44 of this code.

B. Boundary Line and Half Streets. Boundary line streets and half streets shall not be permitted unless binding assurances are presented in writing from the owners of all adjoining properties indicating their intentions to dedicate the remaining parts of the street when such adjoining properties are divided or developed.

C. Cul-de-sacs and Knuckles. Street cul-de-sacs and knuckles shall have minimum right-of-way radii of fifty feet and minimum roadway radii of forty feet. Alley cul-de-sacs shall have rights-of-way conforming to the hammerhead design with fifty feet across the top, twenty feet across the ends, and two fifteen foot radius corner cutoffs.

D. Corner Cut-offs. Street intersections with other streets shall have minimum right-of-way corner cut-offs with radii of fifteen feet. Alley intersections with streets shall have minimum diagonal right-of-way corner cut-offs measuring ten feet on a side. Alley intersections with other alleys shall have minimum right-of-way corner cut-offs of fifteen feet.

E. Intersection Angles. Street and alley intersections shall be at right angles and shall be aligned with existing or future planned intersections. A minimum tangent section one hundred feet in length shall be provided between the end of the corner cut-off and the beginning of any horizontal curve.

F. Grades. The grade of any street or alley shall not exceed six percent.

G. Horizontal Curves. The centerline radius of any horizontal curve on an arterial or major collector street shall not be less than one thousand feet, and on any other street not less than five hundred feet. (Prior code § 10-2.10(a))

17.08.150 Standards and design – Lots and blocks.
A. Size of Lots. Each lot shall have a minimum average width of fifty feet, a minimum frontage of fifty feet on a public street as measured at the building line, a minimum area of five thousand square feet, and, in no case, less than the minimum sizes specified in the zoning regulations for the zone in which such lots are located. Corner lots shall have a minimum frontage of fifty-five feet on a public street as measured at the building line.

B. Blocks. Blocks shall ordinarily be two lot depths in width and not more than 1,400 feet in length.

C. Lot Side Lines. The side lines of all lots shall be at right angles or radial, as the case may be, to the streets on which the lots front.

D. Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots shall have a depth of not less than two hundred feet. (Prior code § 10-2.10(b))

17.08.160 Standards and designs – Easements.
Easements for public utilities, sewers, storm drains, or stormwater channels and slope rights shall be provided wherever deemed necessary by the city engineer. (Prior code § 10-2.10(c))

17.08.170 Improvements.
A. Any subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve, all streets, highways, alleys, ways or easements within or adjacent to the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage as a condition precedent to the acceptance thereof and the approval of the final, parcel or reversion to acreage map. Such improvements shall be installed at lines and grades and in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer, and such improvements shall include:

1. The grading and drainage necessary to proper use and to the public safety and designed to the satisfaction and approval of the city engineer;

2. Concrete curbs and gutters and storm drains and culverts;

3. Sidewalks of a width and quality suitable for the proposed land use;

4. A street roadway structural section, as determined by the city engineer, based on “R” value tests provided by the subdivider and approved by the city engineer. The street pavement shall not be less than four inches on arterial and major collector streets and not less than two inches for all other streets. The pavement shall be asphaltic concrete or other materials as approved by the city engineer. The thickness of the base course, after thorough compaction, shall be not less than six inches for arterial and major collector streets and not less than four inches for all other streets;

5. An alley roadway structural section, as determined by the city engineer, based on “R” value tests provided by the subdivider and approved by the city engineer. The alley pavement shall not be less than two inches in thickness. The pavement shall be asphaltic concrete or other materials as approved by the city engineer and shall be laid upon a base course of crushed aggregate or other selected material as approved by the city engineer. The thickness of the base course, after thorough compaction, shall be not less than four inches;

6. The radius of the curb return at street intersections shall be equal to the radius of the property line return, plus the distance from the curb to the property line, as measured on the intersecting street having the greater distance between the curb and property line;

7. Sanitary sewers and public utilities for each lot which shall be made available for each lot in such manner as will alleviate the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutters, curbs and sidewalks when service connections are made;

8. Street trees with spacing as required by the city engineer;

9. Street lights as required by the city engineer;

10. Permanent subdivision survey monuments as required by the city engineer; and

11. In addition to the minimum improvements required by this section, the planning and environmental quality commission may require, or the council on appeal may require, such additional improvements and facilities or such modifications in the standards of minimum improvements as special conditions may cause such bodies to make a special finding of need.

B. Before commencing the construction of any improvement required by this section, the subdivider shall have plans, profiles and cross-sections therefor prepared by a registered civil engineer. Such plans, profiles, and cross-sections shall be drawn in conformity with the standards prescribed by, and to the satisfaction and approval of, the city engineer. After such plans, profiles and cross-sections have been approved and signed by the city engineer, the subdivider shall file one set of original transparencies with the city engineer.

C. No final, parcel, or reversion to acreage map shall be presented for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into a contract agreement with the city to complete such improvements within a specified reasonable time after the approval and recordation of the map. Such contract agreement shall be secured in such amount as the city engineer shall estimate and determine will be necessary to complete all the improvements required to be done by the subdivider. If the subdivider is required to install improvements which contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage as a condition precedent to the approval of a map, and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public, the subdivider shall be reimbursed, by the terms of the contract agreement, for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage only and the actual cost of such improvements. (Prior code § 10-2.11)

17.08.180 Securities.
A. The securities required by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter shall be:

1. A bond or bonds issued by a surety company authorized to write the same in the state; and

2. A deposit with the city of cash, negotiable bonds, letters of credit, or savings and loan certificates or shares. Savings and loan certificates or shares shall be assigned to the city.

B. Each improvement security shall be subject to the approval of, and acceptance by, the city attorney and council.

C. When a portion of an improvement has been fully completed, the city engineer, in his discretion, may authorize a reduction in the improvement security given for faithful performance equal to the estimated cost of the completed portion of the improvement.

D. Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete an improvement within the time specified in the agreement, the council, upon a notice in writing of not less than ten days served upon the person, firm, or corporation signing the contract or upon a notice in writing of not less than twenty days served by registered mail, addressed to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation signing the contract, may determine that the improvement work, or any part thereof, is incomplete and may cause to be forfeited to the city the portion of the sum of money or bonds given for the faithful performance of the work or may cash savings and loan certificates or shares deposited and assigned to assure the faithful performance of the work to complete the improvement work. (Prior code § 10-2.12)

17.08.190 Tentative maps – Processing fees.
A. When a tentative map for a division of land, a reversion to acreage, a condominium, or a condominium conversion is filed for approval, a fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall be paid to the City for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the processing of such tentative map.

B. When an application to amend or modify a previously approved tentative map is filed, a fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall be paid to the City for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing such application. (Ord. 1629 § 12, 2003; prior code § 10-2.13)

17.08.200 Final, parcel and reversions to acreage maps – Processing fees.
The county surveyor’s office, by agreement with the city pursuant to Section 66431 of the Subdivision Map Act, performs certain of the services and duties charged by the Subdivision Map Act to the city engineer. For such services rendered by the county surveyor, the subdivider shall pay such proper and reasonable fees as may be determined by the county auditor-controller and approved by the board of supervisors, and such fees shall be collected by the county surveyor at the time of the filing of such final, parcel, or reversion to acreage map for the purpose of defraying the costs incurred by the county incidental to the processing thereof. (Prior code § 10-2.14)

17.08.210 Extensions of time – Processing fees.
When a request for an extension of time within which to comply with any requirement or condition imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is filed for approval, a fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the processing of such request. (Ord. 1629 § 13, 2003; prior code § 10-2.15)

17.08.220 Appeals – Processing fees.
When an appeal of any ruling, finding, determination or act imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is filed for approval, a fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the processing of such appeal. (Ord. 1629 § 14, 2003; prior code § 10-2.16)

17.08.230 Improvement plans – Processing fees.
After the improvement plans have been submitted to the city engineer for checking, and before the city engineer shall sign such plans, the subdivider shall deposit with the city clerk a sum of money equal to one percent of the estimated cost of the improvements delineated thereon. Such estimate of cost shall be as approved by the city engineer. The actual cost of reviewing, checking and correcting such improvement plans incurred by the city shall be paid from such deposit, and any unused portion of such deposit shall be returned to the depositor within thirty days after such improvement plans have been approved and signed by the city engineer. (Prior code § 10-2.17)

17.08.240 Certificate of compliance for the conversion of community apartment projects.
A. No parcel, tentative or final map shall be required for the conversion of a community apartment/stock cooperative to condominiums provided said conversion is in compliance with Government Code Sections 66412(g) or (h) and 66452.10 and a certificate of compliance is issued by the city engineer.

B. In addition to the requirements of the Government Code, the city engineer may attach conditions to the conversion and certificate of compliance if he deems it necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. (Prior code § 10-2.18)

17.08.250 Merger of parcels.
Except as is otherwise provided for in Title 17 of this code, two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which are held by the same owner, may be merged by the city pursuant to authority granted in Government Code Section 66451.10.

A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

“Contiguous” means touching or adjoining at more than one point. Property shall be considered contiguous even if it is separated by utility fees or easements or railroad rights-of-way.

“Merger” means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels or units of improved or unimproved land, which are held by the same owner or owners, into one building site pursuant to this section. Parcels or units may include land division or subdivision lots or portions thereof, assessor’s tax parcels, or lots or portions thereof created by deed.

B. Procedure. The community development director shall process merger of parcels in accordance with procedure prescribed in Government Code Section 66451.11 et seq., as follows:

1. Prior to recording a notice of merger, the community development director shall mail by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed with the Los Angeles County recorder.

2. At any time within thirty days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the community development department a request for a hearing on determination of status.

3. A request for hearing on determination of status by the affected property owner shall be set for a public hearing before the planning and environmental quality commission within sixty days following the receipt of the property owner’s request for the hearing.

4. At the conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall determine that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. A determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty days after conclusion of the hearing.

5. If, within the thirty-day period, specified in subsection (B)(2) of this section, the owner does not file a request for a hearing, the community development director may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded no later than ninety days following the mailing of notice specified in subsection (B)(1) of this section.

C. Recordation of Parcel Merger. The merger of parcels shall become effective when the community development director files with the Los Angeles County recorder a “Notice of Merger of Parcels/Certificate of Compliance” specifying the names of record owners and legal description of the affected parcels. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 1996)

17.08.260 Merger of parcels without reversion to acreage.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Government Code Section 66451.11, a request for merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership may be accomplished without reverting to acreage pursuant to authority in Government Code Section 66499.20 3/4.

A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the definitions provided in Section 17.08.250A of this code shall apply.

B. Procedure. Upon receipt of a request for merger of parcels, the community development director shall process the request to merge contiguous parcels held under common ownership, without reverting to acreage, provided the following conditions are met:

1. The request for merger is made by the owner of record of the contiguous parcels proposed to be merged;

2. The request for merger includes a plat map showing sufficient mathematical and survey information, and legal description to adequately establish the boundaries of the division of land to the satisfaction of the community development director;

3. A fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council has been paid to the city by the property owner requesting such merger for the purpose of defraying costs to process such request.

C. Recordation of Parcel Merger. The director shall approve such request for merger of parcels if the conditions set forth in this section are met and the merger complies with all applicable provisions of this code. Conditions related to the merger may be imposed as deemed necessary to carry out the intent of Title 17 of this code and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The merger of parcels shall become effective when the director files with the Los Angeles County recorder a “Notice of Merger of Parcels/Certificate of Compliance” specifying the names of record owners and legal description of the affected parcels. (Ord. 1501 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 17.12
CONDOMINIUMS AND STOCK COOPERATIVES
Sections:

17.12.010    Purpose.

17.12.020    Definitions.

17.12.030    Determination of vacancy rate and surplus.

17.12.040    Fees, requirements and procedures.

17.12.050    Inspections.

17.12.060    Planning and environmental quality commission and council action.

17.12.070    Map approval.

17.12.080    Certificates of use and occupancy.

17.12.090    Certificates of use and occupancy – Applications.

17.12.100    Certificates of use and occupancy – Issuance.

17.12.110    Additional requirements.

17.12.120    Advertising.

17.12.130    Severability.

17.12.010 Purpose.
Condominium ownership of property creates a unique distribution and/or aggregation of property rights and responsibilities among a number of persons which rights and responsibilities are not inherent in other types of property ownership, with particular effect on master plan concepts, elements of the general plan, and other related considerations. Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter:

A. To insure a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing in the city and a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price and location of housing and at the same time provide an additional mode of property ownership;

B. To maintain the supply of rental housing for low and moderate-income persons and families and to provide an additional mode of property ownership;

C. To reduce and avoid the displacement of long-term residents, particularly senior citizens and families with school-age children, who may be required to move from the community due to a shortage of replacement rental housing;

D. To encourage quality development which will not contribute to the deterioration of the neighborhood;

E. To encourage a development pattern based upon good land planning principles;

F. To insure that the conversion of existing developments to condominium ownership be consistent with the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the future occupants of the condominium;

G. The council finds that the conversion of existing apartment buildings into condominiums diminishes the supply of rental housing and displaces residents and will tend to require them to move outside the city when a housing shortage exists. The council finds and declares that when the number of vacant dwelling units in the city is equal to or less than three percent of the total number of dwelling units in the city, a housing shortage exists which is inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter and with the goals and policies set forth in the housing element of the general plan of the city; and

H. The council further determines that many of the considerations set forth with reference to condominium conversions apply to the transition of an existing apartment building into a stock cooperative and, therefore, determines that the provisions of this chapter shall be applied to stock cooperatives as set forth. (Prior code § 10-2.21)

17.12.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

A. A “condominium” or “condominium project” shall be that which is defined by Section 1351 of the Civil Code of the state, containing two or more condominiums, as defined in Section 783 of said code.

B. “Stock cooperative” means a stock cooperative as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy.

C. “Proposed condominium” refers to condominiums in which the units are not as yet constructed.

D. “Condominium conversion” shall refer to condominiums in which the existing units are being used as single or multiple-family residences or as an industrial or commercial building not divided into separate units.

E. Each unit in a condominium subdivision shall be considered as a parcel of land. A parcel consisting of common area only shall not be so defined.

F. “Building Official” means the community development director or his designated agent.

G. A condominium project, as the same is defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code of the state, which is divided into five or more condominium units shall be subject to the requirements and procedures applicable to subdivisions as generally set forth in Chapters 17.04 and 17.08 and to the additional requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter.

H. A condominium project, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code of the state, which is divided into four or less condominium units shall be subject to the requirements and procedures applicable to minor subdivisions as generally set forth in Chapters 17.04 and 17.08 and to the additional requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter.

I. “Division of land” includes in its meaning the division of airspace into condominium units.

J. “Developer” means the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the projects subject to this chapter or the person or organization making an application hereunder.

K. “Community apartment” or “community apartment project” means an apartment or an apartment project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of the exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. In this chapter all references to condominiums and condominium projects or stock cooperatives and stock cooperative projects shall also include community apartments and community apartment projects.

L. “Vacancy deficiency” means the number of vacant apartment units needed to raise the vacancy rate to three percent.

M. “Vacancy rate” means the number of apartments being offered for rent or lease in the city shown as a percentage of the total number of apartments offered for or under rental or lease agreement in the city.

N. “Vacancy surplus” means the number of vacant apartments being offered for rent or lease in excess of a three percent vacancy rate.

O. All other terms shall have the same definitions as set forth in applicable state laws relative to the subdivision of land and defined in other chapters of this title, unless otherwise specifically defined in this section. (Prior code § 10-2.22)

17.12.030 Determination of vacancy rate and surplus.
In December of each year, the community development director shall determine the vacancy rate and the vacancy surplus, if any, which shall apply for the entire year.

A. No application for the approval of a tentative tract or parcel map for a condominium or stock cooperative conversion shall be filed unless there is a vacancy surplus.

B. When there is a vacancy surplus as of the most recent determination, an application for the approval of a tentative tract or parcel map for a conversion may be filed with the community development department if the number of lots, parcels, units, or rights of exclusive occupancy proposed by all such filings does not exceed the vacancy surplus by more than ten percent. (Prior code § 10-2.22.1)

17.12.040 Fees, requirements and procedures.
The application in connection with the making of any condominium subdivision shall be the preparation of a tentative tract or parcel map, which shall be accompanied by the following: data, information and materials, a filing fee as set forth in Section 17.08.190 and all information required by this title pertaining to the filing of a tentative or parcel map for a project subject to the provisions of this chapter. Upon filing an application to convert existing apartments to a condominium or stock cooperative, a fee as established by City Council resolution to cover reviews and inspections conducted by the building division pursuant to the property and structural pest reports shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting such application. In addition to the other requirements of this title, such maps shall be accompanied by all of the following information:

A. The length of residency for each current household and the total number of persons currently residing on the premises;

B. The current rents for each unit, including the date and amount of the last two rent increases;

C. The approximate proposed sales price of each unit and the proposed budget for submission to the Real Estate Commissioner or a similar estimate of projected annual operating and maintenance fees or assessments;

D. A property report describing the condition and estimated useful life of all existing buildings, including foundation, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, roofing and structural elements, together with an estimated cost for repairs and replacements projected for the five years following conversion. Such report shall be prepared by a state registered engineer;

E. A structural pest report prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator pursuant to Section 8516 of the Business and Professions Code of the state relating to written reports on the absence or presence of wood-destroying pests or organisms;

F. A report showing the general layout and describing any facilities or amenities provided in common areas for the use and enjoyment of the unit owners;

G. Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit on the same lot with the main building shall be provided. Of these, one space ten feet wide by twenty feet long shall be enclosed and located in a garage, in a subterranean facility, or in an elevated parking structure; adequate improved ingress and egress shall be provided in accordance with city standards. Additionally, guest parking shall be provided as follows: one space for a two unit development; and for three units or more, at ten percent of the required parking, and where such percentage is below the halfway breakpoint, it will be rounded downward, and where such percentage is above the halfway breakpoint, it will be rounded upward. All guest parking spaces shall be clearly identified and easily accessible and not hindered by any mechanical or electronic devices or appurtenances; and

H. Any other information which, in the opinion of the community development director, will assist in determining whether the proposed project would be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1629 § 15, 2003; prior code § 10-2.23)

17.12.050 Inspections.
Upon the receipt of a property report and structural pest report, the building official shall cause an inspection to be made of all buildings and structures in the proposed condominium conversion or stock cooperative. The building official shall prepare an inspection report identifying all items in violation of the Uniform Housing Code and any additional equipment or facilities he determines to be deteriorated and hazardous. The initial inspection report shall be presented to the developer who shall correct all violations of the Uniform Housing Code and repair or replace any equipment or facilities determined to be deteriorated or hazardous by the property report or building division inspection.

The developer shall also repair or replace any damaged or infested area in need of repair or replacement as shown on the structural pest report. (Prior code § 10-2.23.1)

17.12.060 Planning and environmental quality commission and council action.
A. An application for a condominium conversion (or conversion of rental housing to a stock cooperative) shall not be granted or conditionally granted unless the planning and environmental quality commission and council determine that the conversion is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare and with the General Plan of the City and the Housing Element thereof. In making such determination, the Commission and Council may consider such factors relevant to the public health, safety, or welfare as appear in each particular case including, but not limited to, whether the proposed conversion, either of itself or when considered in conjunction with trends toward condominium conversion in the community, would result in:

1. A major displacement of tenants; or

2. A scarcity of rental units which would preclude the reasonable mobility of tenants and an increase in rental costs justified by any market force other than that of scarcity; or

3. A tendency to diminish planning goals which encourage open occupancy and promote low and moderate income housing; or

4. Vacancy factors indicative of a shortage of rental housing in the community.

B. In further consideration of the tentative or final map, the commission and council shall also consider those provisions set forth in Sections 66473.5 and 66474 of the Government Code of the state.

C. As a condition of approval, the applicant shall be required to pay relocation assistance in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.32 of this code. (Prior code § 10-2.24)

17.12.070 Map approval.
A tentative or final map may be approved, denied or conditionally approved based on the criteria set forth in this chapter, including the provisions of Section 17.12.060. (Prior code § 10-2.25)

17.12.080 Certificates of use and occupancy.
In addition to the requirements for map approval, even if applications (maps) are accepted and approved by the city, a developer shall obtain a certificate of use and occupancy prior to the sale, lease, use or occupancy of any building, unit or structure approved for a condominium conversion or a stock cooperative pursuant to this chapter. This is required in recognition of the general finding that deficient housing and deterioration has a detrimental effect on individuals, neighborhoods and the community and in further recognition of the special problems and concerns concomitant with transitions from an apartment dwelling to a condominium or stock cooperative, including, but not limited to:

A. Structural deficiencies of buildings subject to conversion or transition to a stock cooperative;

B. Unsuspecting condominium purchasers who are generally unprepared and perhaps unwilling to cope with significant repairs; and

C. Certain conditions and factors, such as noise, which constitute a substantial detriment to the more permanent owner-resident in contrast to the apartment dweller. (Prior code § 10-2.26)

17.12.090 Certificates of use and occupancy – Applications.
The application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be made to the building official. Such application shall include the following:

A. Any information updating or amending the property and structural pest reports previously submitted by the applicant with the application for tentative tract or parcel map approval. Such information shall include actions taken by the developer pursuant to any deficiencies or problems specified in the property and structural pest reports or building official’s inspection report; and

B. Proof of compliance with Section 66427.1 of the Government Code of the state regarding notices to tenants and tenants’ rights to purchase as set forth in said section. (Prior code § 10-2.27)

17.12.100 Certificates of use and occupancy – Issuance.
The building official shall cause a final inspection of all buildings and structures to be made prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The building official shall then mark the inspection report to show the corrections, repairs and replacements which have been made. The property report shall be presented by the developer to each prospective purchaser of any interest in a condominium or stock cooperative at least twenty days prior to the consummation of sale or exchange, which means the signing of final documents at the close of escrow. (Prior code § 10-2.28)

17.12.110 Additional requirements.
In addition to compliance with the provisions set forth in Sections 17.12.080 through 17.12.100 of this chapter, the following requirements shall be met as a condition to the granting of the certificate of use and occupancy:

A. Unless the building official finds that such would be impracticable, the consumption of gas and electricity within each dwelling unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each utility and a water shut-off valve shall be provided for each unit.

B. Unless determined to be impracticable by the building official, any specific factors which cause or contribute to undue noise or vibrations shall be corrected.

C. If all of the aforementioned conditions are met and satisfied, a certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted. (Prior code § 10-2.29)

17.12.120 Advertising.
A developer shall make no advertising use of such certificate of use and occupancy or the fact that such certificate has been issued. (Prior code § 10-2.30)

17.12.130 Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each part hereof, irrespective of the fact that any part hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Prior code § 10-2.31)

Chapter 17.16
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

17.16.010    Authority – Purpose.

17.16.020    Definitions and applicability.

17.16.030    Filing, processing and fees.

17.16.040    Development rights.

17.16.050    Development inconsistent with zoning – Conditional approval.

17.16.060    Applications inconsistent with current policies.

17.16.010 Authority – Purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state and may be cited as the “vesting tentative map law.”

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

To accomplish this purpose, the regulations set forth in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare and for the promotion of orderly growth and development.

No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan or not permitted by the zoning provisions or other applicable provisions of this Code. (Prior code § 10-2.32)

17.16.020 Definitions and applicability.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, “vesting tentative map” means a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined in Chapter 17.04, which map shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and which is thereafter processed in accordance with said provisions.

B. All other definitions set forth in Chapter 17.04 shall be applicable.

C. The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions of said sections.

D. If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Prior code § 10-2.33)

17.16.030 Filing, processing and fees.
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data, and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this chapter for a tentative map, except as follows:

A. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map.”

B. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a subdivider shall also supply specific architectural drawings containing the information set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this code.

C. Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required for the filing and processing of a tentative or parcel map.

D. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Prior code § 10-2.34)

17.16.040 Development rights.
A. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the laws, policies and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Government Code of the state.

However, if said Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the laws, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following is determined:

1. That a failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; or

2. That the condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal laws.

C. The rights referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in subsection D of Section 17.16.030. If the final map is approved, such rights shall last for the following periods of time:

1. An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map.

Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, such initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for such phase is recorded;

2. The initial time period set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review if such processing exceeds thirty days after the date a complete application is filed;

3. A subdivider may apply for a one year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal such denial to the council within fifteen days; and

4. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time set forth in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection, the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the expiration of such permit or any extension of such permit. (Prior code § 10-2.35)

17.16.050 Development inconsistent with zoning – Conditional approval.
A. Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning provisions in existence at that time, such inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning provisions to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning provisions is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of Section 17.16.040, shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning provisions and the map as approved.

B. The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in subsection C of Section 17.16.040. (Prior code § 10-2.36)

17.16.060 Applications inconsistent with current policies.
Notwithstanding any provision of Sections 17.16.010 through 17.16.050, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for developments which depart from the laws, policies and standards described in subsection A of Section 17.16.040 and subsection A of Section 17.16.050, and local agencies may grant such approvals or issue such permits to the extent the departures are authorized under applicable laws. (Prior code § 10-2.37)

Chapter 17.20
PARK AND RECREATION DEDICATION FEES
Sections:

17.20.010    Dedication of land for park and recreation purposes.

17.20.020    Standards for determinations.

17.20.030    Amount of land to be dedicated and/or amount of fees in lieu of land dedication.

17.20.040    Establishing the fair market value of land for calculating in lieu fees.

17.20.050    Payment of fees only.

17.20.060    Park site selection.

17.20.070    Credit for recreational improvements.

17.20.080    Limitations on use of land and fees.

17.20.090    Credit for private park amenities.

The City Council hereby finds that the establishment of the land dedication requirements and in lieu fees under this ordinance is statutorily and categorically exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”) because such establishment merely establishes a funding mechanism for the provision of future projects and, as such, this ordinance is not “an essential step culminating in action which may affect the environment” and environmental review under CEQA will be performed when projects funded by operation of this ordinance are chosen and defined. Kaufman & Broad-South Bay, Inc. v. Morgan Hill Unified School Dist., (1993) 9 Cal.App.4th 464. City staff is hereby directed to prepare and file a Notice of Exemption, under CEQA, within 5 working days of adoption of this ordinance. (Ord. 1642 § 3, 2003)

17.20.010 Dedication of land for park and recreation purposes.
A. In accordance with the City of Gardena General Plan including the Recreation Element of the Plan and in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410 et seq.) and specifically Government Code Section 66477, the City of Gardena does hereby require either the dedication of land, the payment of fees, or a combination of both for the park or recreational purposes as a condition of the approval of a tentative or parcel map for residential subdivisions.

B. The City also requires either the dedication of land, the payment of fees, or a combination of both for park or recreational purposes as a condition of the approval of a parcel map for a division of land not a subdivision for purposes of construction of a residential structure or structures.

C. Subdivisions containing less than five (5) parcels and not used for residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this section. A condition, however, shall be placed on the approval of such parcel map and if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four (4) years, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.020 Standards for determinations.
A. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all subdivisions for the purpose of residential development. This Ordinance does not apply to commercial or industrial subdivisions or to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five (5) years old when no new dwelling units are added.

B. The amount of land dedicated or fees paid shall be based upon the residential density, which shall be determined based on the approved or conditionally approved tentative or parcel map. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the average number of persons per household by units in a structure is the same as that disclosed by the most recent available federal census or a census taken pursuant to Chapter 17 (commencing with Section 40200) of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code.

C. Subdividers may offer evidence of the actual population densities of their proposed projects for determination by the City Council. The City Council shall consider the evidence submitted and if it finds that the actual population density will differ from the presumed density, it shall use the actual density to calculate the required land or in lieu fee. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.030 Amount of land to be dedicated and/or amount of fees in lieu of land dedication.
A. The dedication of land, or the payment of fees, or a combination of both shall be based on a minimum of three (3) acres of usable park area, as defined in this Ordinance, per 1000 persons residing within the subdivision.

B. The amount of land or the calculation of a fee in lieu of land to be dedicated by a subdivider in accordance with this Ordinance shall be calculated by the following formula:

1. Park and Recreation Formula:

A = .003 x (UP)

2. Definition of terms:

A = local park space obligation in acres

U = total number of approved dwelling units

P = population density per unit

.003 = total acreage standard of 3.0 acres per 1000 population

C. The city may accept combinations of land, recreational facilities and fees, with the respective amounts to be determined in the sole discretion of the city, so long as the aggregate fair market value of the land, recreational facilities and fees does not exceed the limits established in this chapter.

D. The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision.

E. Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be calculated in accordance with the formula and shall be based on the fair market value of the unimproved land to be subdivided. This shall be determined by multiplying the required acreage “A” by the land value per acre.

G. Fees shall by payable at the time of the recording of the final map or parcel map. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.040 Establishing the fair market value of land for calculating in lieu fees.
A. The fair market value of the unimproved land to be subdivided shall be established by one or a combination of the following methods:

1. The fair market value of the unimproved land can be determined by the use of accepted assessment practices and may be based on the current assessed value of adjustments, if necessary, to reflect current fair market value in accordance with the standards established by the practices of the County Assessor.

2. If the City Council or the developer objects to the valuation, either party may employ a recognized, qualified certified neutral real estate appraiser, at the developer’s expense, to obtain an appraisal of the property. The City Council or their designated representative shall be provided with a certified copy of the appraisal report in order to calculate and substantiate the in lieu fee.

3. The City Council and the developer may agree to a fair market value of the unimproved land through the use of a certified copy of the current escrow instructions establishing full purchase value, comparable sales record, or other mutually agreed procedures or methods.

B. A land valuation or appraisal shall be determined a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to map recordation. Written notice of the proposed valuation shall be provided by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the developer along with the City Council’s calculation under the above section.

C. Such notice shall be deemed served upon deposit in the United States mail. The developer may object to the assessed valuation and subsequent fee within thirty (30) days of service of the valuation notice. Such objection must be in writing and presented to the City Council by mail or in person at one of its regularly scheduled meetings. The City Council may object within thirty (30) days of service of the valuation notice by a resolution adopted by a majority of its members. If there are no objections made within thirty (30) days, all objections to the proposed value for use in calculating the in lieu fees are deemed waived. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.050 Payment of fees only.
Only the payment of fees may be required in subdivisions containing fifty (50) parcels or less, except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than fifty (50). (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.060 Park site selection.
The City Council shall determine if park space shall be provided and the design and location of such space and any amenities thereon. This determination shall be made in accordance with the principles and standards for local park and recreational facilities. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.070 Credit for recreational improvements.
If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land, the value of the improvements to the dedicated land or the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon shall be a credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this chapter. Excepting, however, that the subdivider and the City Council, upon recommendation of the Director of Community Development, must agree in advance and in writing with such expenditures based on current and verified prices and costs for such improvements and equipment. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.080 Limitations on use of land and fees.
A. Any park land or fees shall be received by the city and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used only for either acquiring land or developing new or rehabilitating existing park and recreational facilities that serve the area from which they were derived.

B. The City Council shall develop a schedule specifying how, when and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to provide park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. Any fees collected under this chapter shall be committed within five (5) years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they, without any deductions, shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

17.20.090 Credit for private park amenities.
A. Common interest developments as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, shall be eligible to receive a credit, as determined by the City Council, and in substantial accordance with the provisions of the Recreation Element of the Gardena General Plan, against the amount of land required to be dedicated, or the amount of fee imposed pursuant to this chapter, for the value of private open space within the development which is usable for active recreational uses.

B. The proposed private area for park and recreational purposes must provide that:

1. The private ownership and maintenance of the area is adequately provided for by written agreement, covenants and restrictions; and

2. The use of the private area is restricted for park and recreation purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the development and these covenants cannot be amended or eliminated without the consent of the city.

C. The City Council may adopt more specific guidelines and standards to be utilized in determining the actual percentage of credit that may be given for private park and recreational facilities in any proposed subdivision. Such guidelines and standards shall be adopted by Resolution of the City Council.

The City Council may by resolution adopt regulations regarding the administration of this chapter and establishing any procedures, interpretations and policies considered necessary or desirable to carry out this chapter. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2003)

Title 18
ZONING
Chapters:

18.02    Gardena Zoning Law

18.04    Definitions

18.06    New and Existing Uses

18.08    Establishment of Zones and Boundaries

18.10    Annexed Areas

18.12    Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1)

18.13    Accessory Dwelling Units

18.14    Low-Density Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-2)

18.16    Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-3)

18.18    High Density Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-4)

18.19    Mixed Use Overlay Zone (MU)

18.20    Commercial-Residential Zone (C-R)

18.22    Parking Zone (P)

18.24    Official Zone (O)

18.26    Business and Professional Office Zone (C-P)

18.28    Home Business Zone (H-B)

18.30    Commercial Zone (C-2)

18.32    General Commercial Zone (C-3)

18.34    Heavy Commercial Zone (C-4)

18.36    Industrial Zone (M-1)

18.38    General Industrial Zone (M-2)

18.39    Specific Plans

18.40    Off-Street Parking and Loading

18.42    General Provisions

18.43    Density Bonus and Other Incentives

18.44    Site Plan Review

18.46    Conditional Use Permits

18.48    Variances

18.50    Administrative Adjustments

18.52    Amendments

18.54    Administration and Enforcement

18.56    Home Occupation Permits

18.58    Signs

18.60    Temporary Use Permits

18.62    Adult-Oriented Businesses

18.64    Amusement Devices and Arcades

18.66    Cannabis Prohibition and Personal Cultivation Regulations/Permitting

18.68    Transportation Demand Management

18.70    Wireless Facilities

18.72    Appeals

Chapter 18.02
GARDENA ZONING LAW
Sections:

18.02.010    Title.

18.02.020    Purposes.

18.02.030    Continuation of prior regulations.

18.02.040    Violations constitute public nuisances.

18.02.010 Title.
This title shall be known as the “zoning law of the city of Gardena.” (Prior code § 10-3.101)

18.02.020 Purposes.
The purposes of this title are to encourage, classify, designate, regulate, restrict and segregate the highest and best location and use of buildings and structures for residence, commerce, trade, industry, water conservation or other purposes in appropriate places; to regulate and limit the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures erected or altered; to regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; to provide for adequate off-street parking and loading spaces; and for such purposes to divide the city into zones of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement. Further, such regulations are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air; to prevent and fight fires; to prevent undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion on streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities, such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. (Prior code § 10-3.102)

18.02.030 Continuation of prior regulations.
The provisions of this title shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments. The reenacting of these provisions shall not constitute a validation of any use not conforming to the zone in which it is located. (Prior code § 10-3.103)

18.02.040 Violations constitute public nuisances.
Any building or structure constructed, erected, altered, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, any property used contrary to the provisions of this title, any failure to comply with any condition attached to the granting of any permit, variance, conditional use or any other permit provided for in this title and the use of property inconsistent with or in violation of any provision of this title shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance and a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.104)

Chapter 18.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

18.04.005    Definitions.

18.04.010    Accessory building.

18.04.015    Accessory use.

18.04.020    Alley.

18.04.022    Antique store.

18.04.025    Apartment.

18.04.030    Apartment hotel.

18.04.035    Apartment house.

18.04.040    Automobile service station.

18.04.043    Bachelor/efficiency unit.

18.04.045    Automobile repair facility.

18.04.050    Basement.

18.04.055    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.04.060    Repealed by Ord. 1737.

18.04.065    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.04.070    Building.

18.04.075    Building area.

18.04.080    Building height.

18.04.085    Building line.

18.04.087    Building supply center.

18.04.090    Building site.

18.04.095    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.04.100    Business or commerce.

18.04.103    Car wash facility.

18.04.105    Carport.

18.04.106    Check cashing.

18.04.107    Urgent care center.

18.04.110    Club.

18.04.112    Cluster development.

18.04.115    Collection facility.

18.04.120    Commission/planning commission.

18.04.125    Community care facility.

18.04.130    Condominium.

18.04.133    Contractor business.

18.04.135    Day care facility.

18.04.140    Day care home, family.

18.04.143    Density.

18.04.145    Duplex.

18.04.150    Dwelling.

18.04.155    Dwelling, multiple.

18.04.160    Dwelling, one-family.

18.04.163    Dwelling, accessory unit.

18.04.165    Dwelling, two-family.

18.04.170    Dwelling unit.

18.04.175    Educational institution.

18.04.178    Emergency shelter.

18.04.180    Family.

18.04.182    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.04.185    Floor area.

18.04.190    Floor area ratio (FAR).

18.04.195    Repealed by Ord. 1804.

18.04.197    Deleted.

18.04.200    Garage, private.

18.04.205    Deleted.

18.04.210    Repealed by Ord. 1737.

18.04.215    Group care facility.

18.04.220    Guest room.

18.04.222    Health club.

18.04.225    Health facility.

18.04.230    Home or hobby occupation.

18.04.235    Hospital.

18.04.240    Hotel.

18.04.242    Internet cafe.

18.04.245    Kitchen.

18.04.247    Laboratory, medical and dental.

18.04.248    Laundromat, self service.

18.04.250    Loading space.

18.04.255    Lodginghouse.

18.04.260    Lot.

18.04.265    Lot area.

18.04.270    Lot, corner.

18.04.273    Lot coverage.

18.04.275    Lot, cul-de-sac.

18.04.280    Lot depth.

18.04.285    Lot, interior.

18.04.290    Lot, key.

18.04.295    Lot line, front.

18.04.300    Lot line, rear.

18.04.305    Lot line, side.

18.04.310    Lot, reversed corner.

18.04.315    Lot, through.

18.04.320    Lot width.

18.04.325    Main building.

18.04.330    Mall.

18.04.335    Mall building, covered.

18.04.338    Massage establishment.

18.04.339    Medical and dental offices and clinics.

18.04.340    Mobile home.

18.04.345    Mobile home park.

18.04.350    Mini-market.

18.04.355    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.04.360    Motel.

18.04.361    Motor vehicle dealership.

18.04.363    Neighborhood market.

18.04.365    Nonconforming building.

18.04.370    Nonconforming use.

18.04.372    Repealed by Ord. 1737.

18.04.373    Open space.

18.04.374    Deleted.

18.04.375    Parking area, public.

18.04.380    Parking space, automobile.

18.04.382    Pawn shop.

18.04.385    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.04.387    Pharmacy.

18.04.390    Processing facility.

18.04.395    Recyclable material.

18.04.400    Recycling facility.

18.04.402    Residential group facility.

18.04.405    Reverse vending machine.

18.04.410    Roominghouse.

18.04.412    Second hand store and/or thrift shops.

18.04.413    Self-storage facility.

18.04.415    Semi-subterranean parking structure.

18.04.420    Site plan.

18.04.422    Spa facilities.

18.04.425    Story.

18.04.430    Street.

18.04.435    Street line.

18.04.440    Street, side.

18.04.445    Structural alteration.

18.04.450    Structure.

18.04.453    Supermarket.

18.04.454    Supportive housing.

18.04.455    Swap meet.

18.04.460    Trailer, automobile.

18.04.465    Trailer park.

18.04.470    Transient.

18.04.471    Deleted.

18.04.472    Transitional housing.

18.04.475    Use.

18.04.476    Warehouse.

18.04.478    Wireless telecommunications facility.

18.04.480    Yard.

18.04.485    Yard, front.

18.04.490    Yard, rear.

18.04.495    Yard, side.

18.04.005 Definitions.
The words, terms, and phrases used in this title shall have the meaning usually ascribed to them or as defined or used in the planning law of the state. For the purposes of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used in this title are defined in this chapter. (Prior code § 10-3.201)

18.04.010 Accessory building.
“Accessory building” means a building, part of a building, or structure which is detached from and subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building, structure, or use on the same lot. Where an accessory building is a part of or joined to the main building, such accessory building shall be counted as part of the main building. (Ord. 1804 § 2(A), 2019: prior code § 10-3.202)

18.04.015 Accessory use.
“Accessory use” means a use ancillary, incidental, appropriate, subordinate and devoted exclusively to the main use of the lot or building on such lot. (Ord. 1804 § 2(C), 2019)

18.04.020 Alley.
“Alley” means a public way permanently reserved as a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property. (Prior code § 10-3.204)

18.04.022 Antique store.
“Antique store” means a place used for the sale or trading of articles, which are over fifty (50) years old or have collectible values. Antique shop does not include “second hand store”. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 2004)

18.04.025 Apartment.
“Apartment” means a room or suite of two or more rooms in a multiple dwelling, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family. (Prior code § 10-3.205)

18.04.030 Apartment hotel.
“Apartment hotel” means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or containing a combination of six or more guest rooms or suites of rooms and three or more dwelling units. (Prior code § 10-3.206)

18.04.035 Apartment house.
“Apartment house” means the same as “multiple dwelling.” (See Section 18.04.155) (Prior code § 10-3.207)

18.04.040 Automobile service station.
“Automobile service station” means any facility where the primary use is the retail sale and dispensing of motor vehicle fuel; it may include an on-site mini-market and self-service automobile washing facility. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 1, 2004: prior code § 10-3.208)

18.04.043 Bachelor/efficiency unit.
“Bachelor/efficiency unit” shall mean an independent residential unit of at least 450 square feet, permitted in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1, and consisting of living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation facilities. With the exception of sanitation facilities, all amenities are provided in a single room. (Ord. 1640 § 1 (part), 2003)

18.04.045 Automobile repair facility.
“Automobile repair facility” means any facility used for the repair, alteration, restoration, maintenance, body and fender, painting of passenger vehicles and motorcycles, including but not limited to: fluid replacement and lubrication, tune-up and muffler work, parts and tire sales and installation, wheel and brake work, engine and transmission repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, smog check, wheel alignment, and installation of automobile accessories such as glass, upholstery, radios, and alarm systems. This classification excludes automobile wrecking, or storage of vehicles. (Ord. 1666 § 2, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 2, 2004: prior code § 10-3.209)

18.04.050 Basement.
“Basement” means a space wholly or partly underground and having one-half or more of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement, when designed for or occupied by dwellings, business, or manufacturing, shall be considered to be a story. (Prior code § 10-3.210)

18.04.070 Building.
“Building” means a permanently located structure having a roof (all forms of vehicles are excluded). “Building,” as used in this title, shall include the word “structure.” (Prior code § 10-3.214)

18.04.075 Building area.
“Building area” means the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot. (Prior code § 10-3.215)

18.04.080 Building height.
“Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the lowest portion of the building that is above ground to the highest point of the roof, exclusive of the exceptions to building height permitted by this title. (Ord. 1804 § 2(D), 2019: Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1673 § 2, 2005; prior code § 10-3.216)

18.04.085 Building line.
“Building line” means a line parallel with a lot line or planned street line and separated therefrom by the depth of the required yard. (Prior code § 10-3.217)

18.04.087 Building supply center.
“Building supply center” means any facility engaged in retail or wholesale sales and leasing or rental of building supplies, tools, and equipment. This classification includes lumber and other building materials yards, tool and equipment sales, leasing and rental yards, but excludes retail sales of paint and hardware. (Ord. 1666 § 3, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 3, 2004)

18.04.090 Building site.
“Building site” means the ground area of a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces and off-street parking and loading facilities required by this title. (Prior code § 10-3.218)

18.04.100 Business or commerce.
“Business or commerce” means the purchase, sale, or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings, office recreational or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use of offices by professions and trades rendering services. (Prior code § 10-3.220)

18.04.103 Car wash facility.
“Car wash facility” means any building, structure, improvement or land principally used for washing motor vehicles. (Ord. 1666 § 4, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 4, 2004)

18.04.105 Carport.
“Carport” means covered motor vehicle parking structure accessory to residential units. It may be freestanding or attached to another structure and must be entirely open on at least two sides except for structural supports. (Ord. 1738 § 4 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.221)

18.04.106 Check cashing.
“Check cashing” means a business whose primary purpose is to provide services such as check cashing and deferred deposit transactions. This includes check cashers, payday advance businesses and other business regulated by the State of California’s Check Casher Permit Program, per the California Civil Code, Section 1789.30 et seq. Check cashing facility does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company. Check cashing facility also does not include a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers that cash checks or issue money orders for minimum flat fee not exceeding two dollars ($2.00) as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or business. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 2004)

18.04.107 Urgent care center.
“Urgent care center” means an establishment that provides outpatient diagnostic services and emergency medical care, including minor outpatient surgical procedures for ambulatory patients. Such establishment is staffed by any licensed member of the healing arts as provided in Section 18.04.339 of this code, as well as members of the nursing profession, engaged in providing services and care to patients. (Ord. 1517 § 1, 1997)

18.04.110 Club.
“Club” means an association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. The designation “legal card club” is specifically excluded. (Prior code § 10-3.222)

18.04.112 Cluster development.
“Cluster development” means a multifamily development of three or more buildings or separate units which are enclosed within a gated community or which have nontraditional orientations away from the public street, such as buildings facing each other with interior courtyards. (Ord. 1804 § 2(E), 2019)

18.04.115 Collection facility.
“Collection facility” means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power driven processing equipment except as indicated below. Collection facilities may include small collection facilities or large collection facilities. Small collection facilities are those facilities which occupy an area of not more than five hundred square feet, and may include: a mobile unit; reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty square feet per site; kiosk type units which may include permanent structures; or unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials. Large collection facilities shall mean those facilities which occupy an area of more than five hundred square feet and may include permanent structures. (Ord. 1738 § 4 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.222.1)

18.04.120 Commission/planning commission.
“Commission” or “planning commission” means the planning and environmental quality commission of the city. (Ord. 1738 § 4 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.223)

18.04.125 Community care facility.
“Community care facility” means any state-licensed facility, place or building that is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children, adults or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally disordered, or incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, and includes those facilities and programs described in Health and Safety Code Section 1502 et seq. as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1737 § 14 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.223.1)

18.04.130 Condominium.
“Condominium” means a form of ownership consisting of an estate in real property composed of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in airspace in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such parcel of real property, such as an apartment, office or store. Such estate may be owned in fee, may be life estate, or may be an estate for years, such as a leasehold or subleasehold (subsection 783 of the Civil Code of the state). A condominium project is a subdivision under the Subdivision Map Act of the state. (Section 66424 of the Government Code of the state) (Prior code § 10-3.223.2)

18.04.133 Contractor business.
“Contractor business” means any premises used or operated by a contractor licensed by the state of California for the purpose of conducting administrative activities along with the incidental storing, maintaining, servicing, distributing, or dispatching of supplies, materials, vehicles, equipment, tools commonly used or required by a contractor’s business. (Ord. 1666 § 6, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 6, 2004)

18.04.135 Day care facility.
“Day care facility” means any group of buildings, building or portion thereof used primarily for the daytime regular care, protection and supervision of children at any location other than their normal place of residence, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. Day care facilities shall include nursery schools. (Ord. 1550 § 1, 1998: prior code § 10-3.223.3)

18.04.140 Day care home, family.
“Family day care home” means a home which regularly provides care, protection and supervision for fourteen or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while their parents or guardians are away, and includes the following:

A. “Large family day care home” means a home that provides family day care to seven to fourteen children, inclusive, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 1597.465 and as defined in regulations issued by the state of California. Large day care family homes shall be permitted in all residential zones subject to approval of a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 18.56.

B. “Small family day care home” means a home that provides family day care to eight or fewer children, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 1597.44 and as defined in regulations issued by the state of California. Small family day care homes shall be considered a residential use of property and shall be a permitted use in all zones in which residential uses are permitted. (Ord. 1738 § 4 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.223.4)

18.04.143 Density.
“Density” means the number of units per acre based on gross acreage. (Ord. 1804 § 2(F), 2019)

18.04.145 Duplex.
“Duplex” means the same as “two-family dwelling.” (See Section 18.04.165.) (Prior code § 10-3.224)

18.04.150 Dwelling.
“Dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied exclusively for residential purposes, with the exception of permitted home occupations, including one-family, two-family, and multiple dwellings, but not including hotels, boardinghouses, and lodginghouses. (Prior code § 10-3.225)

18.04.155 Dwelling, multiple.
“Multiple dwelling” means a residential building, or portions thereof, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as more than two separate living quarters, with each living quarter having separate kitchen, sleeping, and bathroom facilities for the exclusive use of a single family or household. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.226)

18.04.160 Dwelling, one-family.
“One-family dwelling” means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family, including guests and servants employed on the premises and having but one kitchen. (Prior code § 10-3.227)

18.04.163 Dwelling, accessory unit.
“Accessory dwelling unit” or “accessory unit” shall mean an attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities on the same parcel of land as the single-family dwelling. “Accessory dwelling units” includes efficiency units as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1 and manufactured homes as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007. (Ord. 1778 § 1, 2017: Ord. 1640 § 1 (part), 2003)

18.04.165 Dwelling, two-family.
“Two-family dwelling” means a residential building under one roof designed for or occupied for separate living quarters by two families or households living independently of each other and having separate kitchen, sleeping and bathroom facilities. Two-family dwellings are the same as a duplex. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.228)

18.04.170 Dwelling unit.
“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a residential building designed or occupied or intended for occupancy by one household or family as living quarters and having only one kitchen. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.229)

18.04.175 Educational institution.
“Educational institution” means public, parochial and other nonprofit institutions conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary, secondary and collegiate levels, including graduate schools, universities and nonprofit research institutions. Such institutions shall either:

A. Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education; or

B. Confer degrees as a college, university, undergraduate, or graduate standing; or

C. Conduct research.

This definition shall not include schools, academies, or institutes, incorporated or otherwise, which operate for a profit, nor shall it include commercial or trade schools. (Prior code § 10-3.230)

18.04.178 Emergency shelter.
“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of no more than six months by a homeless person. (Ord. 1737 § 10, 2012)

18.04.180 Family.
“Family” means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a group not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, not including a sorority, fraternity, club or group of persons occupying a hotel, lodging house or institution. (Ord. 1737 § 13, 2012: prior code § 10-3.231)

18.04.185 Floor area.
“Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, excluding areas used for accessory garage purposes and such basement and cellar areas as are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the building. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls, including walls or other enclosures of enclosed porches. Wherever the term “floor area” is used in this title as a basis for requiring off-street parking, it shall be assumed that, unless otherwise stated, such floor area applies not only to the ground floor area but also to any additional stories and/or basement of such structure. (Prior code § 10-3.232)

18.04.190 Floor area ratio (FAR).
“Floor area ratio” means the numerical value obtained by dividing the total floor area of all buildings located on a lot or parcel of land by the total area of such lot or parcel of land. In calculating the floor area ratio, the measurements for all structures shall be from outside wall to outside wall, using the gross square footage; provided, that for multifamily dwellings and condominiums any garage area, private street, private access way, uncovered patio, porch, or balcony, and any uncovered common recreation area including swimming pools shall be excluded from the FAR calculation. In calculating the total land area, no portion of any street, alley or right of way dedication/easement shall be included. (Ord. 1804 § 2(G), 2019: Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.232.1)

18.04.200 Garage, private.
“Private garage” means an accessory building or portion of the main building designed for the parking or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.234)

18.04.215 Group care facility.
“Group care facility” means twenty-four-hour residential facilities authorized, certified or licensed by the state to provide medical or nonmedical care for seven or more individuals such as children, the elderly, mentally disordered persons, developmentally disabled persons, or otherwise handicapped persons. These facilities include, but are not limited to, rest homes, convalescent homes, group homes, residential facilities for the chronically ill, residential care facilities for the elderly, alcoholism/drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities, and skilled nursing facilities and community care facilities for residential care, but excluding those uses classified under hospitals. (Ord. 1737 § 14 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.235.2)

18.04.220 Guest room.
“Guest room” means a room which is designed to be occupied by not more than four guests for sleeping purposes. (Prior code § 10-3.236)

18.04.222 Health club.
“Health club” means a place of business with equipment and facilities for exercising, improving physical fitness, improving overall physical well-being and relaxation. Businesses with spa facilities shall be considered health clubs. (Ord. 1714 § 2(A), 2010)

18.04.225 Health facility.
“Health facility” means an establishment engaged in outpatient treatment of a specialized nature with permanent facilities and medical staff to provide diagnosis, treatment, or both for ambulatory patients. Such establishments include but are not limited to alcohol and drug addiction treatment clinic, biofeedback clinic, family planning clinic, mental health clinic, medical rehabilitation center, respiratory therapy clinic, health screening services facility, blood bank, and sperm bank. (Ord. 1517 § 2, 1997: prior code § 10-3.236.1)

18.04.230 Home or hobby occupation.
“Home or hobby occupation” means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which use does not change the character thereof and does not adversely affect the uses in the zone of which it is a part. Home occupations shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.56 of this code. (Prior code § 10-3.237)

18.04.235 Hospital.
“Hospital” means an establishment primarily engaged in providing diagnostic services, medical treatment including surgical services, and other inpatient medical services. Such establishment has an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide health care. “Hospital” includes but is not limited to a psychiatric hospital, rehabilitation hospital, cancer hospital, children’s hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, and orthopedic hospital. (Ord. 1804 § 2(I), 2019: Ord. 1517 § 3, 1997: prior code § 10-3.238)

18.04.240 Hotel.
“Hotel” means any building or portion of any building with access provided through a common entrance, lobby or hallway to six or more guest rooms, and which rooms are designed, intended to be used, or are used, rented or hired out as accommodations for guests. (Prior code § 10-3.239)

18.04.242 Internet cafe.
“Internet cafe” shall mean a place of business whose primary purpose is to provide Internet access to the public through use of a computer or other electronic device. (Ord. 1738 § 4 (part), 2012)

18.04.245 Kitchen.
“Kitchen” means any room used for, intended for, or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food. (Prior code § 10-3.240)

18.04.247 Laboratory, medical and dental.
“Medical and dental laboratory” means an establishment primarily engaged in providing professional analytic or diagnostic services to the medical or dental profession, or to the patient on order of a licensed medical or dental practitioner, or establishment primarily engaged in making devices for patients on order of a licensed medical or dental practitioner. (Ord. 1517 § 4, 1997)

18.04.248 Laundromat, self service.
“Self-service laundromat” means any establishment open to the public where coin-operated washing machines and dryers are provided for the washing and drying of personal clothing and household items such as towels, bed sheets and blankets. (Ord. 1666 § 8, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 8, 2004)

18.04.250 Loading space.
“Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, that is delineated for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which loading space has access to a street or alley. A loading space shall be so arranged that it will not impede traffic circulation within the parking area, will not require commercial vehicles to back onto a public street/alley and will not block parking stalls. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.241)

18.04.255 Lodginghouse.
“Lodginghouse” means a building with at least three guest rooms where, for compensation, lodging is provided with or without meals. “Lodginghouse” includes recovery houses or other similar facilities providing group living arrangements for persons recovering from alcoholism or drug addiction where the facility provides no care or supervision, unless such persons are functioning as a family. (Ord. 1737 § 14 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.242)

18.04.260 Lot.
“Lot” means:

A. A parcel of land which is shown as a lot in a subdivision approved pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or

B. A parcel of real property, the dimensions and boundaries of which are defined by a recorded record of survey map; or

C. A parcel of real property shown on a parcel map, recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or

D. A parcel of real property lawfully created and dimensioned prior to January 14, 1954. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.243)

18.04.265 Lot area.
“Lot area” means the total area within the lot lines of a lot. No portion of any street, alley, right-of-way or future dedication or easement abutting a lot line shall be included in the computation of lot area. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.244)

18.04.270 Lot, corner.
“Corner lot” means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees. (Prior code § 10-3.245)

18.04.273 Lot coverage.
“Lot coverage” means that amount of land area on the lot or parcel of land, which is occupied by structures or buildings. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.04.275 Lot, cul-de-sac.
“Cul-de-sac lot” means a lot fronting on, or with more than one-half its width fronting on, the turnaround end of a cul-de-sac street. (Prior code § 10-3.246)

18.04.280 Lot depth.
“Lot depth” means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. (Prior code § 10-3.247)

18.04.285 Lot, interior.
“Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot. (Prior code § 10-3.248)

18.04.290 Lot, key.
“Key lot” means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot and not separated therefrom by an alley. (Prior code § 10-3.249)

18.04.295 Lot line, front.
“Front lot line” means, in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the front lot line. (Prior code § 10-3.250)

18.04.300 Lot line, rear.
“Rear lot line” means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a depth of not less than ten feet. (Prior code § 10-3.251)

18.04.305 Lot line, side.
“Side lot line” means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. (Prior code § 10-3.252)

18.04.310 Lot, reversed corner.
“Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the lot upon which it rears. (Prior code § 10-3.253)

18.04.315 Lot, through.
“Through lot” mean a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. (Prior code § 10-3.254)

18.04.320 Lot width.
“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the building line. (Prior code § 10-3.255)

18.04.325 Main building.
“Main building” means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot as provided in this title. (Prior code § 10-3.256)

18.04.330 Mall.
“Mall” is a roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a covered mall building which serves as access for two or more tenants and may have three levels that are open to each other. (Prior code § 10-3.256.01)

18.04.335 Mall building, covered.
“Covered mall building” means a single building enclosing a number of tenants and occupancies such as retail stores, dining and food service establishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, and other similar uses wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance into one or more covered malls. The term includes “shopping mall,” “merchandise mart,” “indoor mart,” “fashion mart,” “galleria,” and similar words and phrases commonly used to describe general retail sales activities in a covered mall. For purposes of this section, gross leasable area is the total floor designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use. The area of tenant occupancy is measured from the center lines of joint partitions to the outside of the tenant walls. All tenant areas, including areas used for storage, shall be included in calculating gross leasable area. (Prior code § 10-3.256.02)

18.04.338 Massage establishment.
“Massage establishment” shall have the same meaning as that set forth in Section 5.48.020. (Ord. 1738 § 4 (part), 2012: Ord. 1487 § 4, 1995)

18.04.339 Medical and dental offices and clinics.
“Medical and dental offices and clinics” means the facilities of any licensed member of the healing arts as set forth in the California Business and Professions Code, engaged in the practice of general or specialized medicine (M.D.), specialized osteopathic medicine or surgery (D.O.), chiropractic medicine (D.C.), optometry (O.D.), podiatry (D.P.), as well as those of any licensed member of the dental profession engaged in general or specialized dentistry (D.M.D. or D.D.S), and other licensed health practitioners, including but not limited to acupuncturists, audiologists, psychotherapists, dental hygienists, dietitians, occupational therapists, physical therapists, psychologists, and speech pathologists. (Ord. 1517 § 5, 1997)

18.04.340 Mobile home.
“Mobile home” means a detached residential dwelling structure on a permanent chassis produced in a factory and transported to the site where it is placed on a permanent or temporary foundation and connected to the necessary utilities. (Prior code § 10-3.256.1)

18.04.345 Mobile home park.
“Mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where two or more mobile home lots are rented or leased to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. The rental paid for any such mobile home shall be deemed to include the rental for the lot it occupies. (Prior code § 10-3.256.2)

18.04.350 Mini-market.
“Mini-market” means any small retail store selling a broad array of grocery and household products and staples, operated in conjunction with a service station. (Ord. 1666 § 9, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 9, 2004: prior code § 10-3.256.3)

18.04.360 Motel.
“Motel” means a group of attached or detached buildings containing guest rooms or sleeping rooms, some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building with garage attached or automobile parking space conveniently located on the lot or parcel of land, and which is designed, used or intended to be used for the accommodation of automobile travelers or tourists. Motels shall include motor inns, motor lodges, auto courts, tourist courts and similar designations. (Prior code § 10-3.257)

18.04.361 Motor vehicle dealership.
“Motor vehicle dealership” means any business establishment, which sells or leases new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats or motorcycles or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. (Ord. 1666 § 10, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 10, 2004)

18.04.363 Neighborhood market.
“Neighborhood market” means any small retail market selling a full range of food and household products, which may include meat, dairy, produce, dry goods and beverages, in 7,500 – 10,000 square feet tenant space or building. (Ord. 1666 § 11, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 11, 2004)

18.04.365 Nonconforming building.
“Nonconforming building” means a building, or portion thereof, which was lawfully constructed or structurally altered in accordance with the zoning regulations of the city in effect at the time of construction or alteration, but which does not conform to current regulations contained in this title. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.258)

18.04.370 Nonconforming use.
“Nonconforming use” means use of a building, land, or improvement, which was lawfully established in conformance with the zoning regulations of the city in effect at the time the use was established, but which does not comply with one or more of the regulations currently applicable to the zone in which the use is located. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.258)

18.04.373 Open space.
“Open space” means an unobstructed portion of a lot which is usable for active or passive recreational and leisure use. (Ord. 1804 § 2(J), 2019)

18.04.375 Parking area, public.
“Public parking area” means an open area, other than a street, alley, or place, used for the temporary parking of automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers. (Prior code § 10-3.262)

18.04.380 Parking space, automobile.
“Automobile parking space” means a space within a building or public parking area for the temporary parking or storage of one automobile, exclusive of streets, alleys, driveways, aisles and the area of ingress or egress. (Ord. 1804 § 2(K), 2019: prior code § 10-3.263)

18.04.382 Pawn shop.
“Pawn shop” means a place in which the business of a pawnbroker is conducted. “Pawnbroker” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Financial Code Section 21000 as the same may be amended from time to time. Pawnbroker is any person engaged in the business of receiving goods, including motor vehicles in pledge as security for a loan. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 2004)

18.04.387 Pharmacy.
“Pharmacy” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of federal and state authorized prescription drugs and nonprescription medicines, and which may also carry a number of additional items, such as cosmetics, toiletries, tobacco, and novelty merchandise. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1517 § 7, 1997)

18.04.390 Processing facility.
“Processing facility” means a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include light processing facilities and heavy processing facilities. Light processing facility shall mean a facility which occupies an area of under forty-five thousand square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. Heavy processing facility shall mean any processing facility other than a light processing facility. (Prior code § 10-3.264.1)

18.04.395 Recyclable material.
“Recyclable material” means reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code. (Prior code § 10-3.264.2)

18.04.400 Recycling facility.
A “recycling facility” is a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirement of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by the residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include small collection facilities, large collection facilities, or processing facilities. (Prior code § 10-3.264.3)

18.04.402 Residential group facility.
“Residential group facility” means any type of residential facility which, by state law, is required to be treated as a residential use of property when serving six or fewer persons. (Ord. 1737 § 14 (part), 2012)

18.04.405 Reverse vending machine.
“Reverse vending machine” means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. (Prior code § 10-3.264.4)

18.04.410 Roominghouse.
“Roominghouse” means the same as “lodginghouse or roominghouse.” (See Section 18.04.255) (Prior code § 10-3.266)

18.04.412 Second hand store and/or thrift shops.
“Second hand store” and/or “thrift shop” means a profit or non-profit business or organization that engages in, or specializes in, the sale or resale of second hand merchandise or goods, and whose goods may be principally donated or sold on consignment. This classification does not include antique stores. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 2004)

18.04.413 Self-storage facility.
“Self-storage facility” means a structure or group of structures containing generally small, compartmentalized storage places or lockers which are rented or leased to individuals or businesses, who have direct access to such spaces for the purpose of storing personal or business property. (Ord. 1666 § 13, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 13, 2004)

18.04.415 Semi-subterranean parking structure.
“Semi-subterranean parking structure” means a structure not used for occupancy but primarily for parking purposes which structure is totally or partially below grade. “Grade” means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.

A semi-subterranean parking structure shall not be considered a story, except if said structure is partially or totally above grade, additional side and rear yard setbacks will be required. (Prior code § 10-3.267.1)

18.04.420 Site plan.
“Site plan” means a plan, prepared to scale, showing all of the uses proposed for a specific property. The plan shall show clearly and with full dimensioning all buildings, building heights, spaces between buildings, off-street parking and loading spaces, points of ingress and egress, walls, fences, landscaping features, and any additional information which may be deemed necessary by the community development director to clearly define the intended use of the property and determine its conformity with the provisions of this title and any conditions imposed in connection with a variance or conditional use permit. (Ord. 1804 § 2(L), 2019: prior code § 10-3.269)

18.04.422 Spa facilities.
“Spa facilities” means facilities such as mineral baths, salt rooms, mineral rooms, saunas, steam rooms, whirlpools and other therapeutic baths. This list is meant to be illustrative. (Ord. 1714 § 2(B), 2010)

18.04.425 Story.
“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any one floor and the floor next above it or, if there shall be no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. (Prior code § 10-3.270)

18.04.430 Street.
“Street” means a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords principal means of access to abutting property. (Prior code § 10-3.271)

18.04.435 Street line.
“Street line” means the boundary line between the street and abutting property. (Prior code § 10-3.272)

18.04.440 Street, side.
“Side street” means that street bounding a corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot. (Prior code § 10-3.273)

18.04.445 Structural alteration.
“Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, floor joists or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. (Prior code § 10-3.274)

18.04.450 Structure.
“Structure” means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which work requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including billboards and outdoor advertising structures, and excluding outdoor areas, such as patios, paved areas, walks, swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas, fences or walls used as fences six feet or less in height. (Prior code § 10-3.275)

18.04.453 Supermarket.
“Supermarket” means a large retail market or store selling a wide range of food and beverage and household items. Included within the premises of a supermarket may be a bakery, butcher shop, flower shop, coffee shop, financial institution, pharmacy, and video rental shop. (Ord. 1666 § 14, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 14, 2004)

18.04.454 Supportive housing.
“Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by the target population as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14 and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. (Ord. 1737 § 14 (part), 2012)

18.04.455 Swap meet.
“Swap meet” means a retail commercial use, conducted out-of-doors, where new or used merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange by two or more vendors from individual stalls. “Swap meet” includes “flea market,” “bazaar,” “open air market,” and similar words and phrases commonly used to describe a swap meet. “Swap meet” shall not include any activity set forth in Chapter 18.60 of this code. (Prior code § 10-3.275.1)

18.04.460 Trailer, automobile.
“Automobile trailer” means a vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons and property, including a trailer coach. (Prior code § 10-3.276)

18.04.465 Trailer park.
“Trailer park” means any area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate two or more automobile trailers. (Prior code § 10-3.277)

18.04.470 Transient.
“Transient” means a person receiving accommodations for a price, with or without meals, for an indefinite rental period of time. (Prior code § 10-3.278)

18.04.472 Transitional housing.
“Transitional housing” or “transitional housing development” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. (Ord. 1737 § 14 (part), 2012)

18.04.475 Use.
“Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained. (Prior code § 10-3.279)

18.04.476 Warehouse.
“Warehouse” means a building where goods or products are stored, whether on a short-term or long-term basis. This classification shall not include self-storage facilities as defined in Section 18.04.413, but shall include products being stored for wholesale distribution. (Ord. 1738 § 4(part), 2012: Ord. 1666 § 16, 2005: Urg. Ord. 1667 § 16, 2004: prior code § 10-3.284. Formerly 18.04.500)

18.04.478 Wireless telecommunications facility.
“Wireless telecommunications facility” means a facility consisting of the equipment and structures involved in receiving and transmitting radio frequency communications from and to radio communications devices, and relaying those communications to and from a switching point which connects the radio communications devices to a telephone network and/or a data communications network. (Ord. 1738 § 4(part), 2012)

18.04.480 Yard.
“Yard” means an open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. (Prior code § 10-3.280)

18.04.485 Yard, front.
“Front yard” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line or planned street line and the closest permissible point on a building on the lot, excepting the limited projections permitted in this title. (Ord. 1804 § 2(M), 2019: prior code § 10-3.281)

18.04.490 Yard, rear.
“Rear yard” means a yard contiguous to the rear line of a lot and extending from side lot line to side lot line, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the closest permissible point on a building on the lot, excepting the limited projections permitted in this title. On a corner lot the rear yard shall extend from the interior side lot line to the side yard on the street side. (Ord. 1804 § 2(N), 2019: prior code § 10-3.282)

18.04.495 Yard, side.
“Side yard” means a yard contiguous to the side lot line, extending from the front yard, or front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard, or rear lot line where no rear yard is required, the width of which side yard is the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and the closest permissible point on a building on the lot, excepting the limited projections permitted in this title. (Ord. 1804 § 2(O), 2019: prior code § 10-3.283)

Chapter 18.06
NEW AND EXISTING USES
Sections:

18.06.010    New construction and new uses.

18.06.020    Deleted.

18.06.010 New construction and new uses.
All new construction, including buildings, improvements, alterations or enlargements, undertaken and all new uses or occupancy of premises within the city shall conform with the requirements, character and conditions as to use, height and area laid down for each of the several zones or districts as described in this title. No person shall erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge, or use or cause or permit to be erected, constructed, established, moved into, altered, enlarged or used, any building, structure, improvement or use of premises located in any zone described in this chapter contrary to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.301)

18.06.020 Deleted.
(Ord. 1683, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

Chapter 18.08
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES AND BOUNDARIES
Sections:

18.08.010    Zones established.

18.08.020    Zoning map.

18.08.030    Uncertainty of boundaries.

18.08.010 Zones established.
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the city is divided into several zones, known as follows:

R-1

Single-family residential zone

R-2

Low-density multiple-family residential zone

R-3

Medium density multiple-family residential zone

R-4

High density multiple-family residential zone

M-U

Mixed use overlay

C-R

Commercial residential zone

P

Parking zone

O

Official zone

C-P

Business and professional office zone

H-B

Home business zone

C-2

Commercial zone

C-3

General commercial zone

C-4

Heavy commercial zone

M-1

Industrial zone

M-2

General industrial zone

-SP

Specific plan zones as follows:

Artesia Corridor Specific Plan

Ascot Village Specific Plan

Carnelian Specific Plan

Cottage Place Specific Plan

Emerald Square Specific Plan

Gardena Village Specific Plan

Normandie Estates Specific Plan

Normandie Place Specific Plan

Redondo Village Specific Plan

Platinum Row Specific Plan

(Ord. 1760 § 2, 2015: Ord. 1738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.401)

18.08.020 Zoning map.
The zones established by this chapter and the boundaries of such zones are shown upon a map which is made a part of this title and which is designated as the “official zoning map.” Such zoning map, for convenience, may be divided into parts, and each such part, for the purposes of more readily identifying areas within such zoning map, may be subdivided into units, and each such part and unit may be separately used for the purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official reference to the zoning map. Such map, and each such part and unit, and the notations, references and other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth by such map were all fully described in this chapter. (Prior code § 10-3.402)

18.08.030 Uncertainty of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone shown on the zoning maps, the following rules shall apply:

A. Street, Alley, or Lot Lines. Where the indicated zone boundaries are approximately street, alley or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries; otherwise such boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the zoning maps, unless specifically indicated by dimensions.

B. Determination by Commission. Where uncertainty exists, the commission, by written decision, shall determine the location of the zone boundary.

C. Vacated Streets or Alleys. Where a street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the zone boundary shall be changed so as to include such vacated or abandoned street or alley, or portion thereof, in the same zone as the adjoining property to which it reverts. (Prior code § 10-3.403)

Chapter 18.10
ANNEXED AREAS
Sections:

18.10.010    Zoning annexed areas.

18.10.010 Zoning annexed areas.
Areas annexed to the city shall be classified in the same or nearest comparable zone classification in which such area was classified in the county at the time of annexation until the council adopts different zone classifications in the manner provided for zone changes in Chapter 18.52 of this code. An area annexed to the city, which area was unclassified in the county at the time of annexation, may be classified in any zone classification by a temporary interim zoning ordinance adopted by the council until the council adopts different zone classifications in the manner provided for zone changes in Chapter 18.52 of this code. Zone changes may be initiated prior to the effective date of the annexation and may be effective upon the annexation. (Prior code § 10-3.501)

Chapter 18.12
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-1)
Sections:

18.12.010    Single-family residential zone (R-1).

18.12.020    Uses permitted.

18.12.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.12.040    Uses prohibited.

18.12.050    Property development standards.

18.12.010 Single-family residential zone (R-1).
The R-1 single-family residential zone is intended as a low density residential district of single-family homes with one dwelling per lot and customary accessory buildings considered harmonious with low density residential development. (Prior code § 10-3.601)

18.12.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 zone and other such uses as the commission may deem to be similar to those listed and not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare:

A. Single-family dwellings and accessory buildings customary to such uses located on the same lot or parcel of land;

B. Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.56;

C. Parks, playgrounds, and public buildings;

D. Family day care homes; provided, a large family day care home shall be permitted subject to approval of a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 18.56;

E. Mobile homes certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system, pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. Further, such mobile homes shall be occupied only as a residential use type and shall be subject to any and all property development standards of the zone;

F. Accessory dwelling unit, as defined in Section 18.04.163 and subject to property development standards set forth in Chapter 18.13;

G. Residential group facility;

H. Transitional housing, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in this zone;

I. Supportive housing, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in this zone. (Ord. 1778 § 2, 2017: Ord. 1737 § 15, 2012; Ord. 1640 § 3, 2003; prior code § 10-3.602)

18.12.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-1 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.46:

A. Public and private schools, to and including the twelfth grade;

B. Church and related facilities. Related facilities do not include day care facilities, schools (kindergarten through twelfth grade), and rectories, convents, parsonages or minister’s residences;

C. Utility substations;

D. Convents and monasteries associated with religious orders of nuns or priests; and

E. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1737 § 3, 2012: Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1640 § 4, 2003; Ord. 1550 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1527 § 1, 1997; prior code § 10-3.603)

18.12.040 Uses prohibited.
All uses not listed in Sections 18.12.020 and 18.12.030 are deemed to be expressly prohibited in the R-1 zone, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. (Ord. 1738 § 5, 2012: prior code § 10-3.604)

18.12.050 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1 zone.

A. Lot Area. A minimum of five thousand square feet;

B. Lot Width.

1. A minimum of fifty feet for interior lots, and

2. A minimum of fifty-five feet for corner lots;

C. Lot Depth. A minimum of eighty feet;

D. Density. A maximum of one dwelling unit per lot, except for an accessory dwelling unit;

E. Dwelling Unit Size. A minimum of eight hundred square feet, excluding the garage;

F. Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed twenty-five feet and shall consist of not more than two stories;

G. Yards.

1. Front yard setback: twenty feet.

2. Side yard setback:

a. A minimum of five feet for interior lots, and

b. A minimum of ten feet for corner lots (street side only),

3. Rear yard setback: ten feet for new dwellings and additions and a minimum of five feet for existing single story dwelling units.

4. Accessory buildings: one-story accessory buildings may be constructed along the rear and side property line when located in the rear one-third of the lot. Garages fronting on public streets shall maintain a minimum twenty-foot yard setback. All garages shall be provided with garage doors and new front facing garages and replacement garage doors for front facing garages shall be sectional type doors.

5. No more than fifty percent of the front yard area, including driveways, shall be paved or otherwise covered with hardscaped materials. The remaining area shall be permanently landscaped with softscape materials and a permanent irrigation system shall be installed subject to city approval.

6. Driveways. No more than one driveway shall be allowed per parcel to a public street on parcels with less than one hundred feet frontage.

H. Distances between Buildings. A minimum of six feet between main and accessory buildings;

I. Lot coverage:

1. A maximum of fifty percent for interior lots, and

2. A maximum of seventy-five percent for corner lots;

J. Off-Street Parking. The provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply;

K. Signs. The provisions of Chapter 18.58 shall apply;

L. Fences, Hedges, and Walls. The provisions of Section 18.42.070 shall apply;

M. Swimming Pool Areas. The provisions of Section 18.42.090 shall apply;

N. Projections Permitted in Required Yards. The provisions of Section 18.42.100 shall apply;

O. Protection of Intersection Visibility. The provisions of Section 18.42.110 shall apply;

P. Repealed.

Q. All new structures and additions to existing structures shall demonstrate compliance with residential design guidelines set forth in Chapter 18.42. (Ord. 1804 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1778 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1738 § 27, 2012; Ord. 1737 § 4, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1640 §§ 5, 6, 2003)

Chapter 18.13
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
Sections:

18.13.010    Purpose.

18.13.020    Zones allowed.

18.13.030    General requirements.

18.13.040    Development regulations.

18.13.050    Processing of accessory dwelling unit permits.

18.13.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for accessory dwelling units on lots developed with an existing single-family dwelling in accordance with the provisions of state law.

B. For purposes of this chapter, the existing single-family dwelling is considered to be the “primary unit.”

C. In cases of conflict between this chapter and any other provision of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2017)

18.13.020 Zones allowed.
A. Accessory dwelling units shall be allowed on all legally existing residentially zoned lots where only a single-family exists in: the single-family residential zone (R-1); the low density multiple-family residential zone (R-2); the medium density multiple-family residential zone (R-3); and the home business (H-B) zone.

B. New accessory dwelling units shall not be allowed on any lot used for residential purposes that lies within a specific plan area.

C. New attached and detached accessory dwelling units shall not be allowed in any high density multiple-family residential zone (R-4) unless such accessory unit is located within an existing accessory structure or above a garage and complies with all other requirements of this chapter.

D. Accessory dwelling units in the home business (H-B) zone shall only be permitted on legal conforming lots where the only use on the lot is a single-family home and no business exists. (Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2017)

18.13.030 General requirements.
A. An accessory dwelling unit may only be constructed on a lot which contains an existing single-family dwelling.

B. Only one accessory dwelling unit may be allowed per lot.

C. The lot on which the accessory dwelling unit is to be constructed must be a legally existing lot with a minimum size of five thousand square feet.

D. Accessory dwelling units shall not be sold separately from the primary residence.

E. Accessory dwelling units may be rented independently of the primary unit. However, in the R-1 zone, the owner of the property must be an occupant of either the primary unit or the accessory dwelling unit in order for one of the two units to be rented and a covenant shall be recorded to this effect in a form approved by the city attorney.

F. Accessory dwelling units may be located in any of the following places:

1. Attached to the existing dwelling;

2. Located within the living area of the existing dwelling; or

3. Detached from the existing dwelling, but located on the same lot as the existing dwelling.

G. No accessory dwelling unit, or the primary dwelling unit on the same lot on which an accessory dwelling unit is located, shall be rented out for less than thirty consecutive calendar days. A covenant shall be recorded to this effect in a form approved by the city attorney.

H. No accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed if the building official determines that there is not adequate water or sewer service to the property.

I. All applicable public service and recreation impact fees shall be paid prior to occupancy in accordance with Government Code Sections 66000 et seq. and 66012 et seq.

J. Accessory dwelling units shall not count in determining density or lot coverage and are considered a residential use consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designation for the lot. (Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2017)

18.13.040 Development regulations.
A. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located to the rear of the existing single-family dwelling.

B. An accessory dwelling unit, whether attached or detached, shall be consistent in architectural style with the existing single-family dwelling and standards for residential uses in the adjacent residential community.

C. No passageway as defined in Government Code Section 65852.2(i) shall be required for the construction of an accessory dwelling unit.

D. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with all appropriate building code requirements. However, fire sprinklers shall not be required in an accessory dwelling unit if they are not required for the primary dwelling unit.

E. Size.

1. The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifty percent of the existing living area or one thousand two hundred square feet, whichever is less.

2. The total floor area for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the existing dwelling unit or one thousand two hundred square feet, whichever is less.

3. No accessory dwelling unit shall be less than the size required to allow an efficiency unit pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1.

F. Setbacks. Except as specified below, an accessory dwelling unit shall be required to comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which the unit is to be located.

1. No setback shall be required for a legally existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit.

2. A five-foot setback from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above an existing garage.

3. A five-foot setback shall be required from all side lot lines for any new accessory dwelling unit.

4. A ten-foot setback shall be required for all rear lot lines for any new accessory dwelling unit.

5. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be at least six feet from all other structures on the lot or on any adjacent lot.

G. Parking.

1. Parking shall be required at the rate of one space per each bedroom of the accessory dwelling unit. Efficiency and studio units shall be required to have one parking space.

2. Parking spaces for accessory dwelling units may be provided through tandem parking on an existing driveway; provided, that such parking does not encroach into the public sidewalk.

3. Parking spaces for accessory dwelling units may be provided in paved portions of setback areas; provided, that the amount of paving does not exceed the total amount of paving and hardscaped areas that are otherwise allowed by this title.

4. When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished or converted in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, such parking spaces must be replaced. The replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including but not limited to: covered spaces; uncovered spaces; or tandem spaces. Parking may also be provided through the use of a mechanical automobile parking lift.

5. Tandem parking and parking in setback areas shall not be allowed if the community development director makes specific findings that such parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical, or fire and life safety conditions.

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection G, no parking shall be required for the accessory dwelling unit if any of the following conditions apply:

a. The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile walking distance of a public transit stop;

b. The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district;

c. The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure;

d. When on-street parking permits are required, but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit; or

e. When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.

H. Utilities.

1. All utility installations shall be placed underground.

2. Water and sewer service to the site and the accessory dwelling unit shall be adequate.

3. For an accessory dwelling unit contained within an existing single-family home or an existing accessory structure in the single-family residential zone, the city shall not require the installation of a new or separate utility connection between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility or impose a connection fee or capacity charge.

4. For all other accessory dwelling units other than those described in subsection (H)(3) of this section, the city shall require a new or separate utility connection between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility and shall charge a connection fee or capacity charge that is proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit based on the size or number of plumbing fixtures. A separate sewer lateral shall be required for the second unit and separate electric and water meters shall be required for the second unit.

I. The number of curb cuts allowed shall be governed by the underlying zoning regulations.

J. New Construction. An applicant shall be allowed to build an accessory dwelling unit in conjunction with construction of a new single-family home. In such case, parking for the new single-family home shall be required in accordance with Section 18.40.040A.

K. An applicant may apply for an administrative site plan review by the community development director pursuant to Sections 18.44.020C and D in order to turn an existing single-family residence into the accessory dwelling unit and develop a new primary dwelling unit elsewhere on the lot. In such case the existing single-family residence must meet all requirements of this chapter relating to accessory dwelling units, including size limitations. (Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2017)

18.13.050 Processing of accessory dwelling unit permits.
A. A permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall be approved by the director of community development or his designee for any accessory unit that meets the requirements of this chapter.

B. An application for an accessory dwelling unit shall be acted upon within one hundred twenty days after receipt of a complete application. (Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2017)

Chapter 18.14
LOW-DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-2)
Sections:

18.14.010    Low-density multiple-family residential zone (R-2).

18.14.020    Uses permitted.

18.14.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.14.040    Uses prohibited.

18.14.050    Property development standards.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 613, 657, 662, 739, 843, 930, 1068 and 1191.

18.14.010 Low-density multiple-family residential zone (R-2).
The R-2 low-density multiple-family residential zone is intended as a low-density residential district of single-family detached dwellings and duplexes. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.701)

18.14.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 zone and other such uses the commission may deem to be similar to those listed and not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare:

A. All uses permitted in the R-1 zone;

B. Single and two-family dwellings; and

C. Condominiums and stock cooperative apartments of up to two units. (Ord. 1683 § 1, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.702)

18.14.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.46:

A. All uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit in the R-1 zone;

B. Off-street parking lots provided:

1. The lot abuts a commercial and/or industrial zone,

2. Front yards shall be landscaped and maintained,

3. There shall be a six foot high decorative block wall around the perimeter of the lot, except that such wall shall be three and one-half feet in height along the street frontage of such lot,

4. No egress or ingress shall be permitted from a residential district, and

5. Any other conditions the commission deems necessary;

C. Lodginghouses;

D. Group care facility; and

E. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1737 §§ 5, 16, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 11, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.703)

18.14.040 Uses prohibited.
All uses not listed in Sections 18.14.020 and 18.14.030 are deemed to be expressly prohibited in the R-2 zone, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. (Ord. 1738 § 6, 2012: prior code § 10-3.704)

18.14.050 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-2 zone.

A. Lot area: a minimum of five thousand square feet;

B. Lot width:

1. A minimum of fifty feet for interior lots, and

2. A minimum of fifty-five feet for corner lots;

C. Lot depth: a minimum of eighty feet;

D. Density: a maximum of two dwelling units per lot, but no more than seventeen units/acre;

E. Dwelling unit size:

1. A minimum of one thousand two hundred square feet for three or more bedroom units,

2. A minimum of nine hundred square feet for two bedroom units,

3. A minimum of seven hundred fifty square feet for one bedroom units, and

4. A minimum of four hundred fifty square feet for bachelor/efficiency units;

F. Building height: the maximum building height shall not exceed thirty feet and shall not consist of more than two stories;

G. Yards:

1. Front yard setback: a minimum of twenty feet; no more than fifty percent, including driveways, shall be paved or otherwise covered with hardscaped materials. The remaining area shall be permanently landscaped with softscape materials and provided with a permanent irrigation system subject to city approval.

2. Side yard setback:

a. A minimum of five feet;

b. A minimum of ten feet for corner lots (street side only);

c. A minimum of ten feet when a building fronts on a side yard;

d. A minimum of ten feet for buildings with semi-subterranean parking.

3. Rear yard setback: a minimum of ten feet.

4. Accessory buildings: one-story accessory buildings may be constructed along the rear and side property line when located in the rear one-third of the lot. Garages fronting on public streets shall maintain a minimum twenty-foot yard setback. All garages shall be provided with garage doors. New garage doors for front facing garages shall be sectional type garage doors;

H. Distances between buildings:

1. A minimum of six feet between main and accessory buildings;

2. Main buildings: a minimum of fifteen feet; provided, however;

a. A minimum of twenty feet for buildings front to front and with interior courts, and

b. A minimum of thirty feet for buildings front to front and with driveways between structures;

I. Off-street parking: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply;

J. Usable open space: a minimum of six hundred square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each unit for the recreational and leisure use of the residents of all multiple-family dwellings and condominiums in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.42.065.

1. A minimum of twenty-five percent of the required usable open space shall be private and directly accessible from the individual dwelling unit.

2. The remaining seventy-five percent may be private or common open space;

K. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 shall apply;

L. Fences: the provisions of Section 18.42.070 shall apply;

M. Refuse areas: the provisions of Section 18.42.130 shall apply;

N. Swimming pool areas: the provisions of Section 18.42.090 shall apply;

O. Projections permitted in required yards: the provisions of Section 18.42.100 shall apply;

P. Protection of intersection visibility: the provisions of Section 18.42.110 shall apply;

Q. Lot coverage:

1. A maximum of fifty percent for interior lots and

2. A maximum of seventy-five percent for corner lots;

R. Storage space: a minimum of two hundred cubic feet of storage space shall be provided in the garage of each dwelling unit;

S. All new structures and additions to existing structures shall demonstrate conformance with residential design guidelines set forth in Chapter 18.42. (Ord. 1804 § 4, 2019; Ord. 1738 § 28, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 12, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.705)

Chapter 18.16
MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-3)
Sections:

18.16.010    Medium density multiple-family residential zone (R-3).

18.16.020    Uses permitted.

18.16.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.16.040    Uses prohibited.

18.16.050    Property development standards.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 613, 657, 662, 739, 843, 930, 1059, 1068, and 1191.

18.16.010 Medium density multiple-family residential zone (R-3).
The R-3 medium density multiple-family residential zone is intended as a medium density residential district of multiple-family dwellings, such as apartments and condominiums. (Prior code § 10-3.801)

18.16.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 zone and other such uses as the commission may deem to be similar to those listed and not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare:

A. All uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zones; and multiple-family dwelling units. (Ord. 1737 § 17, 2012: Ord. 1683 § 13, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.802)

18.16.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-3 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.46:

A. All uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit in the R-1 and R-2 zones;

B. Day care facilities;

C. Group care facilities; and

D. Mobile home parks pursuant to Section 18.46.030C.19.

E. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1737 § 6, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 14, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.803)

18.16.040 Uses prohibited.
All uses not listed in Sections 18.16.020 and 18.16.030 are deemed to be expressly prohibited in the R-3 zone, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. (Ord. 1738 § 7, 2012: prior code § 10-3.804)

18.16.050 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-3 zone.

A. Lot area: a minimum of five thousand square feet;

B. Lot width:

1. A minimum of fifty feet for interior lots, and

2. A minimum of fifty-five feet for corner lots;

C. Lot depth: a minimum of eighty feet;

D. Density: a maximum of seventeen units/acre. However, when the application of such density standard results in a fraction of a dwelling unit, such fraction, if below the five-tenths breakpoint, shall be rounded downward to the nearest whole number, and, if such fraction is at or above the five-tenths breakpoint, it shall be rounded upward to the nearest whole number;

E. Dwelling unit size:

1. A minimum of one thousand two hundred square feet for three or more bedroom units,

2. A minimum of nine hundred square feet for two bedroom units,

3. A minimum of seven hundred fifty square feet for one bedroom units, and

4. A minimum of four hundred fifty square feet for bachelor/efficiency units;

F. Building height: the maximum building height shall not exceed thirty-five feet and shall consist of no more than three stories;

G. Yards: for cluster developments, setbacks are calculated from the project boundaries and not from individual units or buildings within the development.

1. Front yard setback: a minimum of twenty feet; no more than fifty percent, including driveways, shall be paved or otherwise covered with hardscaped materials. The remaining area shall be permanently landscaped with softscape materials and provided with a permanent irrigation system subject to city approval.

2. Side yard setback:

a. A minimum of five feet for one-story or two-story buildings;

b. A minimum of seven and one-half feet for two-story buildings with a semi-subterranean parking structure or three-story buildings;

c. A minimum of ten feet for buildings which abut parcels zoned R-1 or R-2;

d. A minimum of ten feet for corner lots (street side only); and

e. A minimum of ten feet when a building fronts on a side yard.

3. Rear yard setback:

a. A minimum of five feet for one-story or two-story buildings;

b. A minimum of seven and one-half feet for two-story buildings with a semi-subterranean parking structure or three-story buildings;

c. A minimum of ten feet for buildings which abut parcels zoned R-1 or R-2;

d. A minimum of ten feet when a building fronts on a rear yard.

4. Accessory buildings: one-story accessory buildings may be constructed along the rear and side property line when located in the rear one-third of the lot. Garages fronting on public streets shall maintain a minimum twenty-foot yard setback. All garages shall be provided with garage doors. New garage doors for front facing garages shall be sectional type garage doors;

H. Distances between buildings:

1. A minimum of six feet between main and accessory buildings;

2. A minimum of fifteen feet between main buildings; provided, however:

a. A minimum of twenty feet for buildings front to front and with interior courts;

b. A minimum of thirty feet for buildings front to front and with driveways between structures; and

c. For buildings that are greater than two stories, the distance shall be increased two and one-half feet between buildings for each floor over the second floor;

I. Off-street parking: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply;

J. Usable open space: a minimum of six hundred square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each unit for the recreational and leisure use of the residents of all multiple-family dwellings and condominiums in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.42.065:

1. A minimum of twenty-five percent of the required usable open space shall be private and directly accessible from the individual dwelling unit.

2. For multiple-family dwellings and condominiums of fifteen units or more, a minimum of one-third of the required usable open space shall be common and available for the use of all residents. The front yard area shall be excluded in the calculation of the required usable open space.

3. The remainder of the usable open space may be either private or common;

K. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 shall apply;

L. Fences: the provisions of Section 18.42.070 shall apply;

M. Refuse areas: the provisions of Section 18.42.130 shall apply;

N. Swimming pool areas: the provisions of Section 18.42.090 shall apply;

O. Projections permitted in required yards: the provisions of Section 18.42.100 shall apply;

P. Protection of intersection visibility: the provisions of Section 18.42.110 shall apply;

Q. Storage space: a minimum of two hundred cubic feet of storage space shall be provided in the garage of each dwelling unit;

R. All new structures and additions to existing structures shall demonstrate conformance with residential design guidelines set forth in Chapter 18.42. (Ord. 1804 § 5, 2019; Ord. 1746 § 5, 2013; Ord. 1738 § 29, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 15, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.805)

Chapter 18.18
HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-4)
Sections:

18.18.010    High density multiple-family residential zone (R-4).

18.18.020    Development standards.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 613, 657, 662, 739, 843, 930, 977, 1059, 1068, and 1191.

18.18.010 High density multiple-family residential zone (R-4).
All regulations governing this chapter shall be identical to Chapter 18.16, Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-3), except as specified herein. (Ord. 1737 § 8 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 16, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.901)

18.18.020 Development standards.
The development standards set forth herein shall apply and supersede any zoning code provision in this title to the contrary.

A. Density. For any project approved after August 1, 2012, the minimum permitted density shall be twenty units per acre for any residential development. This subsection shall not apply to the expansion of any existing use.

B. The maximum permitted density shall be as set forth in this subsection; fractional units shall be rounded upward if such fraction is at or above the five-tenths breakpoint:

1. Twenty-five units per acre for lots less than one-half acre;

2. Twenty-seven units per acre for lots between one-half acre and one acre; and

3. Thirty units per acre for lots greater than one acre.

C. Landscaping. The minimum landscaping requirement shall be four hundred sixty square feet.

D. Building Height. The maximum building height for habitable space shall not exceed thirty-five feet, or forty feet with architectural projections which are building elements such as towers, cupolas, and pitched roofs at a minimum pitch of four to twelve, that are added to buildings to provide architectural interest without adding interior floor area, and also include skylights and chimneys. In no event may the building exceed three stories.

E. Parking.

1. Tandem parking shall be allowed.

2. For senior or income restricted units: one off-street parking space for each one bedroom or studio unit. (Ord. 1804 § 6, 2019: Ord. 1746 § 6, 2013; Ord. 1737 § 8 (part), 2012)

Chapter 18.19
MIXED USE OVERLAY ZONE (MU)
Sections:

18.19.010    Mixed use overlay zone (MU).

18.19.015    Superimposed nature of mixed use overlay zone.

18.19.020    Special focus areas.

18.19.025    Mixed use in other areas.

18.19.030    Uses permitted.

18.19.040    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.19.050    Uses prohibited.

18.19.060    Property development standards.

18.19.070    Design principles.

18.19.010 Mixed use overlay zone (MU).
The mixed use overlay zone is intended to allow greater flexibility of development alternatives, especially attractive higher density residential development and live-work buildings, in appropriate areas of the city. More specifically, the intent of the mixed use overlay zone is to accomplish the following objectives:

A. To encourage mixed use projects that combine residential with nonresidential uses in the same building or building site area as a means to create an active street life, enhance the vitality of businesses, and reduce the need for automobile travel;

B. To provide a meaningful blend of residential and non-residential uses that enhances and builds upon the city’s commercial base; the mixed use overlay zone is not intended to simply act as a loophole in the zoning code for residential development;

C. To provide additional housing options for people, including but not limited to, young professionals and older people, who want to live near their workplace and/or near retail and other non-residential uses;

D. To encourage consolidation of small parcels into viable, block-size mixed use development in designated areas;

E. To ensure on-site compatibility of residential and non-residential uses; and

F. To ensure compatibility of mixed use projects with surrounding uses and development patterns. (Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.19.015 Superimposed nature of mixed use overlay zone.
The mixed use overlay zone shall be in the nature of an overlay zone. Land classified in the mixed use overlay zone shall also be classified in one or more underlying zones. Property so classified shall be identified on the zoning map by both the underlying zone and the mixed use overlay zone. The regulations set forth in this chapter of the mixed use overlay zone shall be in addition to those regulations set forth in the underlying zone. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the mixed use overlay zone and the provisions of the underlying zone, the provisions of the mixed use overlay zone shall prevail when a mixed use project is being developed. If the mixed use overlay zone is silent in relation to any development standard, the development standard identified in the underlying zone shall prevail. (Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.19.020 Special focus areas.
With application of the mixed use overlay zone, the city seeks to take advantage of development opportunities in key areas of the city, each of which faces unique opportunities and constraints. A description of the desired purpose for four of these areas is described in this section to provide guidance for those seeking to construct mixed use development in such areas.

A. Rosecrans Avenue Corridor (generally those parcels abutting Rosecrans Avenue and those properties north of 145th as shown below): Land use needs for this area include retail and eating establishments to serve the needs of Gardena residents. The primary objective for such uses is to provide residents with an attractive alternative to obtaining goods and services in nearby cities.



B. Western Avenue Corridor North (generally those parcels abutting Western Avenue, north of Redondo Beach Boulevard and south of 145th as shown below): Land uses in this area are intended to emphasize office and service uses in combination with attached residential uses. The parcel and street configuration of land within this focus area dictates that development will be smaller and potentially more incremental in nature. Accordingly, parcels within each block should be developed as one cohesive project where possible. Development of multiple blocks as one project is highly encouraged. Access from existing alleyways will permit rear vehicular access, while minimizing curb cuts along Western Avenue.



C. Western Addition (parcels abutting Western Avenue north of 169th and south of Redondo Beach Boulevard as shown below): By integrating commercial and residential uses, including live-work buildings, this area will function as a transition from the industrially zoned properties to the south to the residentially zoned properties to the north. Additionally, development in this area should respect and relate to the character of the Civic Center area located nearby. The objective for this area is to develop one large or a group of mixed use developments that work together to create a unified sense of place and purpose.



D. Dominguez Channel (approximately twenty-acre area bounded by Western Avenue, 178th Street, and Dominguez Channel): This area provides an opportunity to plan complementary development and defined connections to the Artesia Corridor Specific Plan, opposite Dominguez Channel to the north. Recreational opportunities are anticipated to occur within the Dominguez Channel easement, and consequently adjacent uses should take advantage of this situation by locating parks and open spaces along the Dominguez Channel edge. In addition, the Dominguez Channel area has the opportunity to serve as a gateway to Gardena, due to its location at the southern border of the city. Accordingly, the objective for this area is also to develop one large or a group of mixed use developments that work together to create a unified sense of place and purpose.



(Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.19.025 Mixed use in other areas.
Applications may be made to place the mixed use overlay zone on other properties in the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.52. The planning commission and city council shall consider whether a mixed use development is appropriate in its context with adjacent land uses and serves the needs of residents in an attractive and functional manner. (Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012)

18.19.030 Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted in the mixed use overlay zone:

A. All mixed use development in accordance with the provisions of this section requires site plan review pursuant to the standards of this title. Site plans shall be subject to planning commission review and approval.

B. If property is developed solely in accordance with provisions of the underlying zoning district, uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be allowed. Site plan review shall not be required for such development unless required by another provision of this title.

C. If property is developed with a mix of residential and nonresidential uses1 within the same project area in accordance with the provisions of this section:

1. Residential:

a. Multiple-family dwellings;

b. Single-family attached dwellings;

c. Live-work uses;2

d. Transitional housing, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in this zone;

e. Supportive housing, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in this zone.

2. Commercial:

a. Food sales and service:

i. Confectionery, candy stores, retail bakery;

ii. Neighborhood markets;

iii. Restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias (sit-down and/or take-out).

b. Health services:

i. Medical, dental, optical offices;

ii. Pharmacies (walk-in);

iii. Health clubs of less than ten thousand square feet.

c. Administrative, financial, real estate, bank and professional offices.

d. Retail sales and service:

i. Antique stores;

ii. Art and photography galleries and studios;

iii. Automobile supply stores;

iv. Barber shops and beauty shops;

v. Blueprinting and photocopying;

vi. Book and stationary stores;

vii. Clothing stores of less than five thousand square feet;

viii. Department and furniture stores of less than five thousand square feet;

ix. Dry cleaning service;

x. Florists and plant shops;

xi. Furniture upholstery shops;

xii. Gift shops;

xiii. Hardware and paint stores of less than five thousand square feet;

xiv. Interior decorating services;

xv. Jewelry stores;

xvi. Music and vocal instruction and dancing academies;

xvii. Pet shops;

xviii. Postal facilities (private);

xix. Repair services (limited);

xx. Shoe sales;

xxi. Tailor;

xxii. Television, radio, and home appliance stores of less than five thousand square feet.

3. Public facilities:

a. Fire and police stations;

b. Libraries;

c. Post offices.

4. Live-work:

a. Professional, administrative, and business uses;

b. Repair services (excluding auto related repair services);

c. Retail sales and service;

d. Studios (art, photography, copywriter, film/video).

5. Accessory:

a. Parking lots or structures,

b. Public or private recreational facilities,

c. Mechanical and utility equipment.





(Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1757 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(C) and (D), 2010; Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.19.040 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted in a mixed use development under a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.46:

A. Bars and nightclubs;

B. Restaurants, coffee shops (drive-thru);

C. Supermarkets;

D. Public assembly:

1. Lodges and meeting halls,

2. Museums,

3. Theaters (cinema and otherwise);

E. Pharmacies (drive-thru);

F. Health clubs of more than ten thousand square feet;

G. Retail sales and service:

1. Clothing stores of more than five thousand square feet,

2. Department and furniture stores of more than five thousand square feet,

3. Hardware and paint stores of more than five thousand square feet,

4. Television, radio, and home appliance stores of more than five thousand square feet;

H. Computer internet and amusement facilities;

I. Live-work in conjunction with:

1. Restaurants; or

2. Any use that may result in exterior or interior noise levels in excess of city residential noise standards;

J. Churches;

K. Massage establishments that are not otherwise subject to an exception pursuant to Section 5.48.030, except no massage establishment shall be allowed to locate in a live-work unit. (Ord. 1757 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(E), 2010; Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.19.050 Uses prohibited.
A. All uses not listed in Sections 18.19.030 and 18.19.040, unless determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040.

B. Any project consisting solely of residential uses. (Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.19.060 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings built within the mixed use overlay zone, when a property owner chooses to provide housing in association with non-residential uses in accordance with the provisions of said zone.

A. Lot dimensions: Minimum lot width at street frontage of eighty feet with curb cuts along building frontage, fifty feet without curb cuts along building frontage. No minimum or maximum lot depth.

B. Minimum project area3:

1. One acre minimum, with the following exceptions:

a. Parcels that cannot be consolidated to satisfy the minimum project area because they are bordered on all sides by property that is not zoned with the mixed use overlay zone;

b. Parcels that cannot be consolidated because they are bordered on three or more sides by roadways; or

c. Parcels that cannot be consolidated because adjacent property is not zoned with the mixed use overlay.

2. Lots across public roadways may be consolidated to create larger project areas.

3. The community development director must be consulted before the review of projects that cause an orphaned parcel condition. An orphaned parcel condition exists if the group of consolidated parcels that comprise the minimum project area of one acre results in an adjacent isolated or orphaned parcel that will be unable to meet the minimum project area. The involvement of the community development director ensures that adequate effort has been made to negotiate between the project and adjacent orphaned parcel. In addition, in the event that the orphaned parcel is not included in the adjacent development for reasons such as its recent date of development, the involvement of the community development director will ensure that compatibility exists between the orphaned parcel’s existing condition and the adjacent project’s current development.



C. Density and intensity:

1. Floor area ratio (FAR)4: nonresidential intensity shall be a maximum of 0.5 FAR as calculated over the portion of the project area devoted to such use, including when such use is part of a vertical development.

2. For mixed use projects approved after August 1, 2012, the minimum permitted residential density shall be twenty units per acre for any residential development. This subsection shall not apply to the expansion of any existing use.

3. Residential as a part of a mixed use project: the maximum residential density shall be as follows, calculated over the portion of the project area devoted to such use, including when such use is part of a vertical development:

a. Twenty units per acre maximum for sites less than one-half acre;

b. Twenty-five units per acre maximum for sites at least one-half acre but less than one acre; and

c. Thirty units per acre maximum for all sites of one acre or greater.

4. Projects may develop both the maximum FAR for nonresidential development and maximum density for residential development within the same project area, provided all other standards in this section are met.

5. Site coverage: Eighty percent.

D. Dwelling unit size:

1. A minimum of one thousand two hundred square feet for three or more bedroom units;

2. A minimum of nine hundred square feet for two bedroom units;

3. A minimum of seven hundred fifty square feet for one bedroom units, and

4. A minimum of four hundred fifty square feet for bachelor/efficiency units.

E. Maximum Building Height. The following height standards apply to individual buildings within a project area5:

1. Thirty-five feet, or forty feet with architectural projections if6:

a. Adjacent to one-story residential uses; or

b Adjacent to a collector street.

2. Forty feet, or forty-five feet with architectural projections if:

a. Adjacent to two-story residential uses; or

b. Adjacent to a major collector street.

3. Fifty-five feet, or sixty feet with architectural projections if:

a. Adjacent to three-story or greater residential uses; or adjacent to commercial or other nonresidential uses; and

b. Adjacent to an arterial street.

F. Yards: for mixed use projects, setbacks are calculated from the project boundaries and not from individual units or buildings within the development.

1. Front yard setback: a minimum of twelve feet from face of curb and a maximum of twenty feet from face of curb;

2. Side yard setback: five feet from property line;

3. Rear yard setback: ten feet from property line;

4. Building to building:

a. Main structures less than or equal to forty feet in height: twenty feet if adjacent to industrial structures; ten feet if adjacent to all other structures;

b. Main structures greater than forty feet in height: thirty feet if adjacent to industrial structures; twenty feet if adjacent to residential structures; and fifteen feet if adjacent to commercial structures; and

c. A minimum of six feet between main and accessory buildings.

d. The provisions of Section 18.42.120 shall not apply to this section.

G. Accessory buildings: an accessory building, including garage, may be constructed within five feet of rear and side property line (or edge of alley right-of-way) when located in the rear one-third of the lot. Garages fronting on public streets shall maintain a minimum eight-foot setback from the property line. All single tenant garages shall be provided with automatic garage doors.



Diagram of yard setbacks.

H. Live/work standards: Live/work units and buildings are subject to the following standards:

1. Work on the premises of a live/work unit shall be limited to persons who live in the live/work unit. Living and working spaces shall not be rented or sold separately. The owner/occupant of a live/work unit shall notify the City of any change in use or occupancy. Any change of use or occupancy shall comply with the uses identified in this Section and will require a new Certificate of Occupancy. The commercial square footage initially approved for live-work areas within a unit shall remain commercial in nature and shall not be converted to residential use with subsequent owners.

2. Off-street loading will be accomplished by the temporary use of planned parking spaces, or in parking spaces limiting a vehicle’s permitted parking time (e.g., parking stalls designated with twenty minute parking limits).

3. Live/work units and buildings must comply with any requirements imposed by the building, fire, community development, police, and public works departments intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

4. An administrative approval or conditional approval of the commercial/work component of the live/work units shall be granted to the owner of the unit. Approvals of commercial uses may not be transferred between units. A copy of all conditions of the approval of the project shall be provided to all future owners/occupants of the building prior to their execution of a lease or purchase agreement for the live/work unit. Project conditions are required to be recorded with the County Recorder’s Office prior to exercise of entitlement.

5. Businesses using commercial vehicles are prohibited.

I. Usable open space:

1. Residential uses: a minimum of one hundred fifty square feet of outdoor usable space shall be provided per dwelling unit in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.42.065.

a. A minimum of seventy square feet per unit shall be private open space and directly accessible from the individual dwelling unit.

b. The remainder of the open space may be either private or common.

2. Live/work uses: a minimum of one hundred square feet of either outdoor usable common or private open space shall be provided for each live/work unit in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.42.065.

3. The usable common open space requirements of residential mixed use and live/work units can be combined into one or more large spaces to satisfy the usable common open space requirements, so long as the space is located along or directly accessed and visible from perimeter or interior streets.

J. Off-street parking: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply, with the following exceptions:

1. Tandem parking: up to fifty percent of parking requirements for residential or live/work units may be satisfied by tandem parking. Guest spaces may not be tandem. Garaged tandem parking shall be no smaller than twelve feet wide by forty feet long, as measured from the interior walls;

2. No curb cuts are allowed for lots less than twenty thousand square feet that abut alleys;

3. Bachelor/efficiency units: one space shall be required for each unit;

4. Live/work units: two resident spaces and 0.5 guest spaces per unit. Resident spaces shall be covered; guest spaces may be uncovered. Three additional parking spaces shall be provided for every one thousand square feet of nonresidential square footage; except that ten additional parking spaces shall be provided for every one thousand square feet of restaurant uses; parking spaces for nonresidential uses may be uncovered;

5. Shared parking is allowed subsequent to a shared parking analysis, prepared by a California-licensed, independent traffic engineer, at the developer’s expense, and approved by the community development director;

6. Due to variations in parking demand and needs of mixed use projects, vehicle parking requirements and the design of the parking areas, including ingress and egress, may be reduced or modified as part of the site plan review process, by the planning commission, based upon information contained in a parking demand study prepared by a California-licensed, independent traffic engineer, at the developer’s expense;

7. Parking for any residences shall be secured and separated from public parking;

8. Assigned parking shall be provided within one hundred fifty feet of the front entrance of the dwelling unit for which it serves;

9. An above- or below-grade parking structure is permitted subject to the following standards:

a. Entrance and exit to garage shall be from side-street or rear of primary building,

b. If the parking structure has retail, office or similar uses on the street-level floor on the side facing the street, the minimum front or side garage setback may be reduced from minimum eight feet from the property line to zero feet (providing that the building allows for an enhanced walkway with landscaping or streetscape elements as depicted in Section 18.19.070 within the twelve-foot yard setback from the face of the curb), subject to site plan review and approval per Chapter 18.44.

K. Circulation and access: All lots and project sites that abut existing alleys shall take primary vehicular access (parking, deliveries, loading and unloading) from alley. Project sites or lots which abut Western Avenue or Crenshaw Boulevard shall dedicate a minimum twenty-four-foot-wide easement, or at dimensions specified by the consolidated fire protection district of Los Angeles County, for alleyway purposes. This requirement may be waived as part of the site plan review process if it is determined that lot dimensions or external physical constraints preclude extension of alley.

L. Storage areas: for dwelling units without a private parking garage, general storage cabinets/closets with a minimum size of one hundred cubic feet capacity shall be required for each unit. The storage cabinets are encouraged to be located within the parking area, or in close proximity to the respective units. For dwelling units with tandem parking garages, each storage cabinet/closet shall be a minimum of two hundred cubic feet capacity.

M. Service, trash and loading areas, and mechanical equipment:

1. Service and loading areas shall be oriented away from public view and provided with ornamental screening;

2. Exterior on-site facilities and mechanical equipment, including sewer, gas, water, electric, telephone, and communications equipment, shall be installed underground where feasible. Transformers and other mechanical equipment that must be above ground shall be screened in accordance with Section 18.42.140, and incorporated into the landscape wherever possible;

3. Trash enclosures shall be screened in accordance with Section 18.42.130. In addition, they shall be enclosed within the building envelope or architecturally integrated with the overall design theme of the development. Trash enclosures should be planted with vines if located adjacent to or within a landscaped area. (Ord. 1804 §§ 7, 8, 2019; Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012; Ord. 1737 § 9, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.19.070 Design principles.
The design principles set forth in this section shall be used to review site plans, building plans and use permits for all mixed use projects proposed on land within the mixed use overlay zone. These design principles aim to create guidelines for the public space between the street and adjacent building that promote visual interest and pedestrian activity. This transitional space is defined by the site design, architecture, and streetscape elements.

A. Site design: the following principles intend to establish an engaging street edge defined by the orientation and placement of buildings fronting major streets.

1. Building orientation: buildings and major pedestrian entrances should be oriented towards centers of activity, such as the primary street frontage or public plazas:



(a) All primary ground-floor common entries or individual dwelling unit entries fronting on streets should be oriented to the street, not to the interior or to a parking lot. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement;

2. Building facade: the building placement should enforce a continuous street edge establishing a strong pedestrian corridor. However, long, unarticulated building facades should be eliminated with variation in setbacks:

(a) Variable setbacks: setbacks should vary by a minimum of ten inches each twenty-five feet in order to break up long, bland unarticulated building facades,

(b) In addition to creating visual interest, building setbacks should establish space for pedestrian plazas, courtyards, or outside dining areas. Setbacks should not generate unusable or dead space;



3. Setback encroachments: restaurant facilities and retail may encroach into the street setback as permitted by the City under an approved encroachment permit under the following principles:

a. Uses should add color and activity to the street such as outdoor eating areas or flower vendors,

b. Outdoor dining, outdoor displays, or any other ancillary use as approved by the community development director may encroach into the sidewalk area a maximum of eight feet from the building frontage, so long as at least four feet of unobstructed walkway is maintained;



4. Pedestrian circulation should be continuous and provide connectivity between appropriate uses:

a. Pedestrian pathways should connect to appropriate off-site uses, including off-site transit stops and parking;

b. Pedestrian pathways should be clearly marked;



c. Street-side facades may be divided to form pedestrian spaces such as public plazas, private pocket parks, outdoor dining, and other pedestrian-oriented amenities to promote pedestrian activity;

5. Vehicular circulation should be designed to serve uses appropriately and employ traffic calming measures to ensure pedestrian safety:

a. Maximize access and connectivity while minimizing curb cuts to major roadways,

b. Alleyways shall be designed to ensure safe and continuous traffic flow, minimizing direct connections to public roadways,

c. Prevent bypass alternate routes to minimize traffic conflicts and enhance pedestrian circulation,

d. Use of neck-downs, bulb-outs, and other traffic calming measures are encouraged.

B. Architecture: the following principles intend to promote quality design appearance and visual interest.

1. Architectural styles and scale: building design should incorporate an architectural style and scale that is compatible with nearby uses, provided such uses are similar to uses permitted by this chapter. Architectural details may draw upon locally historic buildings or other nearby features that contribute to the aesthetic ambience of the immediate area;

2. Siding materials: plain concrete block, plain concrete, plywood, sheet pressboard, vinyl, or similar siding materials are strongly discouraged. Siding should be of high quality materials that weather well over time. Materials and colors should be compatible with the architectural style;

3. Color: colors should include a base color and accent colors. Generally, a minimum of three complementary colors should be used for each building. Color schemes should be selected with a harmonious range of accent materials;



4. Multiple story structures: each subsequent story above the second story shall be set back from the story below by a minimum of eight feet. Architectural features, private open spaces, and patios may encroach up to fifty percent into the multiple story setback area, up to the wall face of the lower story, to create interest in building mass;



5. Corner buildings: buildings at corners of intersections should receive special architectural treatment to enhance the pedestrian experience, such as building cut-offs and corner entrances with additional architectural detail;

6. Building facade: street-facing facades should be visually open to major streets and architecturally enhanced through the use of the architectural features listed below. Maximum total wall plane without windows or entrances (on any facade) should not exceed thirty percent of the first story wall. A minimum of sixty percent of the street-facing facade between two feet and eight feet in height must be comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas;



7. Architectural features are encouraged to create visual interest. The architectural details listed below should adhere to the following guidelines:

a. The following architectural projections may encroach into the required setback by up to eighteen inches: bays, dormer windows, sun-control devices, un-roofed porches, cornices, belt courses and appendages such as water tables, sills, capitals, and bases,

b. Balconies and porches are encouraged to create distinction between units,

c. Awnings should be broken into segments that mirror the door and window openings beneath them,

d. Canopies should be limited in width and supporting posts should not be placed within the public right of way,

e. Trim detail on rooflines, porches, windows and doors on street-facing elevations are encouraged;

8. Window placement should reflect the desired exposure appropriate for the respective use:

a. For commercial uses, large windows should front onto major pedestrian throughways to promote exposure and visibility,

b. For residential uses, windows should face away from loading areas, docks, and trash storage areas. In the occasion that residential windows face one another, windows should be offset to maximize privacy.

C. Streetscape: the following streetscape elements augment architectural styles of the area and promote pedestrian activity. These interactive elements enhance usable pedestrian space and decrease the possibility of dead space.

1. Landscaping is encouraged and should be well maintained and complement the adjacent project:

a. Landscaping should be selected at a scale that is consistent with the building site,

b. Street landscaping should be appropriate for sidewalk environments to limit the potential of root systems to affect the adjacent sidewalks,

c. Landscaping should not interfere with pedestrian movement or impede with the visibility of business and signage;

2. Furniture: Benches, seating areas, kiosks, and shade structures should be incorporated as amenities for pedestrians:

a. Furnishings should be placed where pedestrian traffic, viewsheds, or building ingress and egress will not be obstructed,

b. Furnishings should be constructed of durable, high quality materials that can withstand the elements without showing wear,

c. Furniture design should be complementary to the architectural styles of the area;



3. Public art and water features should be used to highlight public spaces and create points of interest for each project. These streetscape elements should be well maintained and used as accent features;

4. Paving materials: use of distinctive paving treatments is encouraged to give visual cues to users and emphasize different areas within the streetscape and public spaces. Painted paving surfaces should not be used except to indicate traffic lanes or parking spaces;



5. Walls, fences, and gates should be used to identify separate areas and provide needed privacy and security:

a. Although necessary in certain locations, solid walls should only be used when absolutely necessary,

b. Walls, fences, and gates should appear consistent in style and material, complementing the surrounding architectural styles,

c. Landscaping elements should be densely planted and layered to provide screening. Vines and trellises are encouraged to help soften hard edges and screen walls from view;

6. Lighting should be used to illuminate public spaces and contribute to the safety and beauty of the project:



a. Fixtures should be complementary to the architectural styles of the area,

b. Overly glaring or flashing lights are discouraged;

7. Signage should be used to identify places, provide direction, and advertise businesses. Along with communicating information, signage should add to the character of each project and reinforce a sense of place:

a. Signs shall consist of high quality materials and color palettes that reflect the architectural themes of the surrounding area,

b. Location and placement of signs should not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movement.



(Ord. 1738 § 42 (part), 2012; Ord. 1683 § 17, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

1
Mixed use development can be horizontally or vertically integrated. Horizontal mixed use development consists of two or more attached or detached buildings of differing use categories (e.g., residential and commercial) within the same project area. Such buildings do not need to be on the same parcel or even on the same block, but must be within the same project area. Vertical mixed use development consists of one or more different uses placed over another use within the same building (e.g., residential over commercial).


2
Covenants, conditions and restrictions for individual live-work projects may further restrict and prohibit uses, but shall not be more permissive than uses listed under Section 18.19.020(C)(4). In addition, a Home Occupancy Permit shall be required.


3
Project area: A project area may encompass a single parcel or multiple parcels, planned and constructed as one, coordinated and unified project.


4
Floor area ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR is calculated as the total square feet of nonresidential building (excluding areas used exclusively for parking), divided by the number of square feet within the project area (excluding areas designated for public roadways, as measured from curb to curb).


5
Depending on location of buildings with respect to adjacent uses, it is possible for each building within a project area to have a different height limit. If a building abuts multiple roadway classifications and/or uses, the most restrictive standard shall apply.


6
Architectural projections are building elements (e.g., towers, cupolas) that are added to buildings to provide architectural interest without adding interior floor area. The maximum height of any architectural projection is ten feet unless approved by the community development director following site plan review.


Chapter 18.20
COMMERCIAL-RESIDENTIAL ZONE (C-R)
Sections:

18.20.010    Commercial-residential zone (C-R).

18.20.020    Uses permitted.

18.20.025    Allowed uses subject to site plan review.

18.20.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.20.040    Uses prohibited.

18.20.050    Property development standards.

18.20.060    Deleted.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 944 and 1083.

18.20.010 Commercial-residential zone (C-R).
A. The C-R zone is intended to permit multifamily residential uses to be located on lots in this zone either as the sole use or in conjunction with commercial and office uses. (Ord. 1746 § 2 (part), 2013: prior code § 10-3.1001)

18.20.020 Uses permitted.
A. All C-R uses shall be conducted wholly within a totally enclosed building, with the exception of outdoor dining which may be allowed subject to site plan review;

B. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-R zone:

1. Administrative, financial and professional offices;

2. Antique stores;

3. Art galleries;

4. Artist’s and photographer’s studios;

5. Bakery shops;

6. Barber shops and beauty shops;

7. Blueprinting and photostating;

8. Book and stationery stores;

9. Clothing stores;

10. Confectionery and candy stores;

11. Department and furniture stores;

12. Retail dry cleaning shops;

13. Florists and plant shops;

14. Gift shops;

15. Hardware and paint stores;

16. Interior decorating shops;

17. Jewelry stores;

18. Neighborhood markets;

19. Medical and dental offices and clinics;

20. Instructional academies, including music, vocal, dance, and tutoring, but not vocational schools;

21. Pet shops;

22. Private and public parking lots for automobiles;

23. Pharmacies;

24. Post offices;

25. Restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias and/or tearooms;

26. Shoe repair shops;

27. Shoe stores (retail);

28. Tailor shops;

29. Television, radio and home appliance stores and repairs;

30. Theaters (motion picture or otherwise);

31. Retail commercial uses similar to those set forth in this section;

32. Fortunetelling as defined in Chapter 5.40; and

33. Laboratories, medical and dental;

C. Family day care homes; provided, a large family day care home shall be permitted subject to approval of a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 18.56; and

D. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.56. (Ord. 1746 § 2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1666 § 17, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 17, 2004; Ord. 1517 §§ 8, 9, 1997; prior code § 10-3.1002)

18.20.025 Allowed uses subject to site plan review.
The following uses are allowed subject to site plan review pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.44. Site plan reviews pursuant to this section shall be subject to planning commission review and approval:

A. Multifamily residential uses in the C-R zone either as the only use on the parcel or as part of a mixed use development in conjunction with permitted or conditionally permitted uses.

1. New single-family residential structure shall not be allowed as the only use on a parcel, but may be developed in conjunction with multifamily residential development; provided, that it meets the minimum density requirement set forth in Section 18.20.050B.5.

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, any single-family residence legally existing on December 31, 2012, shall be allowed to continue as a legal nonconforming use.

a. The nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the lot upon which the nonconforming use exists.

b. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, in the case of damage or destruction by fire, explosion, earthquake or other natural disaster, the nonconforming use may be rebuilt to the previously existing square footage immediately prior to the occurrence of such damage; provided, that reconstruction is started within eighteen months from the date of such damage and the reconstruction is diligently pursued to completion.

c. Should a legal nonconforming single-family residence be converted to a nonresidential use, the legal nonconforming status shall terminate;

B. Conversion of a single-family residence to a nonresidential use;

C. Outdoor dining;

D. Accessory uses in commercial parking lots;

E. Transitional housing, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the C-R zone; and

F. Supportive housing, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the C-R zone. (Ord. 1746 § 2 (part), 2013)

18.20.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses, after a public hearing, may be permitted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.46:

A. Establishments serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises provided the establishment of such a business would not adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the community;

B. Lodges and meeting halls;

C. Vocational colleges, such as barber and beauty colleges, modeling schools and medical training and trade schools;

D. Mobile homes certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system, pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. Further, such mobile homes shall be occupied only as a residential use type and shall be subject to any and all property development standards of the zone;

E. Amusement arcades;

F. Churches and related facilities. Related facilities do not include day care facilities, schools (kindergarten through twelfth grade), and rectories, convents, parsonages or minister’s residences; and

G. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1746 § 2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1737 § 18, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 18, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1554 § 1, 1998: prior code § 10-3.1003)

18.20.040 Uses prohibited.
The following uses are deemed to be incompatible with the uses set forth in Sections 18.20.020 and 18.20.030 and are therefore prohibited:

A. Motor vehicle dealerships;

B. Automobile service stations;

C. Car wash facilities;

D. Fast food and drive-in restaurants;

E. Industrial uses;

F. Motels and hotels;

G. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in Sections 18.20.020 and 18.20.030;

H. Adult-oriented businesses as defined by Section 18.62.020;

I. It is unlawful to sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle from a vacant or unimproved lot. “Vehicle,” as used in this subsection, means and includes everything so defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and, in addition, boats;

J. Swap meets;

K. Automobile repair facilities;

L. Any other use not listed in Section 18.20.020 or 18.20.030, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. (Ord. 1746 § 2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1738 § 8, 2012; Ord. 1666 § 18, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 18, 2004; Ord. 1498 § 4, 1996; Ord. 1483 § 2, 1994; prior code § 10-3.1004)

18.20.050 Property development standards.
A. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-R zone:

1. Lot Dimensions. Each lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of fifty feet and a minimum lot area of five thousand square feet.

2. Building Height.

a. Properties of less than one-half acre: forty-five feet.

b. Properties one-half acre or greater: fifty-five feet, if there is a multifamily residential component to the development.

3. Stories. Commercial buildings shall be limited to three stories; mixed use or residential buildings may be four stories.

4. There shall be a minimum distance of fifteen feet between main buildings and a minimum of six feet between main buildings and accessory buildings. The provisions of Section 18.42.120 shall not apply to buildings in this zone.

5. Accessory Buildings. One-story accessory buildings may be constructed along the rear and side property line when located in the rear one-third of the lot.

6. Off-Street Parking.

a. Residential. Enclosed parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of one space for every studio and one bedroom unit and two spaces for every unit which is two or more bedrooms. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at the rate of one-fourth space per unit and all fractional spaces shall be rounded up to a full parking space.

b. Commercial. Parking for the commercial portion of any building shall be required at the rate set forth in Chapter 18.40, but may be satisfied by paying an in-lieu parking fee in accordance with Section 18.40.120. Parking may be reduced to the extent such reduction is justified by a parking demand study submitted by the applicant and approved by the city.

c. Except as specified herein, all other provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply.

7. Other Standards. To the extent not otherwise addressed in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 18.42 shall apply.

8. Signs. The provisions of Chapter 18.58 shall apply.

B. Residential Units.

1. Multiple-family residential uses built as a mixed use shall be restricted to the upper stories in a vertical development or the rear of the property in a horizontal development.

2. The minimum size of residential units shall be as follows:

a. Studio/efficiency/bachelor: four hundred fifty square feet.

b. One bedroom: six hundred square feet.

c. Two bedrooms: eight hundred square feet.

d. Three or more bedrooms: one thousand one hundred square feet.

3. Open Space Requirements. Each residential unit shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty square feet of usable common and private open space in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.42.065:

a. A minimum of fifty square feet per unit shall be private open space and directly accessible from the individual dwelling unit.

b. A minimum of seventy-five square feet per unit shall be usable common open space.

c. The remaining twenty-five square feet per unit may be provided as either common or private open space.

4. The maximum residential density shall be thirty-four units per acre.

5. If multifamily residential is the only use on the property:

a. The minimum density shall be twenty-four units per acre;

b. No more than fifty percent of the front yard setback, including driveways, shall be paved or otherwise covered with hardscaped materials. The remaining area shall be permanently landscaped with softscape materials and provided with a permanent irrigation system subject to city approval.

C. The following minimum setback requirements shall apply in the C-R zone:

 

Commercial Only

Vertical Mixed Use

Horizontal Mixed Use

Residential Only

Front – 1st and 2nd floors

0'

0'

0'

5'

3rd and 4th floors

5'

5'

5'

10'

Rear – Adjacent to commercial

5'

5'

5'

5'

Rear – 1st and 2nd floors adjacent to R-3, R-4, or C-R

10'

10'

10'

10'

Rear – 3rd and 4th floors adjacent to R-3, R-4, or C-R

15'

15'

15'

15'; 20' if building is greater than 45'

Side yard – Commercial component

0'

0'

0'

N/A

Side yard – Residential – 1 or 2 story building

N/A

N/A

5'

5'

Side yard – Residential – 2 story with semisubterranean parking or 3+ stories

N/A

N/A

10'

10'

Side yard residential – Corner lot – Regardless of stories

N/A

N/A

10'

10'

Side yard – Building fronts on a side yard of R-3, R-4, or C-R property regardless of height

N/A

N/A

10'

10'

(Ord. 1804 § 9, 2019; Ord. 1746 § 2 (part), 2013: Ord. 1683 § 19, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1005)

18.20.060 Deleted.
(Ord. 1683 § 20, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

Chapter 18.22
PARKING ZONE (P)
Sections:

18.22.010    Parking zone (P).

18.22.020    Uses permitted.

18.22.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.22.040    Uses prohibited.

18.22.050    Property development standards.

18.22.010 Parking zone (P).
The P parking zone is intended for the off-street parking of automobiles and other vehicles. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, any and every building and premises or land in the P zone shall be used for, or occupied, and any and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, moved into, or within such P zone, exclusively and only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article. (Prior code § 10-3.1101)

18.22.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted (also see Section 18.42.040):

Off-street parking: open air, temporary parking of transient automobiles and other vehicles movable under their own power, but not including service, repairs or sales. The provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply. (Ord. 1805 § 5, 2019; Ord. 1738 § 9, 2012; prior code § 10-3.1102)

18.22.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.46 of this code:

A. Commercial uses allowable in the abutting commercial zoned parcel, when developed in concert with the abutting commercial zoned parcel and found compatible with surrounding developed area.

B. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1683 § 21, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1103)

18.22.040 Uses prohibited.
The following specific uses are deemed to be incompatible with the uses permitted in the P zone and are therefore prohibited:

A. Residential uses;

B. Industrial uses;

C. Adult oriented businesses as defined in subsection A of Section 18.62.010 of this code; and

D. It is unlawful to sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle from a vacant or unimproved lot. “Vehicle,” as used in this subsection, means and includes everything so defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and, in addition, boats. (Ord. 1683 § 22, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1104)

18.22.050 Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to land in the P zone:

A. Front yards: where the P zone abuts an R zone, there shall be a front yard not less than twenty feet. Such yard shall be landscaped and maintained. Where the frontage on one side of the street is zoned P and it faces an R zone frontage, there shall be a front yard not less than twenty feet. Such yard shall be landscaped and maintained.

B. Side and rear yards: where the side or rear lot of P zoned property abuts any R zone, there shall be an eight-foot-high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along such side or rear lot line abutting any R zone; provided, however, such wall shall be only three and one-half feet high from the building line of the R zone to the front lot line.

C. The gross floor area of buildings or structures on a lot or lots that comprise the project site shall not exceed 0.50 FAR. (Ord. 1683 § 23, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1105)

Chapter 18.24
OFFICIAL ZONE (O)
Sections:

18.24.010    Official zone (O).

18.24.020    Uses permitted.

18.24.010 Official zone (O).
The O official zone is intended solely for public, quasi-public and official uses and any other public or community functions, facilities and needs. (Ord. 1683 § 24, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1201)

18.24.020 Uses permitted.
Buildings, structures, and land in the O zone shall be used, and structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged only for the following purposes, plus such other uses as the commission and the council may deem to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health and general welfare. All projects in the O zone shall be subject to the site plan review provisions set forth in Chapter 18.44:

A. Public buildings;

B. Public schools;

C. Parks and recreation areas;

D. Water works and drainage facilities; and

E. Nonprofit senior citizen housing developments provided they meet all the development standards of the R-3 zone with the following exceptions:

1. The maximum density, floor area ratio, usable open space and storage space requirements may be modified in whole or in part by the community development director based upon a review of the impacts of the project on the surrounding area.

2. Parking: a minimum of one parking space per two dwelling units. Off-street spaces may encroach into the front yard setback area provided the spaces are properly screened and/or landscaped;

3. Dwelling unit size: the minimum dwelling unit size may be modified in part or in whole by the community development director on an individual project basis; and

4. Building height: the maximum building height shall not exceed forty-five feet. (Ord. 1805 § 6, 2019; Ord. 1738 § 10, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 25, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1490 § 4, 1995; prior code § 10-3.1202)

Chapter 18.26
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE (C-P)
Sections:

18.26.010    Business and professional office zone (C-P).

18.26.020    Uses permitted.

18.26.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.26.040    Uses prohibited.

18.26.050    Property development standards.

18.26.010 Business and professional office zone (C-P).
The C-P business and professional office zone is intended to provide for the integrated development of office and professional uses along with related uses and facilities. (Ord. 1683 § 26, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1301)

18.26.020 Uses permitted.
Buildings, structures, and land in the C-P zone shall be used, and structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged only for the following purposes, plus such other uses as the commission may deem to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare:

A. Business and Professional Office Uses. Only the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the property development standards set forth in Section 18.26.050. All uses and storage, with the exception of electric distribution substations, shall be constructed wholly within a totally enclosed building:

1. Administrative, financial and professional offices;

2. Art galleries;

3. Artists’ and photographers’ studios;

4. (Deleted);

5. Educational institutions;

6. Electric distribution and public utility substations;

7. Employment agencies;

8. Exhibit halls not permitting the sale of any products or items offered in exhibit;

9. General research not involving the manufacture, fabrication, processing, or sales of products listed in any other commercial or industrial district;

10. Laboratories, medical and dental;

11. Libraries;

12. Medical and dental offices and clinics;

13. Pharmacies;

14. (Deleted);

15. Fortunetelling as defined in Chapter 5.40.

16. Repealed.

B. Retail Commercial Uses. Only the following retail commercial uses shall be permitted when operated within a totally enclosed building being used for one or more of those uses permitted in this section; provided, however, there shall be no sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises:

1. Barber shops and beauty shops;

2. Confectionery stores;

3. Florists, retail;

4. Gift shops; and

5. Restaurants, coffee shops and/or tearooms. (Ord. 1805 § 7, 2019; Ord. 1757 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 11, 2012; Ord. 1737 § 19, 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(F), 2010; Ord. 1554 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1550 § 3, 1998; Ord. 1517 § 10, 1997; prior code § 10-3.1302)

18.26.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted in the C-P zone subject to a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this code:

A. Lodges and meeting halls;

B. Museums;

C. Office supply stores;

D. Public parking lots;

E. Establishments serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises provided the establishment of such a business would not adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the community;

F. Group care facilities and community care facilities, but excluding community care facilities for residential uses for less than seven persons;

G. Vocational colleges, such as barber and beauty colleges, modeling schools and medical training and trade schools;

H. Health facilities;

I. Day care facilities;

J. Hospitals;

K. Amusement arcades;

L. Urgent care centers;

M. Massage establishments that are not otherwise subject to an exception pursuant to Section 5.48.030;

N. Churches and related facilities. Related facilities do not include day care facilities, schools (kindergarten through twelfth grade), and rectories, convents, parsonages or minister’s residences.

O. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1757 § 4, 2015; Ord. 1737 § 20, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 27, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1554 § 3, 1998: Ord. 1517 § 11, 1997; prior code § 10-3.1303)

18.26.040 Uses prohibited.
The following uses are hereby expressly prohibited in the C-P zone, except as otherwise provided in Sections 18.26.020 and 18.26.030:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Uses other than those specifically set forth or provided for in Sections 18.26.020 and 18.26.030, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040;

E. Outdoor sales, including sales of products from trucks, conducted on vacant lots and outdoor sales of products not related to the business conducted on the premises;

F. Adult-oriented businesses as defined by Section 18.62.020G;

G. It is unlawful to sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle from a vacant or unimproved lot. “Vehicle,” as used in this subsection, means and includes everything so defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and, in addition, boats. (Ord. 1738 § 12, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 28, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1498 § 5, 1996; prior code § 10-3.1304)

18.26.050 Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all nonresidential land and buildings in the C-P zone:

A. Building height/FAR: Building heights shall not exceed sixty-five feet in general, shall not exceed thirty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-P zone and any R-1 or R-2 zone, and shall not exceed forty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-P zone and R-3 zones. The gross floor area of buildings or structures on a lot or lots that comprise a project site shall not exceed 0.50 FAR.

B. Building setbacks: See Section 18.42.085.

C. Fences, hedges and walls: the provisions of Section 18.42.070 shall apply.

D. Off-street parking and loading: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply.

E. Access: there shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road, or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all the standards and specifications of the city.

F. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 shall apply.

G. Minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred square feet. (Ord. 1738 § 30, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 29, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1305)

Chapter 18.28
HOME BUSINESS ZONE (H-B)
Sections:

18.28.010    Home business zone (H-B).

18.28.020    Uses permitted.

18.28.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.28.040    Uses prohibited.

18.28.050    Property development standards.

18.28.060    Performance standards.

18.28.070    General provisions and exceptions.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 662, 666, 719, 843, 944 and 1055.

18.28.010 Home business zone (H-B).
The H-B zone is intended to permit business and industrial uses of limited size and intensity to be located on lots occupied by single-family residential structures. It is further intended that where there are existing residential structures on a lot, the character of H-B zoned areas be maintained by restricting nonresidential uses to a separate building or area located to the rear of such residential structures. (Prior code § 10-3.1401)

18.28.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted in the H-B zone:

A. Single-family dwellings;

B. Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.56 of this code;

C. Mobile homes certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system, pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. Further, such mobile homes shall be occupied only as a residential use type and shall be subject to any and all property development standards of the zone; and

D. Family day care homes; provided, a large family day care home shall be permitted subject to approval of a home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 18.56 of this code. (Prior code § 10-3.1402)

18.28.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this code:

A. Plant nurseries;

B. Television, appliance, radio, and small equipment repairs, but excluding the retail sales of repaired products;

C. Contractor businesses;

D. Machine shops;

E. Retail sales of products produced on the premises;

F. Printing, engraving, lithographing, blueprinting, photocopying, and film processing;

G. Data processing and research, development or experimental laboratories;

H. Dog kennels for the purpose of breeding, training, boarding, or raising for profit or pleasure in the area bounded by 178th Street on the north, 182nd Street on the south, Denker Avenue on the east, and the alley between La Salle Avenue and Harvard Boulevard on the west;

I. Light manufacturing, processing or assembly of goods;

J. (Repealed);

K. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1738 § 13, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 30, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 19, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 19, 2004; Ord. 1640 § 7, 2003; prior code § 10-3.1403)

18.28.040 Uses prohibited.
The following uses are deemed to be incompatible with the uses set forth in Sections 18.28.020 and 18.28.030 and are therefore prohibited:

A. Automobile repair facilities;

B. Multiple-family dwellings containing two or more dwelling units;

C. Hotels, motels, and lodginghouses;

D. Retail commercial uses, except as provided in subsection E of Section 18.28.030;

E. Lodges, meeting halls and other places of public assembly;

F. (Deleted);

G. Warehouses and truck terminals;

H. Intensive commercial and industrial uses;

I. Adult-oriented businesses as defined by Section 18.62.020G of this code;

J. It is unlawful to sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle from a vacant or unimproved lot. “Vehicle,” as used in this subsection, means and includes everything so defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and, in addition, boats;

K. Automobile service stations;

L. Uses other than those specifically set forth or provided for in Sections 18.28.020 and 18.28.030, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. (Ord. 1738 § 14, 2012; Ord. 1498 § 6, 1996; Ord. 1666 § 20, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 20, 2004; prior code § 10-3.1404)

18.28.050 Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the H-B zone:

A. Lot dimensions: each lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of fifty feet and a minimum area of five thousand square feet.

B. Building height: no building shall exceed thirty-five feet in height. Single-family residences shall not exceed twenty-five feet or two stories in height.

C. Yards: every lot shall have a front yard setback of not less than twenty feet in depth. Structures in the front one-half of the lot shall be located not closer than five feet from the side property line.

D. Lot area per dwelling unit: the minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be five thousand square feet.

E. Minimum size of dwelling units: each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of eight hundred square feet of enclosed floor area, excluding garages.

F. All nonresidential uses and structures shall be confined to the rear one-half of the lot.

G. All nonresidential activities shall be conducted within a building. Outside storage shall be enclosed by a solid, uniformly finished fence and/or masonry wall. Such fence or wall shall be at least eight feet in height. The storage of materials shall not exceed the height of the required fence or wall.

H. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 of this code shall apply.

I. Off-street parking and loading: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 of this code shall apply.

J. Off-street parking in setback areas: required off-street parking spaces, if approved by the commission, may be located within the front yard setback area of a lot. In no case shall commercial or industrial vehicles or equipment be parked or stored in the required front yard setback area.

K. Fences, hedges and walls: the provisions of Section 18.42.070 of this code shall apply.

L. The gross floor area of buildings or structures on a lot or lots that comprise a project site shall not exceed 0.50 FAR. (Ord. 1683 § 31, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1405)

18.28.060 Performance standards.
A. Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving the use and storage of inflammable and explosive materials shall be governed by the provisions of the fire prevention code of the city. Adequate safety devices and equipment against the hazard of fire and explosion shall be provided in accordance with the fire prevention code. All incineration shall be prohibited.

B. Noise emitted from any use shall not exceed standards set forth in Chapter 8.36. (Ord. 1683 § 32, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1406)

18.28.070 General provisions and exceptions.
A. Where two or more adjoining lots of record are in single ownership at the time such lots are zoned H-B and such lots individually are substandard in lot width and/or lot area, such lots shall be considered a single lot or several lots which meet the minimum width and area requirements set forth in Section 18.28.050A.

B. A building containing any nonresidential use specified in Section 18.28.030, subject to conditional use permit approval, may be constructed on the front one-half of a vacant lot provided the property development and performance standards are complied with and provided, further, the exterior appearance of such building shall be residential in character. (Ord. 1683 § 33, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1407)

Chapter 18.30
COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-2)
Sections:

18.30.010    Commercial zone (C-2).

18.30.020    Uses permitted.

18.30.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.30.040    Uses prohibited.

18.30.050    Property development standards.

18.30.010 Commercial zone (C-2).
The C-2 commercial zone is intended for retail commercial uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, any and every building and premises or land in the C-2 zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained and moved into and within the C-2 zone, exclusively, and only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 10-3.1501)

18.30.020 Uses permitted.
Buildings, structures, and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged, only for the following uses. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards set forth in Section 18.30.050.

A. Retail commercial activities not involving used merchandise and conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building for the following uses:

1. Auditoriums (movie, music, theatrical, or otherwise);

2. Bakery goods shops (retail and employing not more than five bakers on the premises);

3. Banking and savings and loan;

4. Barber shops;

5. Beauty shops;

6. Book and stationery stores;

7. Clothes cleaning agencies and cleaning and pressing establishments using noninflammable and nonexplosive cleaning fluids;

8. Clothes and wearing apparel shops;

9. Confectionery and candy stores;

10. Custom dressmaking shops;

11. Neighborhood markets;

12. Medical and dental offices and clinics;

13. Department and furniture stores;

14. Dress shops;

15. Pharmacies;

16. Dry goods and notions stores;

17. Electric appliance stores and repairs;

18. Electric distribution substations;

19. Fire and police stations;

20. Florist shops;

21. Furniture stores;

22. Hardware and paint stores;

23. Interior decorating shops;

24. Jewelry stores;

25. Laboratories, medical and dental;

26. Millinery shops;

27. Newsstands;

28. Offices, business and professional;

29. Public utility commercial offices;

30. Photographic studios;

31. Radio and home appliance stores and repairs;

32. Real estate offices;

33. Restaurants, cafes, and cafeterias (no dancing or theatrical performances);

34. Shoe repair shops;

35. Shoe stores (retail);

36. Tailor shops, custom making;

37. Theaters (motion picture or otherwise) and auditoriums;

38. Television sales, services, and repairs;

39. Watch repair shops;

40. Fortunetelling as defined in Chapter 5.40;

41. Repealed;

42. Repealed;

43. Internet cafe;

B. Retail business uses similar to those set forth in subsection A of this section as provided in Section 18.42.040;

C. (Deleted);

D. Parking lots for automobiles. The provisions of Chapter 18.40 of this code shall apply;

E. Uses customarily incidental to retail businesses or accessory buildings when located on the same lot provided there shall be no manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing or treatment of products;

F. Substations. The requirement that the permitted use be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building shall not apply to an electric distribution substation;

G. (Deleted); and

H. Accessory uses in commercial parking lots subject to site plan review pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.44 of this code. (Ord. 1805 § 8, 2019; Ord. 1757 § 5, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 15, 2012; Ord. 1737 § 21, 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(G) and (H), 2010; Ord. 1666 §§ 21, 22, 2005; Ord. 1667 §§ 21, 22, 2004; Ord. 1554 § 4, 1998; Ord. 1550 § 4, 1998; Ord. 1517 § 12, 1997; Ord. 1487 § 5, 1995; prior code § 10-3.1502)

18.30.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.46 of this code:

A. Establishments selling or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises;

B. Day care facilities;

C. Group care facilities and community care facilities, but excluding community care facilities for residential uses for less than seven persons;

D. Hospitals;

E. Amusement arcades;

F. Health facilities;

G. Massage establishments that are not otherwise subject to an exception pursuant to Section 5.48.030;

H. Urgent care centers;

I. Churches and related facilities. Related facilities do not include day care facilities, schools (kindergarten through twelfth grade), and rectories, convents, parsonages or minister’s residences;

J. Self-service laundromats;

K. Supermarkets;

L. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1757 § 6, 2015; Ord. 1737 § 22, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 34, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 23, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 23, 2004; Ord. 1554 § 5, 1998: Ord. 1517 § 13, 1997; prior code § 10-3.1503)

18.30.040 Uses prohibited.
All uses not listed in Sections 18.30.020 and 18.30.030 are deemed to be expressly prohibited, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. No similar use determination may be made for the following specific uses, which are deemed to be incompatible with the uses permitted in the C-2 zone and are therefore prohibited:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Hotels and motels;

D. Industrial uses;

E. Laboratories, other than medical and dental;

F. Wholesaling and warehousing;

G. (Deleted);

H. Outdoor sales, including sales of products from trucks, conducted on vacant lots and outdoor sales of products not related to the business conducted on the premises;

I. Adult-oriented businesses as defined by Section 18.62.020G;

J. It is unlawful to sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle from a vacant or unimproved lot. “Vehicle,” as used in this subsection, means and includes everything so defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and, in addition, boats;

K. Swap meets. (Ord. 1738 § 16, 2012; Ord. 1517 § 14, 1997; Ord. 1498 § 7, 1996; Ord. 1483 § 3, 1994; prior code § 10-3.1504)

18.30.050 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-2 zone.

A. Lot area: There shall be a minimum area of seven thousand and five hundred square feet.

B. Lot dimensions: every lot shall have a minimum width of fifty feet. Every lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifty feet.

C. Building height/FAR: Building heights shall not exceed sixty-five feet in general, shall not exceed thirty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-2 zone and any R-1 and R-2 zone, and shall not exceed forty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-2 and R-3 zones. The gross floor area of buildings or structures on a lot or lots that comprise a project site shall not exceed 0.50 FAR.

D. Building setbacks: See Section 18.42.085.

E. Distance between buildings: No distance between buildings shall be required other than where a lot is now used for residential purposes, in which case the provisions of the R-4 zone (Chapter 18.18 of this code) shall apply.

F. Fences, hedges, and walls: The provisions of Section 18.42.070 of this code shall apply.

G. Access: there shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all the standards and specifications of the city.

H. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 of this code shall apply.

I. Off-street parking and loading: The provisions of Chapter 18.40 of this code shall apply. (Ord. 1738 § 31, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 35, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1505)

Chapter 18.32
GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-3)
Sections:

18.32.010    General commercial zone (C-3).

18.32.020    Uses permitted.

18.32.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.32.040    Uses prohibited.

18.32.050    Property development standards.

18.32.010 General commercial zone (C-3).
The C-3 general commercial zone is intended for general commercial uses. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, any and every building and premises or land in the C-3 zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained and moved into and within the C-3 zone, exclusively, and only in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 10-3.1601)

18.32.020 Uses permitted.
Buildings, structures, and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged only for the following uses, plus other such uses as the commission may deem (pursuant to Section 18.42.040) to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. All uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building, unless otherwise expressly authorized and shall be subject to the property development standards set forth in Section 18.32.050. The following uses shall be permitted (also see Section 18.42.040):

A. Any use permitted in the C-2 zone provided all uses shall comply with all the requirements stipulated for the C-3 zone; except where expressly stated otherwise in this chapter;

B. Stores, businesses, or commercial activities not involving any kind of manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to a retail business conducted on the premises and that such operations are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration, or other similar causes. Permitted uses shall include:

1. Antique stores;

2. Deleted;

3. Bowling alleys;

4. Blueprinting and photostating;

5. Bird stores and pet shops;

6. Chinchilla sales;

7. Conservatories of music;

8. Dancing academies;

9. Gymnasiums;

10. Legal card clubs;

11. Laboratories, medical and dental;

12. Mortuaries;

13. Music and vocal instruction;

14. Nursery sales of flowers and plants;

15. Pet shops;

16. Medical and dental offices and clinics;

17. Real estate offices;

18. Refrigerated food lockers;

19. Taxidermists;

20. Telephone exchanges;

21. (Repealed);

22. Furniture upholstery shops;

23. Repealed;

24. Secondhand store and/or thrift shop, when located at least five thousand feet from pawn shop or another secondhand store and/or thrift shop;

25. Repealed;

26. Veterinary clinics and hospitals;

C. Parking lots for automobiles. The provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply;

D. General commercial uses similar to those set forth in subsection B of this section as provided in Section 18.42.040;

E. Uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses set forth for accessory buildings when located on the same lot;

F. (Repealed); and

G. Accessory uses in commercial parking lots subject to site plan review pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.44. (Ord. 1805 § 9, 2019; Ord. 1757 § 7, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 17, 2012; Ord. 1737 § 23, 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(I) and (J), 2010; Ord. 1683 § 36, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 24, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 24, 2004; Ord. 1661 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1554 § 6, 1998; Ord. 1550 § 5, 1998; Ord. 1517 § 15, 1997; Ord. 1487 § 6, 1995; prior code § 10-3.1602)

18.32.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted in the C-3 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedure set forth in Chapter 18.46:

A. Car wash facilities;

B. Establishments selling serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises;

C. Group care facilities and community care facilities, but excluding community care facilities for residential uses for less than seven persons;

D. Recreational vehicle storage facilities, provided they are not located on arterial and major collector streets;

E. Motor vehicle dealerships;

F. Hospitals;

G. Day care facilities;

H. Amusement arcades;

I. Hotels and motels;

J. Health facilities;

K. Massage establishments that are not otherwise subject to an exception pursuant to Section 5.48.030;

L. Urgent care center;

M. Vocational colleges, such as barber and beauty colleges, modeling schools and medical training and trade schools;

N. Churches and related facilities. Related facilities do not include day care facilities, schools (kindergarten through twelfth grade), and rectories, convents, parsonages or minister’s residences;

O. Automobile service stations;

P. Self-service laundromats;

Q. Neighborhood markets;

R. Health clubs;

S. Supermarkets;

T. Lodges and meeting halls;

U. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1757 § 8, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 18, 2012; Ord. 1737 § 24, 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(J), 2010; Ord. 1683 § 37, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 25, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 25, 2004; Ord. 1554 § 7, 1998: Ord. 1525 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1517 § 16, 1997; Ord. 1498 § 8, 1996; prior code § 10-3.1603)

18.32.040 Uses prohibited.
All uses not listed in Sections 18.32.020 and 18.32.030 are deemed to be expressly prohibited, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. No similar use determination may be made for the following specific uses, which are deemed to be incompatible with the uses permitted in the C-3 zone and are therefore prohibited:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Wholesaling and warehousing;

E. Outdoor sales, including sales of products from trucks, conducted on vacant lots and outdoor sales of products not related to the business conducted on the premises;

F. It is unlawful to sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle from a vacant or unimproved lot. “Vehicle,” as used in this subsection, means and includes everything so defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and, in addition, boats;

G. Swap meets;

H. Adult-oriented businesses as defined by Section 18.62.020G. (Ord. 1738 § 19, 2012; Ord. 1498 § 9, 1996; Ord. 1483 § 4, 1994; prior code § 10-3.1604)

18.32.050 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-3 zone, except for lot width and lot area for such land and buildings which were of record on August 26, 1982.

A. Lot area: there shall be a minimum area of seven thousand five hundred square feet.

B. Lot dimensions: every lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of fifty feet. Every lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifty feet.

C. Building height: Building height shall be limited to two and one-half stories, shall not exceed thirty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-3 zone and any R-1 and R-2 zone, and shall not exceed forty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-3 and R-3 zones. The gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot or lots that comprise a project site shall not exceed 0.50 (FAR).

D. Building setbacks: In addition to setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way pursuant to Section 18.42.080, see Section 18.42.085.

E. A minimum ten-foot landscape perimeter shall provided on all street frontages.

F. Distance between buildings: no distance between buildings shall be required other than where a lot is now used for residential purposes, in which case the provisions of the R-4 zone (Chapter 18.18) shall apply.

G. Fences, hedges, and walls: the provisions of Section 18.42.070 shall apply.

H. Access: there shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road, or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all the standards and specifications of the city.

I. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 of this code shall apply.

J. Off-street parking and loading: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply. (Ord. 1683 § 38, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1605)

Chapter 18.34
HEAVY COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-4)
Sections:

18.34.010    Heavy commercial zone (C-4).

18.34.020    Uses permitted.

18.34.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.34.040    Uses prohibited.

18.34.050    Property development standards.

18.34.010 Heavy commercial zone (C-4).
The C-4 zone is intended to provide for highway related uses. (Prior code § 10-3.1701)

18.34.020 Uses permitted.
Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged, only for the following uses. All uses shall be within an enclosed building unless expressly permitted and subject to the property development standards set forth in Section 18.34.050.

A. Any use permitted in the C-2 and C-3 zones provided all uses shall comply with all the requirements stipulated for the C-4 zone; except where expressly stated otherwise in this chapter.

B. Stores, businesses, or commercial activities not involving any kind of manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to the business conducted on the premises and that such operations are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration, or other similar causes. Permitted uses shall include:

1. Administrative and professional offices;

2. Auditoriums;

3. Blueprinting and photocopying;

4. Bowling alleys;

5. Electrical distribution and public utilities substations;

6. Medical and dental offices and clinics;

7. Gymnasiums, reducing salons, natatoriums and similar physical educational centers;

8. Mortuaries;

9. Off-street parking lots;

10. Plant nurseries;

11. Real estate offices;

12. Restaurants;

13. Skating rinks;

14. Theaters;

15. Vocational colleges, such as barber and beauty colleges, modeling schools and medical training schools;

16. Repealed;

17. Laboratories, medical and dental;

18. Repealed.

C. Accessory uses in commercial parking lots subject to site plan review pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.44. (Ord. 1805 § 10, 2019; Ord. 1757 § 9, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 20, 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(K) and (L), 2010; Ord. 1683 § 39, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 26, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 26, 2004; Ord. 1554 § 8, 1998; Ord. 1550 § 6, 1998; Ord. 1517 § 18, 1997; Ord. 1487 § 7, 1995; prior code § 10-3.1702)

18.34.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
The following uses may be permitted in the C-4 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.46:

A. Car wash facilities;

B. Establishments selling or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises;

C. Recreational vehicle storage facilities;

D. Amusement arcades;

E. Hotels and motels;

F. Health facilities;

G. Group care facilities and community care facilities, but excluding community care facilities for residential uses for less than seven persons;

H. Hospitals;

I. Urgent care centers;

J. Churches and related facilities. Related facilities do not include day care facilities, schools (kindergarten through 12th grade), and rectories, convents, parsonages or minister’s residences;

K. Motor vehicle dealerships;

L. Automobile service stations;

M. Self-service laundromats;

N. Neighborhood markets;

O. Supermarkets;

P. Health clubs;

Q. Lodges and meeting halls;

R. Drive-in restaurant;

S. Drive-in theaters;

T. Golf driving range and golf pitch and putt courses;

U. Taxicab services;

V. Massage establishments that are not otherwise exempt from the requirements of Chapter 5.48;

W. Self-storage facilities provided that the self-storage units do not exceed more than seventy-five feet of ground floor street frontage on a major collector or arterial street, or are otherwise buffered by another allowed, or conditionally allowed, use, including a retail component of the facility, and subject to the requirements set forth in Section 18.46.030(C)(17); and

X. Those uses permitted with a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 18.46.030C. (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1757 § 10, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 21, 2012; Ord. 1737 § 25, 2012; Ord. 1714 § 2(M), 2010; Ord. 1683 § 40, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 27, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 27, 2004; Ord. 1554 § 9, 1998: Ord. 1517 § 19, 1997; prior code § 10-3.1703)

18.34.040 Uses prohibited.
All uses not listed in Sections 18.34.020 and 18.34.030 are deemed to be expressly prohibited, except those determined by the commission to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. The following specific uses are deemed to be incompatible with the uses permitted in the C-4 zone and are therefore prohibited:

A. Residential uses;

B. Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses in any building or structure or on any lot;

C. Industrial uses;

D. Wholesaling and warehousing;

E. Commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in Sections 18.34.020 and 18.34.030;

F. Outdoor sales, including sales of products from trucks, conducted on vacant lots and outdoor sales of products not related to the business conducted on the premises;

G. Adult-oriented businesses as defined by Section 18.62.020G of this code;

H. It is unlawful to sell, contract to sell, offer to sell, display for the purpose of sale, or permit the sale of any vehicle from a vacant or unimproved lot. “Vehicle,” as used in this subsection, shall mean and include everything so defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and, in addition, boats;

I. Swap meets. (Ord. 1498 § 10, 1996; Ord. 1483 § 5, 1994; prior code § 10-3.1704)

18.34.050 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-4 zone.

A. Lot area: there shall be a minimum area of seven thousand five hundred square feet.

B. Lot dimensions: every lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of fifty feet. Every lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifty feet.

C. Building height/FAR: Building heights shall not exceed sixty-five feet in general, and shall not exceed thirty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-4 zone and any R-1 or R-2 zone, and shall not exceed forty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the C-4 zone and R-3 zones. The gross floor area of buildings or structures on a lot or lots that comprise a project site shall not exceed 0.50 FAR with the exception of a development where at least eighty percent of the development includes self-storage facilities, in which case the FAR shall not exceed 2.75.

D. Building setbacks: See Section 18.42.085; also see Section 18.42.080 of this code for additional setbacks which may be required for planned rights-of-way.

E. A minimum ten-foot landscape perimeter shall be provided along all street frontages.

F. Fences, hedges and walls: the provisions of Section 18.42.070 of this code shall apply.

G. Off-street parking and loading: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 of this code shall apply.

H. Access: there shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road, or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all the standards and specifications of the city.

I. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 of this code shall apply. (Ord. 1766 § 3, 2016; Ord. 1738 § 32, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 41, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1705)

Chapter 18.36
INDUSTRIAL ZONE (M-1)
Sections:

18.36.010    Industrial zone (M-1).

18.36.020    Uses permitted.

18.36.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.36.040    Performance standards.

18.36.050    Uses prohibited.

18.36.060    Property development standards.

18.36.010 Industrial zone (M-1).
Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, any and every building and premises or land in the M-1 industrial zone shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 10-3.1801)

18.36.020 Uses permitted.
The following commercial, manufacturing, and industrial uses shall be permitted in the M-1 zone, provided all activities are conducted within an enclosed building, plus such other uses as the commission may deem, pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040 of this code, to be similar and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare:

A. Adult-oriented businesses. Adult-oriented businesses shall be allowed to locate in the M-1 zone subject to obtaining an adult-oriented business permit in accordance with Chapter 18.62 of this code. In addition to an adult-oriented business permit, a business license must also be obtained prior to an adult-oriented business being allowed to operate.

B. Business offices.

C. Commercial uses customarily incidental and directly related to the services or operation of the permitted industrial uses.

D. Commercial printing, binding and kindred uses.

E. Industrial laundry, cleaning, and dyeing facilities.

F. Laboratories, other than medical and dental.

G. Machine shops.

H. Maintenance services.

I. Manufacturing and assembly of goods and products.

J. Parking lots.

K. Research and development facilities.

L. Restaurants.

M. Studios, artist, music recording or photography.

N. Repealed.

O. Emergency shelters, subject to the following requirements:

1. The maximum number of beds or clients permitted to be served nightly shall not exceed one per one hundred twenty-five square feet of floor area;

2. Parking shall be required at the rate of one space for every two rooms, plus one space per six rooms for employee parking with a minimum of three spaces for employees;

3. The waiting and client intake area shall be a minimum of one hundred square feet of gross floor area, plus an additional ten square feet for every person which the shelter can serve over ten persons;

4. Emergency shelters shall not be located within three hundred feet of each other;

5. No person may stay in an emergency shelter for more than one hundred eighty consecutive days;

6. An on-site manager shall be required during all hours that the emergency shelter is in operation; an individual or individuals who do not utilize the homeless beds and/or services may be eligible as on-site manager(s);

7. The emergency shelter shall prepare and file a management plan with the city that includes clear operational rules and standards;

8. Lighting shall be provided in all parking, exterior, intake and waiting areas, outside common areas, and along the periphery of the building and facility. (Ord. 1805 § 11, 2019; Ord. 1738 § 22, 2012; Ord. 1737 § 11, 2012; Ord. 1666 § 28, 2005: Ord. 1667 § 28, 2004: Ord. 1598 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1597 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1577 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1549 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1517 §§ 20, 21, 1997; Ord. 1498 § 12, 1996; prior code § 10-3.1802)

18.36.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
Provided all activities are within an enclosed building, unless otherwise provided, the following uses may be permitted in the M-1 zone, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this code:

A. Ambulance services, provided they are not located on arterial and major collector streets.

B. Automobile repair facilities, provided they are not located on arterial and major collector streets.

C. Automobile service stations.

D. Building supply centers.

E. Car wash facilities.

F. Churches and related facilities, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 18.46.030(C)(26). Related facilities do not include day care facilities, schools (kindergarten through 12th grade), and rectories, convents, parsonages, or minister’s residences.

G. Contractor businesses; provided they are not located on arterial and major collector streets.

H. Establishments selling or serving alcoholic beverages for off or on-premise consumption.

I. Health facilities.

J. Motels and hotels.

K. Recreational vehicle storage facilities, provided they are not located on arterial and major collector streets.

L. Self-storage facilities, at least five thousand feet from another similar facility and not located along a major collector or arterial street, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 18.46.030(C)(27).

M. Urgent care centers.

N. Warehouse uses subject to the requirements set forth in Section 18.46.030(C)(28).

O. Single room occupancy (“SRO”) residential units subject to the following requirements in addition to the other requirements of Chapter 18.46:

1. Each room shall have a minimum floor area of one hundred fifty square feet and a maximum floor area of three hundred fifty square feet, which may include bathroom and/or kitchen facilities.

2. Dwelling units shall be offered for rent on a monthly basis or longer.

3. A SRO unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons.

4. Each SRO development shall provide a minimum common area of ten square feet for each unit or two hundred fifty square feet, whichever is greater. All common areas shall be within the structure. Dining rooms, meeting rooms, recreational rooms, or other similar areas approved by the community development director may be considered common areas. Shared bathrooms, kitchens, janitorial storage, laundry facilities, common hallways, and other similar types of areas shall not be considered as common areas.

5. If a full kitchen is not provided in each SRO unit, common kitchen facilities shall be provided in the development. A full kitchen includes a sink, refrigerator, and a stove, range top and/or oven.

6. Each SRO unit shall have a private toilet in an enclosed compartment with a door and a sink, in addition to a kitchen sink if one is provided. The compartment shall be a minimum of fifteen square feet. If private bathing facilities are not provided for each unit, shared shower or bathtub facilities shall be provided in accordance with the most recent edition of the California Building Code for congregate residences. However, in no event shall there be less than one full shower or bathtub for every three units, and shower and bathtub facilities shall be located on each floor. Shared shower and bathtub facilities shall be accessible from a common area or hallway and shall be provided with an interior lockable door.

7. Each SRO unit shall have a separate closet.

8. Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and dryer for every ten units, with at least one washer and dryer per floor.

9. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor.

10. Parking shall be provided for a SRO facility at the rate of one parking space per unit plus an additional two spaces for the resident manager.

11. A management plan shall be submitted with the conditional use permit application for a SRO development, which shall be approved by the planning commission. The management plan must address management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, safety and security of the residents, and building maintenance. A twenty-four-hour resident manager shall be provided for any single-room occupancy with ten or more units. An on-site manager and a manager’s office shall be provided for any SRO development with nine or less units; the manager must maintain hours in the office for at least thirty hours a week. (Ord. 1737 § 12, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 42, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 29, 2005: Ord. 1667 § 29, 2004: Ord. 1598 § 4, 2000; Ord. 1597 § 4, 2000; Ord. 1577 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1550 § 7, 1998; Ord. 1549 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1526 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1517 § 22, 1997; prior code § 10-3.1802.1)

18.36.040 Performance standards.
All uses shall comply at all times with the following limitations or performance standards:

A. Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall be governed by the provisions of the fire prevention code of the city and shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry and required by the fire prevention code. All incineration shall be prohibited.

B. Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances. Devices which radiate radio-frequency energy shall be so operated as not to cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the boundary lines of the property upon which the device is located. Radio-frequency energy shall be electro-magnetic energy at any frequency in the radio spectrum between ten kilocycles and three million megacycles.

C. Noise emitted from any use shall not exceed the standards set forth in Chapter 8.36.

D. Vibration emitted from any use shall not exceed the standards set forth in Chapter 8.36.

E. Smoke and Dust. The regulations of the Los Angeles Air Pollution Control District shall apply.

F. Emission of Dust, Heat and Glare. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit dust, heat or glare in such quantities or degree as to be readily detectable on any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located.

G. Emission of Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matters in quantities which exceed those proportions shown in Table III “Odor Thresholds,” in Chapter 5 of the “Air Pollution Abatement Manual,” copyright 1951, by the Manufacturing Chemists’ Association, Inc., Washington D.C. The regulations of the Los Angeles Air Pollution Control District shall also apply.

H. Outdoor Storage and Waste Disposal. All outdoor storage of facilities for fuel, raw materials, and products shall be concealed from view from adjacent property and public rights of way. No material or waste shall be deposited upon a subject lot in such form or manner that it may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

I. Hours of Operation. For industrial uses which are adjacent to or abutting residential areas, hours of operation shall be established for such uses at the time of an application for a license to operate the use. Such hours shall be established in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of adjacent residential districts. (Ord. 1683 § 43, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.1803)

18.36.050 Uses prohibited.
All uses not listed in Sections 18.36.020 and 18.36.030 are deemed to be expressly prohibited, except those determined to be similar pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.42.040. No similar use determination may be made for the following specific uses, which are deemed to be incompatible with the uses permitted in the M-1 zone and are therefore prohibited:

A. Cocktail lounges;

B. Displays and sales of motor vehicles from vacant or unimproved lots;

C. Outdoor sales conducted on vacant lots and not related to the business on the premises; and

D. Residential uses. (Ord. 1738 § 23, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 44, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 30, 2005: Ord. 1667 § 30, 2004: Ord. 1498 § 11, 1996; Ord. 1483 § 6, 1994; prior code § 10-3.1804)

18.36.060 Property development standards.
The property development standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land and buildings in the M-1 zone, except for lot width and lot area for such land and buildings which were of record on August 26, 1982.

A. Building height/FAR: Building heights shall in no case exceed sixty-five feet, shall not exceed thirty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the M-1 zone and any R-1 and R-2 zones, and shall not exceed forty-five feet within one hundred feet of a zone boundary line between the M-1 and R-3 zones. The maximum gross floor area of buildings or structures on a lot or lots that comprise a project site shall not exceed 1.0 FAR.

B. Building restrictions:

1. No opening in the exterior wall of a building shall be allowed when the exterior wall of such building faces an R zone on the rear, side, or front property lines.

Exceptions:

a. If such building is situated sixty feet or more from an R zone, openings in exterior walls facing such R zone shall be allowed.

b. Any openings may be allowed in exterior walls of such buildings if they are required by law providing they are equipped with self-closers and are of solid material.

c. Solid panels of glass block shall be allowed regardless of the distance from the property line.

d. Openings shall be allowed into areas used for office space only; such openings shall be glazed with obscure glass, facing side or rear property lines only.

2. Noise emitted by any use shall comply with standards set forth in Chapter 8.36.

C. Building setbacks: See Sections 18.42.080 and 18.42.085.

D. Fences, hedges and walls: the provisions of Section 18.42.070 shall apply.

E. Landscape perimeters shall be provided on all street frontages except alleyways. The landscape perimeters shall be a minimum of ten feet and shall have automatic sprinkler systems.

F. Access: there shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated street, service road, or alley. The design of the access shall conform to all the standards and specifications of the city.

G. Signs: the provisions of Chapter 18.58 shall apply.

H. Off-street parking and loading: the provisions of Chapter 18.40 shall apply.

I. All industrial uses shall adequately accommodate all of the truck and vehicular circulation, parking, storage, and loading operations on site.

1. In furtherance of this requirement, the following minimum standards must be met:

a. Loading/unloading activities shall take place in areas designed and permanently designated solely for such purpose,

b. Loading spaces shall be designed so as to permit vehicular and truck traffic to move into and out of the loading spaces without backing into or upon designated parking spaces or a street,

c. Truck loading areas shall be adequately screened from public view by an eight-foot high solid wall, accessory structures, or landscaping and foliage so arranged as to conceal the loading facility,

d. Landscape setbacks of at least ten feet shall be required along all street frontages, except alleys,

e. Barbed wire shall not be used in areas visible to the public,

f. Driveways must be at least forty-five feet wide and accommodate truck turning movements from the curb lane,

g. Customer parking must be separate from truck parking and loading areas,

h. The applicant shall be required to pay an annual service impact fee to be determined by resolution of the city council, to cover city costs for repairing excess wear and tear to streets resulting from the trucking operation,

2. Exceptions. The provisions of subsection I(1)(h) of this section shall not apply to:

a. Trucking uses with related manufacturing, industrial processing or retail businesses in city. For the purposes of this section, retail businesses shall mean any business that collects sales tax. Industrial processing shall mean any business that is engaged in the processing of materials/products, whereby the processing adds value to the product(s),

b. Any trucking use that operates only a business office and does not involve trucks operating within the city. (Ord. 1738 § 33, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 45, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 § 31, 2005; Ord. 1667 § 31, 2004; Ord. 1598 § 3, 2000; Ord. 1597 § 3, 2000; prior code § 10-3.1805)

Chapter 18.38
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE (M-2)
Sections:

18.38.010    General industrial zone (M-2).

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 954, 1068, 1156, 1203, 1221, 1244, 1265, 1287, 1291, 1294, 1336 and 1344.

18.38.010 General industrial zone (M-2).
All regulations governing this chapter shall be identical to Chapter 18.36, industrial zone (M-1), of this code. (Prior code § 10-3.1901)

Chapter 18.39
SPECIFIC PLANS
Sections:

18.39.010    Intent and authority.

18.39.015    Specific plan – When used.

18.39.020    Administration.

18.39.025    Residential density.

18.39.030    Procedures and processing.

18.39.040    Specific plan contents.

18.39.010 Intent and authority.
This chapter is established to provide procedures for consideration of specific plans as authorized by Government Code Section 65450 et seq. and other applicable provisions of law. It is also the intent to describe the relation between an adopted specific plan and the provisions of this Title 18.

A. The specific plan (“SP”) zone is intended to provide for the classification and development of a parcel or parcels of land as a coordinated, comprehensive project that will result in a more desirable development or physical environment than would be possible through the strict application of conventional zoning regulations and standards.

B. The regulations established in a specific plan zone will allow residential, commercial or industrial land uses and development standards created specifically for the project area, while ensuring compliance with the spirit, intent and provisions of Titles 17 and 18 of this code, the general plan of the city, and other applicable laws. Guidelines, regulations and development standards incorporated in any specific plan zone are intended to achieve the following:

1. Respond sensitively to the natural and built environment and increase amenities to serve the inhabitants and surrounding community and neighborhood area;

2. Minimize the alteration of existing land forms and preserve significant natural features and vegetation unique to the city;

3. Conserve the historic, cultural and scenic assets of the city;

4. Provide an enriched environment with aesthetic cohesiveness and harmonious massing of structures within a framework of natural and landscaped open space through the utilization of superior land planning and architectural design;

5. Minimize the intrusion of new development into environmentally sensitive areas;

6. Protect new development from adverse visual impacts and excessive noise from nearby off-site structures and transportation corridors. (Ord. 1545 § 2 (part), 1998)

18.39.015 Specific plan – When used.
A. Specific plans may be initiated by the city or by an applicant in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.52.

B. A specific plan shall be required for any housing project on a site of five acres or more, planned as an integrated development in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MU, or C-R zone. (Ord. 1738 § 43, 2012)

18.39.020 Administration.
Specific plans and the regulations contained therein may reference existing provisions and procedures of this Title 18, or they may develop different administrative procedures to use in the implementation of the specific plan. Property may be used for any purpose and subject to all of the regulations and development standards of the specific plan.

A. The specific plan shall be delineated on the Gardena zoning map and each specific plan shall be identified on the map with an assigned number or name.

B. Specific plan approval shall be required if the specific plan promotes a better quality of development planning than can be obtained through conventional zoning. (Ord. 1545 § 2 (part), 1998)

18.39.025 Residential density.
Any specific plan adopted by the city after March 2012 shall allow a maximum residential density of at least twenty units per acre on that portion of the specific plan where residential units are allowed. (Ord. 1737 § 26, 2012)

18.39.030 Procedures and processing.
A. Applications for a specific plan and amendments thereto shall be filed with the community development department together with a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.

B. Specific plan applications for a single structure on a single parcel shall not be permitted.

C. The planning commission shall make the following findings prior to recommending approval to the city council:

1. The specific plan meets state requirements as specified in Section 65450 et seq. of the California Government Code;

2. The specific plan contains all necessary information as specified in Section 18.39.040 of this chapter;

3. The use of a specific plan for the project provides a better quality of development than otherwise available through conventional zoning.

D. The city council shall make the findings set forth in subsection C of this section prior to adopting a specific plan. (Ord. 1683 § 46, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1545 § 2 (part), 1998)

18.39.040 Specific plan contents.
A. In addition to state requirements as specified in the California Government Code Section 65450 et seq., the contents listed below shall be included in all specific plans, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the community development director that the item is clearly not applicable or relevant to the specific plan application under consideration.

B. Specific plan contents:

1. Title, table of contents, acknowledgements;

2. Summary statement;

3. Introduction:

a. Initiator of plan,

b. Purpose and intent,

c. Site location, brief description and maps,

d. Project history/background,

e. Relationship to neighboring jurisdictions, regional agencies and the state,

f. Environmental assessment,

g. Related applications and documents;

4. Detailed description of site:

a. Topography,

b. Geology/soils,

c. Hydrology,

d. Biological resources,

e. Land use,

f. General plan and zoning designations,

g. Circulation,

h. Cultural resources,

i. Public services,

j. Utilities,

k. Site summary,

l. Appropriate maps and diagrams;

5. Specific plan concepts:

a. Project goals and objectives,

b. Opportunities and constraints,

c. Conceptual site plan/land use plan,

d. Transportation/circulation plan:

i. Private,

ii. Public,

iii. Internal and affected external,

iv. Pedestrian, vehicular and mass transit,

e. Grading plan,

f. Public facilities/utilities plan:

i. Sewage,

ii. Water,

iii. Drainage,

iv. Solid waste,

v. Energy,

vi. Utilities,

g. Recreation and open space plan,

h. Fire protection/fuel modification plan,

i. Natural and man-made resources protection,

j. Phasing program,

k. Home owners association,

l. Landscape plan,

m. Appropriate maps and diagrams,

n. Other appropriate conceptual plans;

6. Development regulations and requirements:

a. Development standards,

b. Recreation and open space standards,

c. Parking,

d. Nonconformities,

e. Lighting standards,

f. Sign program,

g. Maintenance standards,

h. Standards for accessory structures, additions, walls, fences, other changes;

7. Design guidelines:

a. Architecture,

b. Landscape, streetscape,

c. Views,

d. Performance standards;

8. General plan consistency:

a. Applicable goals and policies,

b. How the specific plan meets the requirements of and implements the general plan;

9. Implementation:

a. Phasing plan,

b. Precise plan review process,

c. Infrastructure improvements/coordination,

d. Financing measures,

e. Monitoring programs,

f. Administration of plan,

g. Amendment procedures. (Ord. 1545 § 2 (part), 1998)

Chapter 18.40
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Sections:

18.40.010    Purpose.

18.40.020    Provision of parking facilities.

18.40.030    Parking use requirements.

18.40.040    Number of parking spaces required.

18.40.050    Size of parking spaces.

18.40.060    General development standards for parking areas.

18.40.070    Additional standards for residential parking areas.

18.40.080    Additional standards for commercial and industrial parking areas.

18.40.085    Maintenance.

18.40.090    Landscape regulations for parking areas.

18.40.100    Required off-street loading spaces.

18.40.110    Development of parking structures.

18.40.120    Parking for the Gardena Boulevard commercial uses.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 1037 and 1265.

18.40.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the development of off-street parking facilities for the general welfare and convenience of the public utilizing the various land uses within the city; to establish the number of parking spaces required for various uses and accommodate anticipated demand; to promote compatibility between various uses so as to avoid the adverse impacts of vehicular traffic and parking congestion; and to protect property values by the provision of landscaping, walls, setbacks, and other amenities. (Prior code § 10-3.2001)

18.40.020 Provision of parking facilities.
The off-street parking facilities required by this chapter, including loading facilities and landscaping, shall be a continuing obligation of the property owner so long as the use requiring the same continues. It is unlawful for an owner of any building, structure or use to discontinue or dispense with the requirements of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of facilities in excess of those required by this chapter provided all standards governing the location, design and operation of such facilities are adhered to.

A. At the time of the construction of any building or structure, or at the time such building or structure, other than a single-family residence, is enlarged by the addition of floor area, dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, or otherwise, off-street parking therefor shall be provided for the total resulting building or structure as set forth in this chapter.

B. In case of a change in use where the new use has a higher parking requirement than the previous use, parking shall be provided for the new use based on the difference between the number of parking spaces required for the new use as set forth in this chapter and the number of existing parking spaces allotted for the area to be occupied by the new use.

C. In case of a change in use where the new use is of the same intensity as the previous use, the provisions of Section 18.40.040 shall not apply.

D. In case of a change in use where the previous use cannot be ascertained, it will be presumed that the new use is of higher intensity, and parking for such new use shall be provided pursuant to subsection B of this section.

E. In the case of an addition to a single-family residence, the requirement for a two-car garage shall be triggered where the addition consists of twenty percent or more of existing square footage, or three hundred square feet, whichever is less. The community development director may waive the requirement for a two-car garage, or only require a one-car garage, if he determines that it is not physically possible to provide for a two-car garage. (Ord. 1738 § 34, 2012: prior code § 10-3.2002)

18.40.030 Parking use requirements.
For any land use, a minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided as required by this chapter; provided, however, the community development director may require an additional number of spaces, not to exceed ten percent of the minimum requirement, if any of the following findings are made:

A. That the nature or intensity of the use is substantially different from those uses normally associated with the classifications listed in this chapter and can be reasonably expected to generate a need for additional spaces;

B. That the combination of two or more uses can be reasonably expected to generate a need for additional spaces; or

C. That the use or intensity of the use can be reasonably expected to change in such a way that additional spaces would be required. (Prior code § 10-3.2003)

18.40.040 Number of parking spaces required.
The various land uses specified in this section shall provide a minimum of off-street parking in conformity with the requirements of this section. When the application of this section requires a fractional part of a parking space, such fraction, if below the five-tenths breakpoint, shall be rounded downward to the nearest whole number, and, if such fraction is at or above the five-tenths breakpoint, it shall be rounded upward to the nearest whole number.

Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

A. Residential:

Single-family:

Two-car garage.

Two-family and multiple-family dwellings:

Two spaces in a garage or in an enclosed parking facility, per dwelling unit.

Mobile home parks:

Two spaces per mobile home or trailer on the same space where the mobile home or trailer is located.

Accessory dwelling units:

See Chapter 18.13.

B. General Commercial:

Automobile dealerships:

One space per 2,000 square feet of lot area for patrons, plus one space per two employees. Such spaces shall not be utilized for the parking of vehicles for sale.

Banks and savings and loan offices:

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Business and Professional offices:

One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Furniture and major appliance stores:

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Hotels and Motels:

One space per guest room for guest parking, plus one space per six rooms for employee parking with a minimum of three spaces for employees, plus provision of spaces for additional uses within the hotel/motel complex

Plant nurseries:

One space per 2,000 square feet of lot area, plus one space per two employees

Retail and service commercial less than 75,000 square feet gross floor area:

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Retail food and liquor markets:

One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area

Shopping center based on gross floor area:

 

75,000 – 500,000 s.f.

One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area

> 500,000 s.f.

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area

C. Commercial recreation:

Bowling alleys:

Five spaces per lane, plus provision of spaces for additional uses within the complex

Physical fitness centers/health clubs and spas:

One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area

Pool and billiard halls:

Two spaces per table

Tennis and racquetball facilities:

Four spaces per court, plus provision of spaces for other uses

Arcades:

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area

D. Educational facilities:

Day care facilities and kindergartens

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. One space per employee, plus one space per ten children/clients

Elementary and junior high schools:

Two spaces per classroom

High schools:

Six spaces per classroom

Trade schools:

One space per fifty square feet of gross classroom area, plus one space per employee

E. Service facilities:

Hospitals:

Two spaces per bed

Medical and dental clinics and offices:

One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Medical and dental laboratories:

One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Group care facilities:

One space per three beds

F. Places of assembly:

Clubs, lodges, and dance halls:

One space per thirty-five square feet of gross assembly floor area

Museum and libraries:

One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Food and beverage establishments:

Without dancing: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area; With dancing: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per ten square feet of dance floor area

Fast food, drive-in and drive-through:

One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, minimum of ten spaces

Mortuaries:

One space per three fixed seats or one space per thirty-five square feet of gross floor area in the chapel, plus one space per 300 square feet gross floor area not in the chapel

Theaters, auditoriums, and stadiums:

One space per three fixed seats or one space per thirty-five square feet of gross floor area if there are no fixed seats

Churches:

One space per three fixed seats or one space per thirty-five square feet of gross sanctuary area if there are no fixed seats

G. Manufacturing and Kindred Uses:

Manufacturing uses:

One space per 750 square feet for manufacturing areas, one space per 300 square feet for office areas, and one space per vehicle used for the business

Warehouses and storage:

One space per 1,000 square feet for warehousing areas, one space per 300 square feet for office areas, and one space per vehicle for the business

Research and development:

One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area

H. Public and quasi-public Facilities:

Government offices:

One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Other uses:

Determined by the community development director

I. Uses Otherwise Not Provided for:

Determined by the community development director

(Ord. 1778 § 4, 2017; Ord. 1737 § 7, 2012; Ord. 1732 §§ 1, 2, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 47, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1640 § 8, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2004)

18.40.050 Size of parking spaces.
For all required parking spaces, the following shall be the minimum standards:

A. Parking spaces shall have a minimum dimension of nine feet by eighteen feet; parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum dimension of nine feet by twenty-five feet.

B. Parking spaces adjacent to a wall or any other obstruction shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet by twenty feet.

C. Compact parking spaces shall not exceed twenty-five percent of all required parking spaces and shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet by seventeen feet. All compact spaces shall be so marked on the pavement and/or wheel stop. Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, compact parking spaces shall not be considered as satisfying the parking requirements for residential uses, as set forth in Section 18.40.040(A).

D. Accessible parking spaces shall meet all state accessibility standards, as set forth in the California Building Code.

E. Deviations from the parking lot design requirements may be permitted by the community development director when reduced space size in parking areas designed for small or compact automobiles is proposed.

F. The tables and charts below indicate the parking lot layout to be used.







(Ord. 1792 §§ 1, 2, 2018; Ord. 1683 § 48, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2005)

18.40.060 General development standards for parking areas.
A site plan drawn to scale, showing the proposed development of the property, including the layout and development of parking, access, and other improvements, shall be submitted at the time a building permit is requested for any new building or structure, or an addition to an existing building, or at the time a new use of land is established requiring parking spaces in addition to the existing ones or at such time as the parking layout is proposed to be modified.

A. In no case shall any portion of a public street or alley right-of-way be counted as part of the required parking spaces.

B. Unless tandem parking is specifically allowed by the zone, tandem parking shall not be considered as satisfying the parking requirements of this chapter.

C. Parking areas and access thereto shall be provided with adequate illumination for the protection and safety of pedestrians. Such lighting shall be properly shaded and reflected away from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties.

D. All parking areas shall be striped to the satisfaction of the city to facilitate the movement into and out of the parking stalls.

E. Wheel stops shall be securely anchored and placed a minimum of three feet from any wall or property line. In addition, they shall be placed in such a manner that no vehicle shall overhang or encroach over a property line. Wheel stops shall also be provided to prevent the encroachment of, or damage to, other facilities.

F. Driveways shall be free and clear of all obstacles, such as utility poles, meter boxes, stairways and other overhangs. A minimum clearance of eight feet two inches in height shall be maintained between building overhangs and the driveway. The width of the driveway entrance and exits from a public street shall be measured at the property line.

G. Corner cutback area shall be established on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane making an angle of forty-five degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than ten feet from the edge of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way. The corner cutback area shall be free of impediments or visual barriers that exceed 3 1/2 feet in height.

H. A suitable turnaround shall be provided for all parking facilities, except single-family dwellings, in order that all vehicles enter the street in a forward manner. For this purpose, the minimum turning radius shall be twenty-five feet; however, for every six-inch increase in stall width, the turning radius may be reduced by one foot.

I. Parking areas shall be graded to drain and shall be paved with not less than two inches finished thickness of asphaltic pavement laid on not less than four inches of base material, or not less than four inches of finished thickness of Portland cement concrete.

J. Patrons or employees of an occupant of a building shall not be charged for the use of parking spaces designated toward providing the minimum parking requirements. The provisions of this subsection shall be inapplicable to any project whose minimum parking requirements are in whole or in part met by public parking provided by the Gardena Parking Authority pursuant to Section 18.40.110.

K. Parking areas having more than one aisle or driveway shall have directional signs or markings provided in each aisle or driveway.

L. Driveways shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the parking which they serve or shall be connected by easement for ingress and egress over adjoining property with the approval of the community development director.

M. Off-street parking and loading facilities may be provided collectively in the same building for two or more buildings or two or more uses provided the total number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for each of the individual uses and provided all other requirements of this chapter are met.

N. Unless otherwise specifically permitted, no owner, lessee, or other person in possession or control of property subject to this chapter shall allow the off-street parking of vehicles in any required front, side or rear yard. This subsection shall not prohibit the temporary standing of vehicles on permitted driveways.

O. A thirty to forty-two inch masonry/other decorative wall, landscape screen or landscaped berm shall be provided between the property line and parking spaces located along street frontages and between driveway aisle and parking spaces, which face main entrances to new, expanded or reconfigured parking facilities. Such walls or landscape berms shall be setback from the property line and the area between the property line and wall or berm shall be landscaped. The height of the wall or berm shall be measured from the finished grade of the parking space. (Ord. 1804 § 10, 2019; Ord. 1732 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 49, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1640 § 9, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2006)

18.40.070 Additional standards for residential parking areas.
A. Guest parking shall be provided for residential developments and mobile home parks of more than one unit at one-half parking space per dwelling unit. Where such percentage is below the halfway breakpoint, it will be rounded downward, and where such percentage is above the halfway breakpoint, it will be rounded upward. All guest parking spaces shall be clearly identified and easily accessible.

B. Driveways serving less than twenty parking spaces shall have a minimum width of ten feet; driveways serving twenty or more parking spaces shall have a minimum width of twenty feet; driveways extending beyond one hundred fifty feet into a property shall have a minimum width of twelve feet. Additional driveways for multiple-family dwellings providing more than one hundred parking spaces may be required to eliminate traffic congestion upon review by the community development director.

C. Ground level off-street parking areas shall not be located closer than 10 feet from a building wall or portion of a building having windows or doors opening onto the parking area.

D. Unless tandem parking is allowed, a two-car garage shall be fully enclosed and have a minimum interior dimension of twenty feet in width by twenty feet in depth. A garage designed for tandem parking shall have a minimum interior dimension of twelve feet in width by forty-one feet in depth. Designated parking area shall be designed to remain free and clear of all obstructions, including, but not limited to, washer/dryer units, water heaters, etc.

E. Parking facilities for multiple unit residential developments shall be designed to provide practical on site circulation to all required parking spaces which allow each vehicle to exit forward facing.

F. No more than one driveway shall be permitted on residential lots with less than one hundred feet of street frontage. (Ord. 1804 § 11, 2019; Ord. 1792 § 3, 2018; Ord. 1683 § 50, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2007)

18.40.080 Additional standards for commercial and industrial parking areas.
A. Driveways for commercial and industrial parking areas shall be adequate to accommodate trucks utilizing the facility as set forth in this chapter and development standards for the zone.

B. The off-street parking facilities required by this chapter shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve; provided, however, the community development director may grant an exception to the location requirement if:

1. With regard to private parking facilities, (a) all or a part of the substitute location is within four hundred feet of the principal use for which the parking is being provided, measured in walking distance along the way open to public pedestrian passage; and (b) the substitute lot is in the same possession as the property containing the use it is to serve. Such possession may be by deed or by long-term lease approved by the city attorney as to form and content, or

2. With regard to public parking facilities: (a) There is a public parking facility owned or operated by the city, or any other public agency of which the city is a part, within five hundred feet of the principal use for which the parking is being provided, measured in walking distance along the way open to public pedestrian passage; (b) the vehicle parking spaces located at said facility are made available to the general public and their use is not restricted to private owners, lessees, licensees or other parties; (c) the vehicle parking spaces for which an exception is being claimed are to be used solely for employee parking of the person or business seeking the exception; and (d) the community development director finds that there exist sufficient public parking spaces at said facility to satisfy the off-street parking requirements imposed by this code upon the lot or parcel of land under consideration.

The community development director shall have continuing authority to review the status of vehicle parking at public parking facilities as set forth above. If, at a future date, the community development director determines that a public parking facility no longer provides sufficient parking spaces to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for a particular lot or parcel of land, the community development director may require the owner or operator of said lot or parcel of land to provide an alternative means of satisfying off-street parking requirements, which means may include (a) providing off-street parking on the same lot or parcel of land, (b) providing off-street parking at a substitute location, as set forth in subsections (B)(1) above, or (c) providing off-street parking at another public parking facility, as set forth in subsection (B)(2) above.

C. Accessible parking spaces shall meet all state accessibility standards, as set forth in the California Building Code.

D. Company vehicles: One parking space shall be provided for each company vehicle operated by a commercial or industrial business. The parking shall be in addition to all other required parking. (Ord. 1792 § 4, 2018; Ord. 1683 § 51, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2008)

18.40.085 Maintenance.
A. All parking areas shall be maintained to the satisfaction of the city. At a minimum this includes maintenance of the paving and striping.

B. A permit shall be required which includes a parking site plan review prior to the reconfiguration or repaving of any parking areas. An application shall be filed with the community development department accompanied by a fee in an amount set forth by resolution of the city council. This requirement does not apply to routine maintenance such as slurry sealing, repairing of potholes, or restriping in the same configuration as the existing parking lot. (Ord. 1738 § 44, 2012; Ord. 1732 § 4, 2012)

18.40.090 Landscape regulations for parking areas.
A. Landscape plans for parking areas shall be submitted in accordance with Section 18.42.075A and landscape shall be maintained in accordance with Section 18.42.075D.

B. For commercial and industrial developments, the amount of landscaping required shall be not less than five percent of the total paved area utilized for driveways and open parking areas. Said landscaping shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking areas wherever feasible. Any unused space resulting from the design of the parking spaces shall be landscaped. This requirement does not apply to indoor parking areas.

C. The size and type of planting materials shall be as follows:

1. One twenty-four-inch box size tree for every ten parking spaces. If less than ten spaces, two fifteen-gallon size trees shall be acceptable;

2. One five-gallon size shrubbery for each twenty square feet of planter area;

3. Xeriscaping shall be utilized wherever feasible with plants used being predominantly drought tolerant types and a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover and evenly distributed throughout the parking area; and

4. Planting beds shall have a minimum width of three feet. The front three feet of parking spaces may be used for planting beds. A minimum four-inch high curb shall be provided on all sides of planting beds for the protection of the landscaped areas. (Ord. 1804 § 12, 2019: Ord. 1792 § 5, 2018; Ord. 1683 § 52, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2009)

18.40.100 Required off-street loading spaces.
A. For all commercial and industrial uses, one off-street loading space shall be provided for each twenty thousand square feet of gross floor area; however, this requirement shall not apply to buildings or structures with a gross floor area less than seven thousand five hundred square feet.

B. Each off-street loading space shall be not less than twelve feet in width and forty feet in length, with a minimum height clearance of fourteen feet, and shall be so arranged that it will not impede traffic circulation within the parking area and will not block parking stalls.

C. Off-street loading spaces shall be permanently and clearly marked with paint or other easily distinguishable material.

D. Loading spaces shall be designed so as to permit vehicular and truck traffic to move into and out of the loading spaces without the backing of any truck into or upon parking spaces, a secondary or major arterial street. An alley may be used as a turning radius into and out of a loading stall. (Ord. 1683 § 53, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2010)

18.40.110 Development of parking structures.
The parking requirements set forth in Section 18.40.040 may be met by constructing, in conjunction with the Gardena Parking Authority, a public parking structure on the project site which structure contains the required number of parking spaces. (Ord. 1683 § 54, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2011)

18.40.120 Parking for the Gardena Boulevard commercial uses.
New or expanded commercial uses located on Gardena Boulevard between Normandie Avenue and Vermont Avenue may satisfy the parking requirements set forth in Section 18.40.040 as follows:

A. On-site parking shall be provided for spaces required due to increased square footage above and beyond existing square footage, as well as for any parking spaces that were previously provided on site.

B. Where the business is short parking spaces based on the original square footage, the deficiency in parking may be met by providing an in-lieu fee for each space in an amount determined by resolution of the city council.

Funds collected pursuant to this subsection shall be nonrefundable and shall be placed in a special account to be utilized exclusively for providing off-street parking in the area described above in the introductory paragraph.

C. No additional parking spaces or in-lieu fees shall be required where there is only a change in business without an increased intensification of parking requirements for the new business and there is no additional square footage being added to the business. (Ord. 1746 § 4, 2013: Ord. 1693 § 1, 2007: Ord. 1683 § 55, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2012)

Chapter 18.42
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

18.42.010    Scope.

18.42.020    Keeping of animals.

18.42.030    Satellite antennas.

18.42.040    Uses.

18.42.050    Height.

18.42.060    Lot area.

18.42.065    Open space – Residential uses.

18.42.070    Fences, hedges and walls.

18.42.075    Landscape regulations.

18.42.080    Setbacks for streets and alleys.

18.42.085    Building setbacks for commercial and industrial development.

18.42.090    Swimming pool setback areas.

18.42.095    Residential design criteria.

18.42.100    Permitted projections into required yards.

18.42.110    Protection of intersection visibility.

18.42.120    Distance between buildings.

18.42.130    Refuse enclosures.

18.42.140    Enclosure of mechanical equipment.

18.42.150    Security and lighting plan.

18.42.160    Reverse vending machines.

18.42.170    Pedestrian amenities.

18.42.180    Display of addresses.

18.42.010 Scope.
The general provisions set forth in this chapter shall apply to this title. (Prior code § 10-3.2101)

18.42.020 Keeping of animals.
A. Animal Defined. For the purposes of this section, “animal” shall mean any living being which is not human or vegetable.

B. Types. It is unlawful to keep any animal within the city other than domesticated dogs, cats and adult fowl, including doves and pigeons.

C. Number Permitted. A maximum of three weaned dogs, or three weaned cats, or three adult fowl, or any three combination thereof shall be permitted on any one lot or parcel in any zone.

D. Conditional Use Permits Required. The keeping of any animal not mentioned in subsection B of this section and/or animals in excess of the limits set forth in subsection C of this section may be permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.46.

E. Enclosures. All adult fowl permitted shall be kept in an enclosure in the rear yard, and at least five feet from the rear and side property lines, and at least twenty-five feet from any school, church, public building, hospital, group care facility, or any residence not on the property.

F. Public Nuisances. It is unlawful to keep, maintain, feed or further sustain conditions for animals which create objectionable odors or noise if such unreasonably interfere with the comfortable and peaceful use of adjacent properties and/or constitute a health hazard. If, upon an investigation by the city, it is determined that a nuisance does in fact exist, the owner of the property upon which such nuisance is found to exist shall abate such nuisance within ten days after written notification from the city. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2014: prior code § 10-3.2102)

18.42.030 Satellite antennas.
No person shall install, have installed, or maintain any satellite antenna designed or used for the reception of television or other electronic communication signal broadcast or relayed from an earth satellite, unless a building permit is obtained from the building and safety division. Such permit shall be subject to review by the community development director to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements. Satellite antennas may be located in any zone in the city; provided, however, they shall not be installed on or project above the roofs of residential buildings, in any required front yard areas, or in side yard areas of corner lots. Further, when such antennas are installed they shall, to the extent possible, be properly screened from view from streets and from abutting properties to the satisfaction of the community development department. (Prior code § 10-3.2103)

18.42.040 Uses.
All buildings erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, moved, or maintained, and any existing building and the land upon which it exists, shall be used only for the purposes permitted in the zone in which such building or land is located and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by law. Any building or structure moved from one lot or premises to another shall be made to conform to all the provisions of this chapter and shall be of the general character of the existing buildings in the neighborhood or better.

A. Similar Use Determination. In the event a specific use or type of use is not listed in any zone, the community development director shall have the authority to determine which listed use is most similar to the proposed use and thereby determine if the proposed use is permitted, subject to a conditional use, site plan review, temporary use permit, or prohibited.

1. A use specifically listed in one or more zones shall not be permitted as “similar” in a zone where it is not listed by the procedure set forth above. If such use is desired to be added to such zone, it shall be through the amendment procedures pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.52.

2. The community development director’s decision may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.72.

3. A permanent record shall be maintained of the community development director’s decision and other applications for such use shall be treated in accordance with such decision.

B. If the community development director determines that the proposed use is not similar to any use or any conditionally permitted use, and not expressly prohibited, the use may be permitted pursuant to the conditional use permit procedure set forth in Chapter 18.46; provided, that the use is in no way detrimental to surrounding properties or other uses permitted in the zone.

C. Unlawful Uses. Uses that are unlawful under federal or state law shall not be treated as permitted uses, and shall not be determined to be similar uses pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1764 § 5, 2016; Ord. 1738 § 24, 2012: Ord. 1711 § 3, 2008; Ord. 1683 § 56, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2104)

18.42.050 Height.
All buildings erected, and existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved, maintained, or enlarged, shall comply with the height regulations of the zone in which they may be located. (Ord. 1738 § 35, 2012: Ord. 1673 § 1, 2005; prior code § 10-3.2105)

18.42.060 Lot area.
A. All buildings erected, and existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved, maintained, or enlarged, shall comply with the area regulations of the zone in which they may be located.

B. The minimum lot area shall be that prescribed in each zone by this chapter, and such lot area shall not be reduced, diminished or maintained so that the yards or open spaces shall be smaller than that prescribed by this chapter, and the density of population shall not be increased in any manner, except in conformity with the area regulations of the zone in which the property is located. The open spaces provided around any building shall not be considered as providing the yard or open spaces of any other buildings, and the required yard or open spaces on an adjoining lot shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected.

C. Every building erected shall be located on a lot as defined in Chapter 18.04 of this code.

D. Every individual parcel of land at the time it was first zoned shall be deemed to be one lot, and not more than one main building shall be permitted on such parcel of land unless all regulations established by this chapter are complied with or a subdivision tract map is recorded with the county recorder, or a record of survey map, approved record of split, or other map is filed with and approved by the commission. If a through lot is improved as one building site, no main building or accessory building shall be located closer to either street than the distance constituting the required front yard on such street. (Prior code § 10-3.2106)

18.42.065 Open space – Residential uses.
A. Open space may be either private or common.

1. “Private open space” must be directly accessible from the individual dwelling unit and may be in the form of patios, decks, balconies, and roof decks.

2. “Common open space” must be accessible to all residents and may include plazas, courtyards and paseo areas. “Open space” shall not include: sidewalks; parking areas; garages; driveways; turning aisles; storage areas; refuse areas; or areas inaccessible to residents.

B. Dimensions.

1. All common areas shall have a minimum continuous area of one hundred fifty square feet and no dimension less than eight feet in any zone;

2. Except for balconies, patios, and decks, private open space in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones shall have a minimum continuous area of one hundred fifty square feet and no dimension less than eight feet;

3. Except for balconies, patios, and decks, private open space in the MU or C-R zone shall not have any dimension less than eight feet;

4. Private balconies, patios, and decks shall have a minimum area of forty square feet and no dimension less than four feet.

C. Landscaping. All usable open space, excluding private balconies, patios, decks, designated common game areas, and fenced private swimming pool areas, shall be landscaped. Common swimming pool areas may be landscaped if feasible.

D. Indoor Areas. Indoor areas improved and designated for the leisure and recreational use of all the residents may contribute to a maximum of ten percent of the usable open space requirement. (Ord. 1804 § 14, 2019)

18.42.070 Fences, hedges and walls.
A. Height.

1. Residential Uses. A fence, hedge or wall not more than seven feet in height may be located along the side or rear property lines.

2. Residential front yard fences shall be composed of only the following materials: wood, wrought iron, tubular steel, stone, brick, stucco, or decorative block such as slump stone or split-faced block. If the fence consists of wrought iron or tubular steel, it shall be interspersed with stone, brick, stucco, or decorative block for aesthetic reasons.

a. Driveway gates shall be set back at least twenty feet from front or corner side yards.

b. Driveway gates abutting alleys shall be located at least twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley.

c. Except as provided by subsection (A)(2)(d) of this section, fences in the front yard setback shall have a maximum height of three and one-half feet for interior lots and three feet for corner lots in the required front yard setback area. Fences in the front yard beyond the setback shall not exceed seven feet in height.

d. In cluster developments that provide perimeter fencing, fences in the front yard setback may be up to seven feet in height provided the following requirements are met:

i. The fence shall consist of wrought iron or tubular steel and shall be interspersed with stone, brick, stucco, or decorative block for aesthetic reasons; and

ii. There is a minimum of five feet of landscaping between the front of the fence and the back of the sidewalk area closest to the fence.

3. Nonresidential Uses. A fence, hedge or wall not more than eight feet in height may be located along the side or rear property lines. A fence, hedge or wall shall have a maximum height of three and one-half feet for interior lots and three feet for corner lots in the required front yard setback area when such setback is required pursuant to the provisions of this code.

a. Nonresidential fences shall be composed of only the following materials: wrought iron, tubular steel, stone, brick, stucco or decorative block such as slump stone or split-faced block.

b. Nonresidential fences and walls located on street frontages shall have a minimum three-foot landscape setback.

4. Nonresidential Parking Lot Abutting Residential Zone. Wall enclosure requirements shall be as follows:

a. Where a commercial or industrial parking lot abuts property in a residential zone, a decorative masonry wall at least eight feet in height shall be constructed along the abutting property line. Such walls shall uniformly step down to a height of three and one-half feet within the required front yard setback area of the adjacent property.

b. Where a commercial or industrial parking lot is adjacent to a street or highway, a decorative masonry wall three feet in height or a landscape hedge shall be constructed to serve as a visual screen.

B. Visibility. On a reversed corner lot, or where the rear yards of two corner lots abut each other, or whenever visibility is impaired, a reduction in fence, hedge or wall height to a maximum of three feet or a corner cutback area of ten feet by ten feet shall be required for safety purposes. Such cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane making an angle of forty-five degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be.

C. Measurement of Fences. When a fence, wall or landscaping treatment of a specified height is required as a condition of approval to a development request, and there is substantial difference in the finished grade on either side of such fence, the height shall be measured from a grade as determined by the community development director in order to protect the safety and general welfare of affected property owners.

D. Prohibited Fences. No electrically charged fence or barbed wire or razor-ribbon type fencing shall be permitted in any zone in the city, except as provided in subsection E of this section.

E. Exceptions.

1. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the erection or construction of a fence, hedge or wall as required by any federal or state law or regulation.

2. For commercial and industrial uses, three strands of barbed wire may be placed atop a fence or wall which is at least six feet in height and is not visible from a street or highway. Razor-ribbon wire may be placed atop a fence which is at least eight feet in height, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.46, provided it is not visible from a street or highway.

3. Minor Variance in Height. The community development director may permit an increase of not more than twenty percent in the permitted height of a side or rear fence, wall or hedge. Such requests shall be filed with the community development department and be accompanied by appropriate plans drawn to scale and a filing fee established by council resolution. The community development director shall review the application, statements and drawings submitted and all pertinent and relevant data and, within thirty days after the filing of an application, render a decision in writing, either approving or denying the request and stating the reason for such action. One copy of the written decision shall be sent to the applicant, and one copy shall be kept on file.

F. Permit Procedure. No person shall erect, construct or alter a fence or wall unless a permit therefor has been issued by the building and safety division. No permit shall be issued until all fences, walls and hedges on the property conform to the provisions of this section.

1. Applications. An application for a permit shall be filed by the owner or other person having the right to the possession of the land for which the permit is sought.

2. Fees. All permit applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by city council resolution, payable to the city to defray the costs incurred by the city in processing the application. (Ord. 1804 § 13, 2019; Ord. 1738 § 36, 2012: Ord. 1683 § 57, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1629 § 16, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2107)

18.42.075 Landscape regulations.
A. A complete landscaping plan shall accompany site development plans for all newly constructed or expanded buildings or structures in all the multiple-family residential, commercial, and industrial zones. This requirement shall not apply to the following:

1. A change in use, involving no addition or alterations to buildings or parking layout;

2. An addition to or alteration of any building or structure required by other provisions of this code or state laws;

3. An addition to or alteration of any building or structure, which does not exceed five hundred square feet.

B. The landscaping plan shall include:

1. The botanical and common names of the plants listed alphabetically with a key number assigned to each plant so it can easily be located on the plan;

2. The size and quantity of the plants;

3. The spacing and design of landscape material.

C. For commercial and industrial developments, the amount of landscaping required in parking areas and size of planting materials shall be as set forth in Section 18.40.090.

D. Landscape maintenance requirements shall be as follows:

1. An automatic sprinkler or irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in working order.

2. All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in thriving condition.

3. Lawn and ground covers shall be trimmed or mowed regularly. All planted areas shall be kept free of weeds and debris.

4. Adjustments, replacements, repairs and cleaning of plant material shall be a part of the regular maintenance.

5. Stakes, guys, and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct function. Ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasion or girding on trunks or branches. (Ord. 1804 § 15, 2019)

18.42.080 Setbacks for streets and alleys.
No building, structure or other permanent improvement, exclusive of temporary signs and movable fences, shall be constructed or placed within the existing and planned rights-of-way for the streets and alleys required by Chapter 13.44 of this code. All building setbacks and yards shall be measured from such minimum rights-of-way. (Ord. 1683 § 58, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2108)

18.42.085 Building setbacks for commercial and industrial development.
The following building setbacks shall be established and maintained in addition to setbacks that may be required for planned rights-of-way for new and expanded structures:

1. Front building setback:

a. Where Commercial or industrial zoned property fronts a street, there shall be a building setback not less than ten feet, which shall be landscaped and maintained.

b. Where Commercial or industrial zoned property abuts or is adjacent to a R zone, there shall be a building setback not less than twenty feet, which shall be landscaped and maintained.

c. Where Commercial or industrial zone property faces a R zone, there shall be a building setback not less than twenty feet, which shall be landscaped and maintained.

2. Side building setback:

a. Where Commercial or industrial zone property sides upon a street, there shall be a side yard not less than ten feet abutting the street, which shall be landscaped and maintained.

b. Where the side or rear lot line of Commercial or industrial property abuts any R zone and there is no intervening alley, there shall be a side yard not less than five feet. There shall also be an eight-foot-high solid masonry wall erected and maintained along the side lot line abutting any R zone; provided, however, such wall shall be only three and one-half feet high from the building line of the R zone to the front lot line any street frontage.

3. Rear building setback:

a. Where commercial industrial zone property rears upon a street, there shall be a rear-building setback of not less than ten feet, which shall be landscaped and maintained.

b. Where the rear lot line abuts any R zone and there is no intervening alley, there shall be a building setback of not less than five feet and an eight-foot-high solid masonry wall shall be erected and maintained along the rear lot line abutting any R zone; provided, however, such wall shall be only three and one-half feet high within the ten feet closest to a street.

c. Rear building setbacks may be used for off-street parking or storage, except as described in subsection B(3)(b) of this section, where the yard is of adequate size and depth and the provisions of Chapter 18.40 of this code are met. When such yard is used for storage, the height of such storage shall not exceed six feet. (Ord. 1683 § 59, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.42.090 Swimming pool setback areas.
A swimming pool and related equipment shall not be located in any front yard, nor closer than five feet to any lot line or any building or structure, nor within the limits of any public utility easement or within planned rights of way. (Ord. 1683 § 60, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2110)

18.42.095 Residential design criteria.
All new and expanded residential developments shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the following design criteria:

A. Scale and Massing. The general perception of the size and volume of a building shall be compatible with and not more massive than that of surrounding buildings. Multiple massing, front facing and varied facade detailing are methods that can be used to reduce the scale of two-story homes.

B. Street-Facing Entries. Homes and multi-unit dwellings shall have primary entrances and doorways oriented toward the street, rather than away from the street, to the greatest extent feasible.

C. Architectural Detailing. Structures and walls and rooflines of structures shall contain a variety of distinct parts, architectural elements and surface treatments.

D. Rooflines. The rooflines provide a finishing visual detail for the residential structure. Varied rooflines reduce the scale of development. Single massing and box-like structures with minimal facade articulation shall be prohibited.

E. Garages, Driveways and Parking. The structures and paved surfaces devoted to cars have a major impact on the visual quality of the neighborhood and shall not dominate, detract from the architectural details or divide the visual impact of the site.

F. Walls and Fences. While they can provide privacy and a perception of security, walls and fences affect the visual quality of the neighborhood. Walls and fences visible from the street shall be compatible with the finish material and architecture of the structures and softened with landscape treatment placed at the base of or grown on the face of the wall or fence.

G. Materials, Color and Texture. The pattern of colors, materials and surface treatment of structures affect not only the image of the buildings, but also the overall identity of the neighborhood. Selection of materials, color and surface treatment shall be compatible with architectural style of the structures. Neutral colors with the use of appropriate accent colors are the easiest to maintain and are preferred. (Ord. 1738 § 37, 2012: Ord. 1683 § 61, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682)

18.42.100 Permitted projections into required yards.
The following authorized projections into required yards shall apply to both main and accessory buildings in any zone:

A. Fences, hedges, landscaping and guardrails: open fences, hedges, landscaping, and guard rails not more than three and one-half feet in height;

B. Fire escapes and stairs: a maximum of four feet; provided, however, such projections shall not be closer than three feet from side and rear property lines;

C. Cornices, belt courses, sills and similar architectural features:

1. Front yards: a maximum of four feet, and

2. Side and rear yards: a maximum of four inches for each one foot of the width of such required side or rear yard.

Exception: In the R-1 zone, a thirty inch eave encroachment may be permitted provided the eave is no closer than two and one-half feet from the property line and a clear space of five feet is maintained between eaves on adjoining properties;

D. Porches, platforms, patios and landing areas that do not extend above the first floor of the building:

1. Front yards: a maximum of four feet, provided any railing is open and no higher than thirty-six inches in height.

2. Side and rear yards: a maximum of two and one-half feet, provided there is at least 3 feet between the projection and the property line, and

3. Interior courts: a maximum of twenty percent of the width of the court and in no case more than five feet; and

E. Balconies:

1. Side and rear yards: a maximum of four feet provided the side and rear yard is a minimum of ten feet, and

2. Interior courts: a maximum of twenty percent of the width of the court and in no case more than five feet. (Ord. 1683 § 62, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2112)

18.42.110 Protection of intersection visibility.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all intersections of streets, alleys, and/or private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular traffic. There shall be no visual obstruction within the cutback areas established by this section.

A. Street and Alleys. There shall be a corner cutback area at all intersecting and intercepting streets and/or alleys. The cutback line shall be in a horizontal plane making an angle forty-five degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. It shall pass through the closest intersection of yard setback lines at the corner of the lot where visibility is required.

B. Driveways. There shall be a corner cutback area on each side of any private driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutback lines shall be in a horizontal plane making an angle of forty-five degrees with the side, front or rear property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point not less than ten feet from the edge of the driveway where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way.

Exception 1: Open Fencing less than forty-two inches in height shall be exempt from the corner cutback requirement.

C. Irregular Lots. Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a forty-five degree angle does not provide for intersection visibility, the corner cutback shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line which is not less than seventeen feet from the intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side property line which is not less than seventeen feet from such intersection of the side and front (or rear) property lines. (Ord. 1683 § 63, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2113)

18.42.120 Distance between buildings.
Zones in which tall buildings are permitted: in all zones where buildings of three or more stories in height are permitted, the requirements for space between buildings shall be increased two and one-half feet for each story, or fraction thereof, above the second story. (Ord. 1738 § 38, 2012: prior code § 10-3.2114)

18.42.130 Refuse enclosures.
A. Residential. All trash containers shall be stored so they are not visible from the public right-of-way. For all multiple-family dwellings in excess of four units, refuse enclosures shall be provided as required by Chapter 8.20.

B. Commercial, Industrial and Other Uses. For all commercial, industrial and other uses, refuse enclosures shall be provided as required by Chapter 8.20. Refuse enclosures shall whenever possible be located where they are least visible from the public right-of-way.

C. Maintenance. The maintenance of refuse containers, bins and enclosures and the storage and removal thereof, including refuse collection activities, shall be pursuant to Chapter 8.20. However, the community development director may require additional trash enclosures, increased frequency of collection services, and locks placed on the refuse enclosures and/or bins if such action is deemed necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community. (Ord. 1797 § 11, 2018: Ord. 1683 § 64, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2115)

18.42.140 Enclosure of mechanical equipment.
All mechanical equipment, plumbing lines, heating and cooling units and storage tanks and ductwork, roof or ground mounted, shall be incorporated into the building envelope. When that is not feasible, all such items shall be screened on all sides with solid material architecturally compatible with the main structure. (Ord. 1738 § 39, 2012: Ord. 1683 § 65, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2116)

18.42.150 Security and lighting plan.
Complete security and lighting plans shall accompany all site development plans for multiple-family developments of four or more units and commercial and industrial developments to ensure that safety and security issues are addressed in the design of the developments. Lighting plans shall demonstrate an average of 2-foot candle with no single point less than 1-foot candle for all public/common areas. (Ord. 1683 § 66, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2117)

18.42.160 Reverse vending machines.
Reverse vending machines shall be permitted in all zones except residential zones upon administrative approval by the community development director and obtaining a business license from the finance department. Reverse vending machines shall comply with the following standards. Failure to comply with these standards will result in a revocation of the administrative permit.

A. Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

B. Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

C. Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use;

D. Shall cumulatively occupy no more than fifty square feet of floor space per site, including any protective enclosure and shall be no more than eight feet in height;

E. Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

F. Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;

G. Shall have a sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine, solely for the purpose of identifying the recycling facility or materials accepted for recycling. Additional area is permitted to provide operating instructions;

H. Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

I. Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use;

J. Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn;

K. Shall be located adjacent to building walls and designed to be aesthetically compatible with the host use and with surrounding uses. (Prior code § 10-3.2119)

18.42.170 Pedestrian amenities.
Pedestrian access via walkways that are at least forty-four inches wide shall be delineated by decorative material, pavers or stamped concrete for each new residential unit. The delineated walkways are required to provide primary access to each unit from the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1738 § 40, 2012: Ord. 1683 § 67, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682. Formerly 18.42.200)

18.42.180 Display of addresses.
A. All houses, buildings, and structures within the city shall be numbered for the purpose of the prompt identification of properties in accordance with this section.

B. Addresses shall be posted in Arabic numerals with the official number of the house, building or structure.

C. For houses, buildings and structures which face upon a street, whether public or private, the address numbers shall be placed upon the front, near the entrance, so as to be readily visible from the street. Each number shall be placed against a contrasting background. The numbers shall be at least four inches in height for residential dwellings and at least six inches in height for all other buildings and structures.

D. For houses, buildings and structures which have access to an alley, the address numbers shall be placed upon or immediately above the center of the garage door, gate, fence, door, or wall to the rear of the property so as to be readily visible from the alley. Each number shall be at least six inches in height and shall be placed against a contrasting background.

E. For houses, buildings and structures which front on a parking lot, the address numbers shall be placed upon the front, near the entrance, so as to be readily visible from the parking lot. Each number shall be placed against a contrasting background. The numbers shall be at least four inches in height for residential dwellings and at least six inches in height for all other buildings and structures.

F. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in charge of any such house, building or structure to fail to properly display the official address or to remove such address. (Ord. 1738 § 41, 2012)

Chapter 18.43
DENSITY BONUS AND OTHER INCENTIVES
Sections:

18.43.010    Purpose.

18.43.020    Definitions.

18.43.030    General provisions.

18.43.040    Density bonus.

18.43.045    Affordability.

18.43.050    Concessions/incentives.

18.43.060    Waiver/modification of development standards.

18.43.070    Land donation.

18.43.080    Child care facility.

18.43.090    Parking standards.

18.43.100    Condominium conversions.

18.43.110    Development bonus for commercial developers.

18.43.010 Purpose.
When an applicant proposes a housing development within the city and builds affordable housing, donates land, or provides child care facilities as prescribed in this chapter and Government Code Section 65915, upon request of the applicant, the city is required to provide a density bonus and concessions or incentives. The purpose of this chapter is to satisfy the requirements of state law and thereby increase the housing supply and availability of child care facilities in the city. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Adverse impact” shall be as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5.

“Affordable housing agreement” shall mean an agreement between the city and the applicant guaranteeing the affordability of the rental or ownership affordable units in accordance with this chapter and Government Code Section 65915.

“Affordable housing costs” shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5.

“Affordable rent” shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50053.

“Child care facility” shall mean a child day care facility, other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.

“Common interest development” shall be as defined in Civil Code Section 4100.

“Density bonus” shall mean a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable gross residential density under the applicable zoning code provisions and land use element as of the date of the application by the applicant to the city, or, if elected by the applicant, a lesser percentage of density increase.

“Development standard” shall mean a site or construction condition that applies to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, or other city condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. This includes, but is not limited to: height limitation; setback requirement; floor area ratio; on-site open space requirement; or parking ratio that applies to a residential development.

“Director” shall mean the general services director or the director’s designee.

“Disabled veteran” shall be as defined in Government Code Section 18541.

“Homeless person” shall be as defined in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 11301 et seq.

“Housing development” shall mean a development project for five or more residential units, including mixed use developments, and includes, but is not limited to: a subdivision or common interest development approved by the city and consists of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling as defined in Government Code Section 65863.4(d) where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

“Incentive or concession” or “incentive/concession” shall mean any of the following:

1. A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Commission as provided in Health and Safety Code Section 18901 et seq. This includes, but is not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and a reduction in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that result in identifiable and actual cost reductions, to provide for affordable housing costs or for affordable rents for the targeted units.

2. Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located.

3. Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable rents for the targeted units.

“Lower income households” shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5.

“Major transit stop” shall be as defined in Public Resources Code Section 21155.

“Maximum allowable residential density” shall mean the density allowed under the zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan, or, if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. In case of inconsistency, the density allowed under the general plan shall prevail.

“Moderate income households” shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

“Persons or families of low or moderate income” shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

“Persons or families of moderate income” shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

“Senior citizen housing development” shall be as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code, or a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.76 or 799.5.

“Specific adverse impact” shall mean a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete; inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or general plan land use designation does not meet this definition.

“Transitional foster youth” shall be as defined in Education Code Section 66025.9.

“Unobstructed access to a major transit stop” means that a resident is able to access such stop without encountering natural or constructed impediments.

“Very low income households” shall be as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50105. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.030 General provisions.
A. The city shall grant one density bonus as specified in this chapter, and, if requested by the applicant and consistent with the applicable requirements of this chapter and state law, incentives or concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards and parking ratios, when an applicant seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter, that will contain at least any one of the following:

1. Ten percent of the total units for lower income households;

2. Five percent of the total units for very low income households;

3. A senior citizen housing development;

4. Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for persons and families of moderate income; provided, that all units in the housing development are offered to the public for purchase; or

5. Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons, when such units are subject to a recorded affordability restriction of fifty-five years and are provided at the same affordability level as very low income units.

B. The request for a density bonus and proposals for incentives or concessions, or waivers or modifications of development standards and parking ratios, including relaxed development standards, shall be made in writing at the time of filing the housing development application and shall be processed in conjunction with the underlying application. The request shall identify the specific density bonus, incentives or concessions requested, and any development standards, including parking ratios, to be waived or reduced. Approval of this request shall be processed in conjunction with and pursuant to the same procedure as the underlying applications.

1. If the request includes a waiver or modification of development standards beyond the incentives or concessions required to be provided by the city by Section 18.43.050, the applicant shall include reasonable documentation to demonstrate that the incentive/concession meets the definition set forth above.

2. The request shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

C. The density bonus units shall not be included in determining the percentage of units for subsection A of this section.

D. The granting of a density bonus, or incentive/concession as provided for in this chapter, shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zone change, study, or other discretionary approval.

E. Nothing herein prevents the city from granting a greater density bonus and additional incentives/concessions or waivers/modifications than that provided for herein, or from providing a lesser density bonus and fewer incentives/concessions and waivers/modifications than that provided for herein, when the housing development does not meet the minimum thresholds.

F. If the applicant requests a meeting, including a preapplication meeting, with the city to discuss the proposal, the director shall meet with the applicant within twenty-one working days. The meeting shall be for informational purposes only and the proposal shall still be acted upon in conjunction with the underlying housing development application.

G. When multiple projects are being considered together for a density bonus, the projects shall be submitted as one application.

H. An applicant shall not be eligible for a density bonus or any other incentive/concession under this chapter if the housing development is on property which was subject to a rent restriction as specified in Government Code Section 65915(c)(3) unless the proposed housing development replaces those units as specified therein.

I. This chapter is to be interpreted in conjunction with Government Code Section 65915 and terms defined therein shall have the same meaning for this chapter.

J. Any reference to a state law code section includes any amendments thereto. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.040 Density bonus.
A. An applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus as set forth below. For purposes of calculating the amount of the density bonus to be awarded, if an applicant qualifies for more than one category, the applicant shall elect which category the density bonus shall be awarded under.

TYPE OF HOUSING UNITS

AMOUNT OF HOUSING REQUIRED FOR DENSITY BONUS

DENSITY BONUS PROVIDED TO DEVELOPER

ADDITIONAL DENSITY BONUS UNITS THAT MAY BE AVAILABLE TO DEVELOPER

Lower income

10%

20%

1.5% for every 1% above threshold – up to a maximum of 35%

Very low income

5%

20%

2.5% for every 1% above threshold – up to a maximum of 35%

Senior housing development or mobile homes

Housing development must be at least 35 units to qualify

20%

No additional units – 20% max.

Transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, homeless persons

10%

20% of the number of the type of units giving rise to the density bonus

No additional units – 20% max.

Common interest development

10% of units reserved for persons and families of moderate income

5%

1% for every 1% above threshold – up to a maximum of 35%

B. If an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development donates land to the city in accordance with Section 18.43.070, the applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus as set forth below. The increase allowed by this subsection may be combined with an increase allowed under subsection A of this section up to a total of thirty-five percent.

TYPE OF HOUSING UNITS

AMOUNT OF LAND REQUIRED FOR DENSITY BONUS

DENSITY BONUS PROVIDED TO DEVELOPER

ADDITIONAL DENSITY BONUS UNITS THAT MAY BE AVAILABLE TO DEVELOPER

Land donation

Sufficient land to allow construction of units in an amount of 10% of the number of residential units of the proposed development

15%

1% for each 1% increase above the threshold percentage when requirements are met – up to a maximum of 35%

C. If an applicant for a housing development that satisfies one of the criteria of subsection A of this section also proposes to construct a child care facility in accordance with Section 18.43.080, the applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus as follows, unless the applicant chooses to receive an additional incentive/concession:

TYPE OF HOUSING UNITS

AMOUNT OF HOUSING REQUIRED FOR DENSITY BONUS

DENSITY BONUS PROVIDED TO DEVELOPER

ADDITIONAL DENSITY BONUS UNITS THAT MAY BE AVAILABLE TO DEVELOPER

One of above from subsection A of this section plus child care facility

Must meet requirement from above for type of housing

Amount proportionate to square footage of child care facility (or additional concession/incentive)

N/A

D. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be separately rounded up to the next whole number.

E. The density bonus units shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower income households are located.

F. Siting for the affordable units within a housing development shall be as approved by the approving body of the underlying application.

G. Affordable units developed in conjunction with a market rate development shall be of equal design and quality as the market rate units. Exteriors, including architecture and elevations, and floor plans of the affordable units shall be similar to the market rate units. Interior finishes and amenities may differ from those provided in the market rate units, but neither the workmanship nor the products may be of substandard or inferior quality as determined by the building official. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.045 Affordability.1
A. An applicant shall enter into an affordable housing agreement to be recorded against the property with the city to ensure continued affordability of all low and very low income rental units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for at least fifty-five years, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program.

B. Rents for lower income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent.

C. An applicant shall enter into an affordable housing agreement to be recorded against the property with the city to ensure that the initial occupant of all for-sale density bonus units are persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as required, and that the units are made available at an affordable housing cost.

D. The city shall require an equity sharing agreement for all for-sale density bonus units, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following provisions shall be required in an equity sharing agreement, unless in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law:

1. Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which amount shall be used within five years for any of the purposes described in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2 that promote home ownership.

2. The city’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale, minus the initial sale price to the moderate income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If the market value is lower than the initial market value upon resale, then the value at the time of resale shall be used as the initial market value.

3. The city’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the city’s initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.050 Concessions/incentives.
A. The application shall receive the following number of concessions/incentives:

TYPE OF HOUSING UNITS

AMOUNT OF HOUSING REQUIRED FOR CONCESSION/INCENTIVE

NUMBER OF CONCESSIONS/INCENTIVES AVAILABLE TO DEVELOPER

Lower income

10%

1

20%

2

30%

3

Very low income

5%

1

10%

2

15%

3

Moderate income common interest development

10%

1

20%

2

30%

3

One of above plus child care facility

No threshold

1 additional concession (or additional square footage)

B. The city shall grant the concessions/incentives requested by the applicant unless the city makes a written finding, based on substantial evidence, that:

1. The incentive/concession does not result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or for rents for the targeted units.

2. The incentive/concession would have a specific adverse impact upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households.

3. The incentive/concession would be contrary to state or federal law.

C. This section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of city-owned land, or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. However, if the city does provide a direct financial contribution through participation in cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or subsidizing the cost of construction, the applicant shall be required to enter into an affordable housing agreement for thirty years. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.060 Waiver/modification of development standards.
A. In addition to the concessions/incentives required pursuant to Section 18.43.050, the city shall not apply any development standard that will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a housing development that satisfies one of the criteria of Section 18.43.030A at the densities or with the concessions/incentives set forth in this chapter.

B. The city is not required to grant the waiver/modification of the development standard if it makes a written finding, based on substantial evidence, that:

1. The waiver/modification would have a specific, adverse impact upon the health, safety or the physical environment, or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

2. The waiver/modification would be contrary to state or federal law.

3. A proposal for waiver or modification under this section shall not change the number of incentives/concessions to which an applicant is entitled pursuant to Section 18.43.050. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.070 Land donation.
In order to receive a density bonus as provided for in Section 18.43.040B, the applicant shall comply with all of the following:

A. The land must be donated and transferred no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.

B. The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development.

C. The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned with appropriate development standards for development at the density described in Government Code Section 65583.2(c), and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

D. The transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application, except that the city may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by Government Code Section 65583.2(i) if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer.

E. The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with Section 18.43.045.

F. The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to the housing developer.

G. The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development, or, if the city agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

H. A proposed source of funding for the very low income units shall be identified not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.080 Child care facility.
In order to receive a density bonus as provided for in Section 18.43.040C, the applicant shall comply with all of the following:

A. The child care facility will be located on the same premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development.

B. The applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus or an additional incentive/concession, but not both.

C. The child care facility shall be required to remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable.

D. The children of very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income households shall equal a percentage of children attending the child care facility that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for such households.

E. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city is not required to provide a density bonus or incentive/concession if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities.

F. Nothing herein requires the city to allow a child care facility in a zone where it would not otherwise be allowed. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.090 Parking standards.
A. Upon request of an applicant, the city shall not require a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of accessible and guest parking, of a development meeting one of the criteria of Section 18.43.030A which exceeds the following:

1. Zero to one bedroom: one on-site parking space;

2. Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces;

3. Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces.

B. Notwithstanding the above, upon the request of the applicant, the city may not impose a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of accessible and guest parking, that exceeds the standards set forth below when the specified conditions are met:

1. Exceeds one-half space per bedroom when the development includes the maximum percentage of low (twenty percent) or very low (eleven percent) income units and has unobstructed access to a major transit stop located within one-half mile of the development; or

2. Exceeds one-half space per unit when the development consists solely of rental units, exclusive of a manager’s unit(s), with an affordable housing cost to lower income families and has unobstructed access to a major transit stop located within one-half mile of the development; or

3. Exceeds one-half space per unit when the development consists solely of rental units, exclusive of a manager’s unit(s), where the development is a housing development for individuals who are sixty-two years of age or older that complies with Civil Code Sections 51.2 and 51.3 and the development has paratransit service or has unobstructed access to a fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day located within one-half mile of the development; or

4. Exceeds three-tenths space per unit when the development is a special needs housing development as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 51312 and the development has paratransit service or has unobstructed access to a fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day located within one-half mile of the development.

C. The parking ratios set forth in subsection B of this section may be increased to no more than the ratios set forth in subsection A of this section if the city or an independent consultant has conducted a parking study that meets the requirements of Government Code Section 65915(p)(5) and the city makes findings based on such parking study supporting the need for a higher parking ratio.

D. If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

E. A development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

F. The applicant may request additional parking concessions/incentives beyond that provided herein in accordance with Section 18.43.030. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.100 Condominium conversions.
A. When an applicant for a conversion of apartments to a condominium project agrees to provide at least thirty-three percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons or families of low or moderate income or fifteen percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower income households, the city shall provide either a density bonus or other concessions/incentives of equal financial value.

1. The city shall require an affordable housing agreement for a minimum of thirty years. The agreement shall assure the continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers.

2. In order to be entitled to the density bonus or concessions/incentives, the applicant shall agree to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs of the city for the life of the affordable housing agreement.

3. The city may impose such other reasonable conditions which it finds appropriate.

B. The applicant shall include a written proposal for the density bonus or concessions/incentives with the application for the condominium conversion and map.

1. The applicant may submit a preliminary proposal and request a preapplication meeting with the city.

2. The city shall hold a preapplication meeting and notify the applicant in writing how it will comply with this section within ninety days of receipt of the written proposal.

3. The formal proposal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

C. For purposes of this section, “density bonus” means an increase in units of twenty-five percent over the number of apartments to be provided within the existing structure or structures provided for conversion.

D. Nothing herein requires the city to approve a condominium conversion.

E. An applicant shall not be eligible for a density bonus or other incentives/concessions under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other concessions/incentives were provided for pursuant to other provisions of this chapter.

F. An applicant shall not be eligible for a density bonus or other incentives/concessions if the condominium project is proposed on any property that includes rental units that have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low income; subject to any other form of rent or price control through the city’s valid exercise of its police power; or occupied by lower or very low income households.

1. For purposes of this section, this subsection also applies to a project that meets the above, but the dwelling units were vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application.

2. This subsection shall not apply where the proposed condominium project replaces the above-described units in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 65915.5. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1739 § 2 (part), 2012)

18.43.110 Development bonus for commercial developers.
A. An applicant for a commercial development shall be entitled to incentives mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the city when such developer has entered into an agreement for partnered housing to contribute affordable housing in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 65915.7 for as long as such section remains in effect.

B. If the developer of the affordable units does not start construction in accordance with the timelines set forth in the agreement required by Government Code Section 65915.7, the city shall withhold certificates of occupancy for the commercial development until the affordable units are completed. (Ord. 1776 § 1 (part), 2017)

1
Editor’s note: Ord. 1739 added this chapter with two sections numbered 18.43.040. This section has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication.


Chapter 18.44
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Sections:

18.44.010    When required.

18.44.020    Review.

18.44.030    Factors for approval.

18.44.040    Procedure.

18.44.050    Appeals.

18.44.060    Time limits for development.

18.44.070    Revocation of approval.

18.44.080    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.44.090    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.44.100    Deleted.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 587, 1191 and 1322.

18.44.010 When required.
Site plans are required to be submitted for:

A. Any development project for which a general plan amendment, zone change, conditional use permit, variance, tract map, or other discretionary permit is being sought in which case the site plan shall be processed concurrently with the other discretionary approvals;

B. Any development project on property, public or private, fronting on the westerly or easterly side of Western Avenue from 182nd Street on the south to El Segundo Boulevard on the north;

C. Any development project on property, public or private, fronting on the northerly or southerly side of Redondo Beach Boulevard from Crenshaw Boulevard on the west to Vermont Avenue on the east;

D. Any development project on property, public or private, fronting on the northerly or southerly side of Rosecrans Avenue from Crenshaw Boulevard on the west to Vermont Avenue on the east;

E. All new multifamily development of four units or more;

F. Those uses identified in the C-R zone as needing site plan review approval;

G. Any use allowed by right or by conditional use permit pursuant to the mixed use overlay zone, but not including any use allowed by itself in the underlying zone;

H. Any development in the R-1 or R-2 zone where the proposed development is out of character with the surrounding residential properties as determined by the community development director, based on floor area ratio (“FAR”);

I. Accessory uses in commercial parking lots; and

J. Any other development for which a site plan review is required by this code. (Ord. 1805 § 12 (part), 2019: Ord. 1746 § 3 (part), 2013; Ord. 1738 § 45 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.2201)

18.44.020 Review.
A. Whenever a site plan review is required, a site plan for the total development of a lot or lots that comprise the development project shall be approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter prior to the issuance of a building permit.

B. The planning commission shall hold a noticed, public hearing and approve, conditionally approve, or deny site plans required by Sections 18.44.010A through G or pursuant to any other provision of the Gardena Municipal Code.

1. Notice of hearings shall be given in accordance with Government Code Section 65091.

C. The community development director shall review and approve all other site plans and no notice or public hearing shall be required. In such cases the community development director shall make all decisions required by CEQA or other environmental laws. In his discretion, the community development director may refer a site plan review application to the planning commission when he believes that the application would be of concern to the surrounding community.

D. If a site plan is required by any other provision of this title, no notice or public hearing is required and the matter shall be reviewed by the community development director unless such pro-vision requires otherwise. (Ord. 1805 § 12 (part), 2019; Ord. 1746 § 3 (part), 2013; Ord. 1738 § 45 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 68, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2202)

18.44.030 Factors for approval.
A. A site plan shall be approved, or conditionally approved, only after finding that the proposed development, including the uses and the physical design of the development, is consistent with the intent and general purpose of the general plan and provisions of the municipal code, and will not adversely affect the orderly and harmonious development of the area and the general welfare of the city; otherwise such plans shall be disapproved.

B. In addition to all other applicable zoning and development requirements and policies, the following factors shall also be considered in determining whether the site plan shall be approved:

1. The dimensions, shape and orientation of the parcel;

2. The placement of buildings and structures on the parcel;

3. The height, setbacks, bulk and building materials;

4. The distance between buildings or structures;

5. The location, number and layout of off-street parking and loading spaces;

6. The internal vehicular patterns and pedestrian safety features;

7. The location, amount and nature of landscaping;

8. The placement, height and direction of illumination of light standards;

9. The location, number, size and height of signs;

10. The location, height and materials of walls, fences or hedges;

11. The location and method of screening refuse and storage areas, roof equipment, pipes, vents, utility equipment and all equipment not contained in the main buildings of the development;

12. Compatibility and overconcentration of uses in the immediate area; and

13. Such other information which the community development director or commission may require to make the necessary findings that the provisions of this code are being complied with. (Ord. 1738 § 45 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.2203)

18.44.040 Procedure.
The procedure for site plan review shall be as follows:

A. Filing of Applications. An application for a site plan review shall be filed by the property owner, the property owner’s representative, or other person having the right to the possession of the land for which site plan review approval is sought. Such application shall be filed with the community development department on forms provided by the department. As a part of the application, the applicant shall submit copies of the site plan and floor plan drawn to scale and properly dimensioned, including information to consider those factors identified in Section 18.44.030.

B. Filing Fees. The applicant shall pay to the city a filing fee established by City Council resolution for the purpose of defraying the costs incurred by the city in processing the site plan review application.

C. Review. The community development director or commission shall review the application, statements, drawings submitted, all pertinent and relevant data, and the results of the investigation of the property involved and surrounding area. A decision shall be rendered in writing, either approving, approving with conditions, or denying the request, and stating the reasons for such action. Notices shall provide information regarding the right of appeal and shall provide that all decisions are final absent a timely appeal. (Ord. 1738 § 45 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 69, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2204)

18.44.050 Appeals.
A. Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the community development director to the commission. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the commission within ten days after the date of the decision by the community development director. Upon the receipt of such an appeal and the payment of filing fees established by the city council, the community development director shall place the matter for consideration on the commission agenda of the first regular meeting of the commission following ten days’ written notice to the appellant and/or applicant and property owners and residents within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the project site. The commission shall approve the site plan, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan based on its findings.

B. Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the commission to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within ten days after the date of the decision by the commission. Upon the receipt of such an appeal and the payment of filing fees established by the city council, the city clerk shall place the matter for consideration on the city council’s agenda of the first regular meeting of the city council following ten days’ written notice to the appellant and/or applicant and property owners and residents within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the project site. If the matter required a noticed, public hearing before the planning commission in the first instance, then a noticed, public hearing shall also be held before the city council in addition to the notice stated immediately above. The city council shall approve the site plan, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan based on its findings. (Ord. 1738 § 45 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 70, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2205)

18.44.060 Time limits for development.
The subject property under a site plan review shall be developed within a period of time not exceeding twelve months from and after the date of its approval, and, if not so developed and utilized, such approval automatically shall become null and void at the expiration of such twelve-month period.

Upon a showing of good cause, the community development director may grant an extension of up to six months, upon receipt of a written request from the applicant prior to expiration.

When such a request for an extension is filed, a fee in an amount established by city council resolution shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs incurred by the city in processing such extension of time. (Ord. 1738 § 45 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 71, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1629 § 18, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2206)

18.44.070 Revocation of approval.
The community development director may revoke any site plan review approval for noncompliance or for any violation of the conditions set forth in granting such approval. A written notice of intention to revoke shall be mailed to the applicant not less than ten days before the date of revocation. The applicant may appeal the decision to revoke the site plan review pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 18.44.050. (Ord. 1738 § 45 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.2207)

Chapter 18.46
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Sections:

18.46.010    Authorized.

18.46.020    Repealed.

18.46.030    Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.

18.46.040    Procedure.

18.46.050    Revocation or amendment.

18.46.060    Conditional use permits for buildings within planned rights-of-way.

18.46.070    Deleted.

18.46.080    Discontinuation of use.

18.46.010 Authorized.
Uses listed in the zones and sections of this title as being permitted subject to a conditional use permit may be so permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1738 § 46 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.2301)

18.46.030 Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.
A. All uses listed in the respective zones as permitted subject to a conditional use permit may be permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B. (Repealed).

C. The following uses may be permitted pursuant to this section in the zones specified with a conditional use permit. In no case shall a conditional use permit be granted in a zone for a use specifically prohibited in a zone within which the subject property is located:

1. Cemeteries, columbariums, mausoleums and crematories in the C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones;

2. Equestrian establishments (academies, schools and amusements) in the M-1 and M-2 zones;

3. Establishments and enterprises involving large assemblages of people or automobiles in the C-M, C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones, including:

a. Amusement parks;

b. Circuses;

c. Fairgrounds;

d. Open-air theaters;

e. Recreational centers privately operated; and

f. Stadiums;

4. Golf courses in the M-1 and M-2 zones;

5. Greenhouses or lath houses larger than two hundred square feet in area, plant nurseries and the commercial raising of nursery stock in the M-1 and M-2 zones;

6. Radio and television transmitters in any zone;

7. Governmental facilities, other than office buildings, in any zone;

8. Public utility structures and installations in any zone;

9. Uses which are not specifically listed which in no way are detrimental to surrounding properties or uses permitted in the zone and which are not permitted as a similar use;

10. Mobile home parks in the R-3 and R-4 zones; provided, that:

a. The development of the mobile home park shall meet all the minimum standards set forth in Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations;

b. The minimum size of the park shall be three acres;

c. A minimum of two parking spaces per mobile home shall be provided, one covered and one open with guest parking provided at ten percent of the total required parking;

d. A minimum of one refuse enclosure five feet by seven feet in dimensions shall be provided on the park site;

e. The name and space of the resident management shall be clearly identified upon the directory and also the unit;

f. Signs as follows:

i. One identification sign with a maximum area of twenty square feet; and

ii. One mobile home park directory with a maximum area of twenty-four square feet; and

g. Any other conditions the commission deems necessary shall be met;

11. Recreational vehicle storage facilities in the C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones; provided, that:

a. The minimum size of the lot shall be no less than one-half acre;

b. A decorative masonry fence eight feet in height shall be installed around the perimeter of the site;

c. All setback requirements required by the provisions of this code shall be complied with. Where no such requirements are applicable, a minimum ten-foot landscaped setback shall be provided on all sides of the lot fronting a street;

d. The facility shall be properly lighted and all lighting standards shall be hooded and directed away from residential properties;

e. A security alarm system shall be installed to the satisfaction of the police and fire departments;

f. The address of the property, as well as the name, address, and telephone number of the owner or his agent, shall be clearly designated for use in case of an emergency;

g. Fire suppression equipment and devices shall be provided and properly maintained on the premises to the satisfaction of the fire department;

h. No repair or maintenance work on vehicles shall be permitted on the premises;

i. A resident caretaker may be permitted on the premises; and

j. All utilities shall be underground;

12. Covered mall buildings in the C-R, C-P, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones, provided they meet the following and all other applicable code requirements:

a. Each store shall have a gross leasable area of not less than six hundred square feet. For a covered mall building containing one hundred thousand square feet or more, up to fifteen percent of the gross leasable area may, upon conditional approval by the city, be leased or subleased to individual tenants with less than the minimum six hundred square feet space requirement; provided, that each tenant space shall not be less than three hundred square feet. Nothing herein is meant to prohibit kiosks or carts in the pedestrian areas of such buildings;

b. Except for anchor store(s), movie theater(s), financial institution(s), and restaurant(s) with not less than five thousand square feet of gross leasable area, no other store in a covered mall building shall have direct public access directly from the exterior of the building. For purposes of this section, an “anchor store” is an exterior perimeter department store, drugstore, supermarket or major tenant with a gross leasable area of not less than twenty thousand square feet having direct access to a covered mall building but having all required exits independent of a mall;

c. Each store shall have a storefront of not less than fifteen feet in width;

d. Dining and food service establishments shall constitute not more than fifteen percent of the gross floor area of the entire covered mall building;

e. Loading and unloading docks shall be designed and/or screened so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way;

f. Ten feet of fully landscaped setback area shall be provided for each story of a covered mall building. Such setback area shall be located on all sides of the lot fronting on a public right-of-way;

g. Except for anchor store(s), movie theater(s), financial institution(s), and restaurant(s) with not less than five thousand square feet of gross leasable area, no other store in a covered mall building shall be allowed signs so as to be visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent properties;

h. All aisle widths, common and tenant area improvements, emergency and secondary access shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and all other applicable codes;

i. Whenever security doors are provided for a store in a covered mall building, such doors shall not be visible from common areas of the covered mall during business hours. “Common area” is defined as the total area within the covered mall that is not designed for rental to tenants but that is available for common use by all tenants or groups of tenants, their customers, vendors, and visitors, including but not limited to parking areas, malls, sidewalks, landscaped areas, public toilets, truck and service facilities and the like;

j. Five bicycle parking racks at each mall entrance shall be provided;

k. Exterior landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 18.40.090. Interior landscaping of not less than five percent of interior common areas shall be provided;

l. Any other conditions the commission deems necessary;

m. Each store shall be separated from other stores by a wall extending from the floor to the underside of the ceiling above;

13. Large collection facilities in the M-1 and M-2 zones, provided:

a. Facilities shall not be located within one hundred fifty feet from property zoned for residential use or be located on a major collector or arterial street.

b. Facility operations and equipment shall be within an enclosed building.

c. Landscape setbacks of at least ten feet shall be required along all street frontages, except alleys.

d. Temporary storage of material shall be completely concealed from view from the public right-of-way and adjoining properties.

e. Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis.

f. Space shall be provided on site for customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. Space shall be provided on site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is greater. Parking space sizes, aisle widths and other areas designed for vehicle use shall meet all applicable standards listed in Chapter 18.22.

g. One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility and one parking space shall be required for each employee on the largest shift.

h. Noise levels shall not exceed fifty-five dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed sixty dBA.

i. If the facility is located within five hundred feet of property zoned for or occupied by a residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

j. Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least one hundred fifty feet from any property zoned for or occupied by a residential use provided there is acoustical shielding from any residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. Containers for after-hours donation of recyclable material with no acoustical shielding from residential uses shall be located at least three hundred feet from such residential uses.

k. Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling container.

l. Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the planning commission if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.

m. Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved through the conditional use permit process by the planning commission subject to meeting noise and all other applicable standards in this section.

n. In addition to the conditional use permit required by this section, the applicant must also obtain a permit in accordance with Chapter 5.60;

14. Processing facilities in the M-1 and M-2 zones; provided, that:

a. Facilities shall not be located on a major collector or arterial streets, within one hundred feet of property zoned for or occupied by a residential use;

b. All facilities operations and equipment shall be within an enclosed building;

c. Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials;

d. A light processing facility shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers;

e. A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code;

f. Landscape setbacks of at least ten feet shall be required along all street frontages, except alleys;

g. All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition, or may be baled or palletized. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire department. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing;

h. Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present;

i. Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park, and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space shall be provided for a minimum of ten customers or the peak load, whichever is greater;

j. One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center and one parking space shall be required for each employee on the largest shift;

k. Noise levels shall not exceed fifty-five dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed sixty dBA;

l. If the facility is located within five hundred feet of property zoned for or occupied by a residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The facility shall be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open;

m. Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least one hundred fifty feet from any property zoned for or occupied by a residential use; shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

n. Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. Facility shall display notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

o. Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the planning commission if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way;

p. No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor may be detectable on neighboring properties;

15. Hotels and motels in the C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones; provided, that:

a. The minimum lot area for hotels or motels shall be one acre exclusive of all other buildings or uses located on the same lot in a mixed use development;

b. The minimum lot width for hotel or motel developments shall be one hundred feet. The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred fifty feet;

c. A minimum of twenty feet front yard setback shall be provided, and not less than twenty percent of the total paved area utilized for driveways and open parking shall be landscaped pursuant to regulations set forth in Section 18.40.090;

d. A parking demand/traffic impact study, paid for by the proponent of a hotel/motel, has been prepared by a qualified traffic engineer;

e. A market analysis/financial feasibility study, paid for by the proponent of a hotel/motel, has been prepared by a qualified consultant;

f. The engineer/consultant preparing the studies required by subsections C(15)(d) and (e) of this section shall be from a list of engineers and consultants approved by the community development department;

g. Not more than twenty percent of the guest rooms shall be equipped with kitchens or kitchenette facilities;

16. Churches in the M-1 and M-2 zones; provided, that:

a. A church shall be the sole use on a recorded parcel with direct access to a public right-of-way such as a street or highway;

b. No residential use such as a rectory, convent, parsonage, or minister’s residence shall be permitted on church property;

c. No uses such as religious classes, child care, day care or school that may be ancillary to the church shall be permitted on church premises;

d. Parking for church and all ancillary areas such as offices or assembly areas shall comply with Chapter 18.40;

17. Self-storage facilities in the C-4, M-1, and M-2 zones; provided, that:

a. Minimum lot area shall be not less than one acre.

b. At least forty feet of clear, unobstructed driveway depth will be provided from the road to the primary access gate or principal entry point of the facility.

c. Interior drive aisle widths shall be not be less than twenty-five feet.

d. Facility layout, design, and exterior building materials and treatment for all structures including, but not limited to, fences, walls, gates, buildings, and landscaping shall be of high quality and be aesthetically pleasing when viewed from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.

e. Buildings shall be designed and located so that overhead doors and the interior driveways within such facilities are not visible from the adjacent public right-of-way. This provision does not apply to overhead doors that are within an enclosed self-storage building and that are visible only through windows of the building.

f. No door openings for any storage unit shall be visible at ground level from any residentially zoned property.

g. All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the front property line; such setback area shall be totally landscaped with lawn, shrubbery, trees, and/or flowers. There shall be at least one twenty-four-inch boxed tree for every twenty feet of property frontage.

h. All fences or walls visible from the public right-of-way shall be constructed of decorative building materials such as slump stone masonry, concrete block, wrought iron, or other similar materials.

i. Boats, campers, recreational vehicles, and travel trailers may be stored outside of an enclosed building, but only in an area designated for such outside storage on an approved site plan and not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent property when viewed from the ground level.

j. A resident manager unit not to exceed nine hundred square feet in size may be permitted; provided, it is for the exclusive use of the resident manager of the facility and one other adult. Such unit shall be integrated into the storage facility.

k. The resident manager shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all conditions of approval; occupancy of the residential unit shall immediately cease upon termination or cessation of the self-storage use or operation;

18. Warehouses as defined in Section 18.04.476 in the M-1 and M-2 zones, subject to the following requirements:

a. Loading and unloading. Loading and unloading activities shall take place in areas designed and permanently designated solely for such purpose;

i. Loading spaces shall be designed so as to permit vehicular and truck traffic to move into and out of the loading spaces without backing into or upon a street;

ii. Truck loading areas shall be screened from public view by an eight-foot-high wall, accessory structures, or landscaping and foliage so arranged as to conceal the loading facility;

b. Setbacks. Landscape setbacks of at least ten feet shall be required along all street frontages, except alleys;

c. Fencing. Barbed wire shall not be used in areas visible to the public;

d. Driveways. Driveways must be at least forty-five feet wide;

e. Parking. Customer parking must be separate from truck parking and loading areas;

f. Applicant shall be required to pay an annual service impact fee to be imposed in accordance with the Mitigation Fee Act (Government Code Section 66000 et seq.);

19. Check cashing in the C-3 and C-4 zones, when located at least five thousand feet from another check cashing and/or pawn shop;

20. Pawn shops in the C-3 and C-4 zones, when located at least five thousand feet from another pawnshop and/or check cashing business;

21. Motor vehicle dealerships, including accessory repair facilities, shall be permitted in the C-3 and C-4 zones, subject to the following requirements:

a. Applicability. All motor vehicle dealerships shall comply with the development standards of the C-3 zone and with this section.

b. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size shall be three acres for dealerships of new motor vehicles, and one acre for dealerships of used motor vehicles provided there are no repair facilities on the premises of a dealership of used motor vehicles.

c. Parking and Vehicle Storage.

i. There shall be separate areas designated for employee and customer parking which shall not be used for vehicle storage or display.

ii. Rooftop storage of vehicles is permitted provided such storage shall be screened from public view.

iii. No vehicles to be repaired shall be parked or stored on any public street or alley.

d. Loading and Unloading. Loading and unloading of vehicles is permitted only in accordance with this subsection. The dealership operator shall be responsible and liable for any activities of a common carrier, operator, or other person controlling such loading or unloading activities to the extent any such activities violate the provisions of this subsection.

i. Loading and unloading of vehicles is limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, excluding legal holidays.

ii. Loading and unloading shall not block the ingress or egress of any property.

e. Test driving shall not be conducted on residential streets or alleys. For the purposes of this subsection, streets which are designated by the city as major collector streets shall be permissible areas for test driving. Each dealership operator shall have an affirmative obligation to inform all its personnel of this requirement and to ensure compliance with it.

f. Circulation. The location of entries and exits from dealerships shall be located as far away from adjacent residential properties as is reasonably feasible and shall be directed to commercial streets and away from residential areas by means of signage and design. The interior circulation system between levels shall be internal to the building and shall not require use of public ways or of externally visible or uncovered ramps, driveways or parking areas. No arrangement shall be permitted which requires vehicles to back into an alley or other public way.

g. Noise Control.

i. There shall be no outdoor loudspeakers or amplified sound. Interior loudspeakers shall produce no more than forty-five dBA at a boundary abutting or adjacent to a residential parcel, under normal operating conditions (e.g., with windows open if they are likely to be opened).

ii. All noise generating equipment exposed to the exterior shall be muffled with sound absorbing materials to minimize noise impacts on adjacent properties and shall not be operated before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. if reasonably likely to cause annoyance to abutting or adjacent residences.

h. Hours of Operation. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission or city council, if the dealership is within one hundred feet of a residential zone or use, operation of the dealership shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

22. Stand-alone automobile repair facilities in the M-1 and M-2 zones, provided they are not located on arterial or major collector streets and subject to the following requirements:

a. Applicability. Each automobile repair facility, including one which is part of and incorporated within an automobile dealership, shall conform to the property development standards of the zone in which it is to be located, and with this subsection.

b. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for automobile repair facilities not associated with motor vehicle dealership shall be fifteen thousand square feet.

c. Structures. Entrances to individual service bays shall not face abutting residential uses or public right-of-way.

d. Repair Activities. Except as provided herein, all repair activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.

e. Enclosure. Automobile repair facilities performing body and fender work or similar noise-generating activities shall be conducted in fully enclosed structures with walls of concrete block or similar materials and doors in maximum half open position during operating hours. All painting shall occur within a fully enclosed booth.

f. Hours of Operation. In all zones, except on parcels which are more than one hundred feet from a residential use, no work shall be performed on automobiles between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and no work shall be performed on Sundays.

g. Litter. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance. Except as provided herein, no used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked or wrecked vehicles may be stored outside the main building. Reusable or recyclable automobile parts may also be stored in containers measuring no greater than six feet in width by nine feet in length by six feet in height.

h. Storage. An exterior parking area shall be used for employee and customer parking only and not for the repair or finishing work or long-term (over one week) storage of vehicles. No vehicles to be repaired shall be parked or stored on any street or in any alley.

i. Test Driving. All road testing shall be conducted only on streets designated by the city as major collector streets. Each automobile repair facility operator shall notify its employees of this restriction and shall ensure employees adhere to the plan.

j. Vehicles Awaiting Repair and Disassembled Vehicles. Vehicles awaiting repair shall be parked in a screened area or inside the building, including those towed to the facility. The hoods of vehicles awaiting parts or repair shall remain closed at all times while work is not being performed;

23. Automobile service stations, including accessory repair facilities, in the C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones, subject to the following requirements:

a. Applicability. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all new stations and to all existing stations at such time as existing service stations may come before the city for expansion or remodeling requiring any permit from the city.

b. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for new stations shall be not less than one acre.

c. Minimum Street Frontage. Each parcel shall have a minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty feet on each abutting street.

d. Setbacks. No building or structure shall be located within thirty feet of any public right-of-way or within twenty feet of any interior parcel line.

e. Gasoline Pumps. Gasoline pumps shall be at least fifteen feet from any property line and a minimum of twenty feet from any public right-of-way.

f. Walls. Service stations shall be separated from an adjacent property by a decorative masonry wall of not less than six feet in height.

Materials, textures, colors and design of all walls shall be compatible with service station design and adjacent properties. No wall required to be erected and maintained by this subsection shall be constructed within ten feet of a driveway entrance or vehicle accessway opening onto a street or alley which would obstruct a cross view of pedestrians on the sidewalk, alley or elsewhere by motorists entering or standing on the parcel.

g. Access and Circulation. No more than two driveways shall be permitted on any one street frontage. Access to on-site self-serve car wash facility shall not be located within fifty feet of a residentially zoned property.

h. Parking. Customer and employee parking shall not be utilized for automobile repair, finishing work or storage of vehicles. No vehicle that will be or has been serviced may be parked on public streets, sidewalks, parkways, driveways or alleys, and no vehicle may be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering it for sale.

i. Air and Water. Each service station shall provide air and water to customers without charge and at a convenient location during hours when gasoline is dispensed.

j. Restrooms. Each service station shall provide men’s and women’s public restrooms, which are accessible to the general public including the physically disabled during all hours the service station is open to the public. Restrooms shall be attached to a structure on site with entrances or signage clearly visible from the gasoline service area or cashier station and concealed from view of adjacent properties by planters or decorative screening and shall be maintained on a regular basis.

k. Mini-Markets. Mini-markets may be permitted on the site of a service station subject to the following development standards:

i. One on-site parking space for each one hundred fifty square feet of retail space shall be provided in addition to the required parking spaces for the service station.

ii. The mini-market shall be designed with materials compatible with the service station and surrounding properties.

iii. Arcade or game machines or other coin-operated electronic machines shall be prohibited.

l. Refuse Storage and Disposal. Trash areas shall not be used for storage. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or permanently disabled, junked or wrecked vehicles, may be stored outside the main building.

m. Equipment Rental. No rental of equipment such as trailers and trucks shall be permitted, nor shall the storage and parking of such trailers and trucks;

24. Car wash facilities in the C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones, subject to the following requirements:

a. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for car wash facilities shall be not less than one acre, except for self-serve facilities located on the premises of an automobile service station.

b. Setbacks. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, no building or structure for an automobile washing facility shall be located within thirty feet of any public right-of-way or within twenty feet of any interior parcel line.

c. Access. No more than two driveways shall be permitted on any one street frontage, provided the property frontage is not less than one hundred fifty feet. Access to the washing area shall not be located within fifty feet of a residentially zoned property.

d. Parking. Queuing lanes shall be provided to accommodate a minimum of five vehicles per lane, and an area designated for vacuuming and hand drying of vehicles. No vehicle that will be or has been serviced may be parked on public streets, sidewalks, parkways, driveways, or alleys.

e. Restrooms. Except for self-service automobile washing facilities, each automobile washing facility shall provide men’s and women’s restrooms, which are accessible to customers, including the physically disabled, during all hours the establishment is open to the public. Restrooms shall be attached to a structure on site with entrances or signage visible from the waiting area or cashier station, shall be maintained on a regular basis, and concealed from view of adjacent properties by planters or decorative screening.

f. Location of Activities. All washing, waxing, machine drying and related activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed service building, except vacuuming and hand drying of vehicles.

g. Refuse Storage and Disposal. Trash areas shall not be used for storage. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or permanently disabled, junked or wrecked vehicles, may be stored outside the main building.

h. Hours of Operation. If located within one hundred feet of a residential use, operation of the establishment shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. seven days a week.

i. Outdoor Loudspeakers. There shall be no outdoor loudspeakers or public address systems;

25. Building supply centers in the M-1 and M-2 zones, subject to the following requirements:

a. The minimum lot size for building supply centers shall be not less than one acre.

b. To the extent possible, all material, supplies and equipment shall be located within an enclosed building.

c. Screening. Any outside stored building supplies, tools, and equipment shall be stored in an especially designated area, which shall be screened from public view.

d. Parking. Customer and employee parking shall not be utilized for storage of building supplies, tools, and equipment.

e. Refuse Storage and Disposal. Trash areas shall not be used for storage. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance. Used or discarded supplies, parts or equipment, or permanently disabled, junked or wrecked equipment or tools shall not be stored outside the main building.

f. Loading and unloading of supplies and equipment is permitted only in accordance with this subsection. The business operator shall be responsible and liable for any activities of a common carrier, operator, or other person controlling such loading or unloading activities to the extent any such activities violate the provisions of this subsection.

i. Loading and unloading of supplies and equipment is limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, excluding legal holidays.

ii. Loading and unloading areas shall be clearly delineated and located so as not to block the ingress or egress of any property.

g. Outdoor Loudspeakers. There shall be no outdoor loudspeakers or public address systems;

26. Self-service laundromats in the C-2, C-3 and C-4 zones, subject to the following requirements:

a. Minimum Size. Laundromats’ tenant space shall be not less than three thousand square feet.

b. Vending Machines. Coin-operated vending machines may be permitted on the premises of a laundromat for the purpose of dispensing detergents and pre-packaged snacks such as candies, nuts, soft drinks and bottled water.

c. There shall be at least one employee of the laundromat present at all times during the business hours;

27. Small collection facilities, no larger than five hundred square feet in size and in conjunction with a market that is in compliance with the provisions of the city zoning, building and fire codes and does not reduce the available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary use in the C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones;

28. Massage establishments that are not otherwise exempt from this requirement pursuant to Chapter 5.48 in the C-P, C-2, C-3, and C-4 zones subject to the following:

a. The application shall include a detailed floor plan drawn to scale showing: entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including but not limited to closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and location of massage tables and chairs. The floor plan shall be in feet and inches and labeled in English; and

b. For purposes of considering a CUP, the planning commission may take into account the number of other massage establishments in the vicinity as part of determining compatibility. (Ord. 1766 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1757 § 11, 2015; Ord. 1738 § 46 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 §§ 74, 75, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1666 §§ 32 – 40, 2005; Ord. 1667 §§ 32 – 40, 2004; Ord. 1661 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1598 § 5, 2000; Ord. 1597 § 5, 2000; Ord. 1577 § 3, 1999; Ord. 1526 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1517 §§ 23, 24, 1997; Ord. 1483 § 7, 1994; prior code § 10-3.2303)

18.46.040 Procedure.
The procedures for obtaining a conditional use permit shall be as follows:

A. Applications.

1. Filing. Applications for a conditional use permit shall be filed by the owner of the property for which the permit is sought or by the authorized representative of the owner.

2. Form and Contents. The application shall be made on forms furnished by the city and shall be full and complete, and include such data as may be necessary to assist in determining the validity of the request.

B. Filing Fees.

1. Applications for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by city council resolution for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing the application.

2. An application to amend or modify a previously approved conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by city council resolution to cover the costs of processing such application.

C. Staff Investigations shall be made of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the intent of this chapter.

D. Commission Hearings – Date – Notices.

1. The hearing date shall be set by the secretary of the commission after the application filed with the city has been determined to be complete.

2. Notice of the public hearing shall contain the time and place of the hearing and the location and proposed use of the subject property and shall be given as follows:

a. Newspaper Notices. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing.

b. Written Notices. Written notices shall be mailed not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing to the owners and occupants of property within a radius of three hundred feet of the external boundaries of the property described in the application as are shown on the latest publicly available assessment roll of the county. The applicant shall furnish to the city a certified copy of the names and addresses of such owners on forms supplied by the city.

E. Commission Hearings – Notices.

1. Commission Hearings. Public hearings shall be conducted before the commission. The commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of public hearings, and the member of the commission presiding at such hearing is empowered to administer oaths to any persons testifying. In the event a hearing is noticed to commence at a given hour, and for any reason such hearing cannot be commenced at such hour due to other matters on the agenda for such meeting, or otherwise, the hearing may be commenced as soon as they reach the item on the agenda for such meeting.

The commission, may, when it deems such action necessary or desirable, continue hearings to a time and place certain, and such continuance and announcement thereof shall serve as sufficient notice of such continuance without further newspaper publication of the notice.

2. Records of Commission Hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at the public hearing, the names and addresses of persons testifying, and copies of all notices and affidavits of publication and records of action taken shall be a part of the permanent files of the case.

3. Commission Findings and Decisions. The decision of the commission shall be by a majority vote of the members of the commission present at the meeting. The decision shall be in written form and include the findings upon which the commission based its decision regardless of whether such decision is for approval or denial.

4. Notification of Council and Applicant. Not later than seven days after a decision is rendered by the commission, the secretary of the commission shall forward a copy of such decision to the council and to the applicant.

5. Standards for Issuance or Denial of Permits. In determining whether to issue or deny a conditional use permit, the commission shall consider the following factors:

a. The nature of the proposed use;

b. The compatibility of the proposed use with the surrounding area and land uses;

c. The distance between the proposed use and residential areas, schools, houses of worship, and parks;

d. The number of similar uses in the surrounding area and the distances between such uses and the proposed use;

e. The input of persons residing in the community regarding the proposed use and the community opposition;

f. The cumulative effect of the proposed use in the community;

g. Whether, under the circumstances of the particular application, the establishment and maintenance or operation of the use or building will be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city;

h. Such other factors as the commission deems relevant and any other factors related to any of the factors set forth in this subsection E(5); and

i. Failure to satisfy any of the criteria set forth in this subsection E(5) can constitute the basis for the denial of a conditional use permit.

F. Commission Approval and Conditions. The commission, in granting a conditional use permit, shall find, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at the meeting, as follows:

1. That the use applied for at the location set forth in the application is properly one for which a conditional use permit is authorized by this chapter;

2. That such use is necessary or desirable for the development of the community and is compatible with the surrounding uses; is in harmony with the general plan; is not detrimental to the surrounding properties, existing uses or to uses specifically permitted in the zone in which the proposed use is to be located; and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;

3. That the site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate such use and all of the yards, setbacks, walls, fences, landscaping and other features required in order to adjust such use to those existing or permitted future uses on land in the neighborhood;

4. That the site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways properly designed and improved so as to carry the type and quantity of traffic generated or to be generated by the proposed use; and

5. That the conditions stated in the decision are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions may include:

a. Regulation of the use;

b. Special yards, spaces and buffers;

c. Fences and walls;

d. Surfacing of parking areas subject to city specifications;

e. Street, service road, or alley dedications and improvements or appropriate bonds;

f. Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress;

g. Regulation of signs;

h. Landscaping and the maintenance thereof;

i. Maintenance of the grounds;

j. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and the like;

k. Regulation of time for certain activities;

l. A time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;

m. The duration of the use; and

n. Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in this chapter.

G. Commission Denial. In the event the commission determines to deny a conditional use permit, the commission, by an affirmative vote of the majority of the members present at the meeting, shall recite its findings and reasons for denial. Such findings shall be based upon substantial evidence in view of the whole record to justify the ultimate decision.

H. Time Limits for Development. The subject property and the use granted under a conditional use permit shall be developed within a period of not to exceed twelve months from and after the date of granting such permit, and, if not so developed and utilized, such conditional use permit automatically shall become null and void at the expiration of such twelve month period.

The permittee may apply in writing to the Planning Commission for one extension of time, not to exceed six months, within which to develop and use such conditional use permit. Such application shall be made prior to the expiration of the utilization period. The application for such extension of time shall be in duplicate. When such an application for an extension is filed, a filing fee established by city council resolution shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the processing of such extension. The commission, after due consideration, shall either grant or deny such extension of time for such development and use. Only one such extension shall be permitted.

I. Reapplications. Whenever an application is denied by the commission, the same or substantially the same application shall not be filed within a period of twelve months from and after the date of such denial. (Ord. 1738 §§ 47, 48, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 76, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1629 §§ 19, 20, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2304)

18.46.050 Revocation or amendment.
The commission may revoke or amend a conditional use permit for cause. A written notice of the intention to revoke shall be delivered to the permittee at least ten days before the hearing. A hearing shall be held before the commission prior to the revocation of the permit. If the commission revokes a permit, written findings setting forth the basis for its decision shall be adopted.

This section shall not apply to permits, which have lapsed pursuant to subsection H of Section 18.46.040. (Ord. 1683 § 77, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2305)

18.46.060 Conditional use permits for buildings within planned rights-of-way.
A conditional use permit may also be granted for:

A. Temporary structures within planned rights-of-way when the property owner applying for such permit signs an agreement with the city to remove any such temporary building or structure at his own expense whenever so requested by the city for street widening, opening or other reasons; and

B. Structures or improvements within planned rights-of-way upon evidence that the entire property of the appellant, of which the area of the planned right-of-way forms a part, cannot reasonably be used for a permitted use and yield a reasonable return to the owner without a new or improved structure within such planned right-of-way. (Prior code § 10-3.2306)

18.46.080 Discontinuation of use.
If a use permitted by a conditional use permit is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty days, the permit shall be deemed to have lapsed and shall be null and void. (Ord. 1467 § 1, 1993: prior code § 10-3.2308)

Chapter 18.48
VARIANCES
Sections:

18.48.010    Authority to grant.

18.48.020    Conditions necessary to granting a variance.

18.48.025    Mandatory conditions imposed upon encroachments.

18.48.030    Procedure.

18.48.040    Revocation or amendment.

18.48.050    Deleted.

18.48.010 Authority to grant.
A. Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter occur from its strict literal interpretation and enforcement, a variance may be granted authorizing, upon such terms and conditions as are deemed necessary, such variances therefrom as may be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title, so that its spirit shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. A variance shall not be granted to permit a use not permitted in a specific zone as established by this title.

B. A variance may be granted to permit a fixed encroachment such as a building, wall, or structure into the public right-of-way. In addition to requiring a variance, an applicant must also obtain an encroachment permit in accordance with Chapter 13.56. (Ord. 1738 § 49, 2012; prior code § 10-3.2401)

18.48.020 Conditions necessary to granting a variance.
The commission, in granting a variance, shall make a finding that in the evidence presented all four of the following conditions exist in reference to the property being considered:

A. That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of the provisions of this title would deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classifications;

B. That any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated;

C. That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and welfare or injurious to property and improvements in the same vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated; and

D. That the granting of such variance will not adversely affect or be in conflict with the policies of the General Plan of the city. (Ord. 1683 § 79, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2402)

18.48.025 Mandatory conditions imposed upon encroachments.
In granting a variance for an encroachment under the provisions of this chapter, the following conditions, in addition to any other conditions deemed necessary and/or advisable, shall be imposed. In the case of conflict with the conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter and the conditions imposed pursuant to Chapter 13.56, the more stringent shall prevail.

A. That the encroachment shall be removed by the permittee at no cost to the city upon thirty days’ written notice to the permittee from the city, and should any cost be incurred by the city in the removal of such encroachment, such cost shall be a lien upon the subject property;

B. That the encroachment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder;

C. That the encroachment shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding upon all heirs, successors, assigns, executors or administrators in interest;

D. That a certificate of insurance in amounts and form satisfactory to the city attorney shall be filed with the city clerk upon the granting of the variance for the encroachment and shall be maintained in good standing at all times so long as the encroachment exists;

E. That the permittee shall sign an agreement releasing the city, its officials, officers, employees and agents from any and all liability whatsoever in the granting of such encroachment; and

F. That the applicant shall expressly agree to each of the conditions imposed, including any which may be in addition to the foregoing, as a prerequisite to the granting of the encroachment by the city. (Ord. 1738 § 50, 2012)

18.48.030 Procedure.
A. Applications.

1. Filing. An application for a variance shall be filed by the owner of the property for which the variance is sought or by the authorized representative of the owner.

2. Form and Contents. The application shall be made to the commission on forms furnished by the city. The application shall set forth in detail the reasons for the requested variance, present written evidence that the conditions set forth in Section 18.48.020 are satisfied, and shall provide other information as may be prescribed by the commission to assist in determining the validity of the request.

B. Filing Fees.

1. Variance applications shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by City Council resolution for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing the application.

2. An application to amend or modify a previously approved variance shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by City Council resolution to cover the costs of processing such application.

3. An investigation shall be conducted by all departments of the city which may have an interest in, or jurisdiction over, the matter in order to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

D. Commission Hearings – Date – Notices.

1. The hearing date shall be set by the secretary of the commission after the application has been determined to be complete.

2. Notice of the public hearing shall contain the time and place of the hearing and other pertinent data presented in the application in the following ways:

a. Newspaper Notices. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing.

b. Written Notices. Written notices shall be mailed not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing to the owners and occupants of property within a radius of three hundred feet of the external boundaries of the property described in the application, as are shown on the latest publicly available assessment roll of the county.

E. Commission Hearings – Notices.

1. Commission Hearings. Public hearings shall be conducted before the commission. The commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of public hearings, and the member of the commission presiding at such hearing is empowered to administer oaths to any persons testifying. In the event a hearing is noticed to commence at a given hour, and for any reason such hearing cannot be commenced at such hour due to other matters on the agenda for such meeting, or otherwise, the hearing may be commenced as soon as they reach the item on the agenda for such meeting.

The commission may, when it deems such action necessary or desirable, continue such hearing to a time and place certain. Such continuance and announcement thereof shall serve as sufficient notice of such continuance without further newspaper publication of the notice.

2. Records of Commission Hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at the public hearing, the names and addresses of persons testifying, and copies of all notices and affidavits of publication and records of action taken shall be a part of the permanent files of the case and shall be kept in duplicate.

3. Commission Findings and Decisions. The commission action shall be in written form and include the findings upon which the Commission based its decision.

4. Notification of Council and Applicant. Not later than seven days after a decision is rendered by the commission, the secretary of the commission shall forward a copy of such decision to the council and to the applicant.

F. Commission Approval and Conditions. The commission, in granting a variance, shall find that the conditions set forth in Section 18.48.020 exist and may require reasonable conditions which shall assure the intent and purposes of this chapter.

G. (Deleted).

H. Time Limits for Development. The construction or occupancy of land or buildings granted under a variance shall be utilized within a period of not to exceed twelve months from and after the date of granting such permit, and, if not so developed and utilized, such variance automatically shall become null and void at the expiration of such twelve-month period.

The permittee may apply in writing to the planning commission for one extension of time, not to exceed six months, within which to develop and use such variance. Such application shall be made prior to the expiration of the utilization period. When such an application for an extension is filed, a filing fee established by city council resolution shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the processing of such extension. The commission, after due consideration, shall either grant or deny such extension of time for such development and use. Only one such extension shall be permitted.

I. Reapplications. Whenever an application is denied by the commission, the same or substantially the same application shall not be filed within a period of twelve months from and after the date of such denial. (Ord. 1738 § 51, 2012; Ord. 1683 § 80, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1629 §§ 21, 22, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2403)

18.48.040 Revocation or amendment.
The commission may revoke or amend a variance for cause. A written notice of the intention to revoke shall be delivered to the owner of the property to which the variance applies at least ten days before the hearing. A hearing shall be held before the commission prior to the revocation of the variance. If the commission revokes a variance, written findings setting forth the basis for its decision shall be adopted.

This section shall not apply to variances which have lapsed pursuant to subsection H of Section 18.48.030. (Ord. 1683 § 81, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2405)

Chapter 18.50
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS
Sections:

18.50.010    Purpose.

18.50.020    Allowable administrative adjustments.

18.50.030    Conditions necessary to granting an administrative adjustment.

18.50.040    Procedure.

18.50.010 Purpose.
This chapter allows minor adjustments from the property development standards of the zoning provisions of this title when there are special circumstances, practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purpose of this title through the strict and literal interpretation and enforcement of the provisions herewith. (Ord. 1762 § 1 (part), 2015)

18.50.020 Allowable administrative adjustments.
Administrative adjustments as specified herein may be approved or conditionally approved as set forth in this chapter for the following items; provided, that the adjustment does not violate any provisions adopted pursuant to Chapter 8.08 or 15.04:

A. Off-street parking and loading requirements – of up to fifteen percent.

B. Setback requirements – of up to twenty percent.

C. Landscape standards – of up to twenty percent.

D. Projections into setbacks – of up to twenty percent.

E. Distances between buildings – of up to fifteen percent.

Administrative adjustments may not be used in conjunction with any other variance or reduction in standards. (Ord. 1804 § 16, 2019; Ord. 1762 § 1 (part), 2015)

18.50.030 Conditions necessary to granting an administrative adjustment.
In order to grant an administrative adjustment the following findings must be made:

A. There are special circumstances, practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purpose of the city’s zoning provisions through the strict and literal interpretation and enforcement of the above provisions. Special circumstances include, but are not limited to, nonconforming lot sizes and properties previously developed to different development standards where there is no room for modification without substantial alteration or demolition of existing structures;

B. That the proposed adjustment would not be detrimental to the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;

C. That the proposed adjustment is necessary in order that the applicant not be unreasonably deprived the use or enjoyment of his property;

D. The proposed adjustment is consistent with this title; and

E. The proposed adjustment is consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 1762 § 1 (part), 2015)

18.50.040 Procedure.
A. Applications.

1. An application for an administrative adjustment shall be filed with the community development department by the owner of the property for which the adjustment is sought or by the authorized representative of the property owner.

2. The application shall be made on forms furnished by the city and shall include a legal description of the property.

3. The application shall be accompanied by adequate plans which allow for detailed review.

4. The application shall set forth in detail the reasons for the requested adjustment, present written evidence that the conditions set forth in Section 18.50.030 are satisfied, and shall provide other information as may be required to assist in determining the validity of the request.

B. Filing Fees.

1. Administrative adjustment applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by city council resolution for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing the application.

2. An application to amend or modify a previously approved administrative adjustment shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by city council resolution to cover the costs of processing such application.

3. An investigation shall be conducted by all departments of the city which may have an interest in, or jurisdiction over, the matter in order to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

C. Approving Authority – Community Development Director. The community development director shall be the approving authority if the administrative adjustment application is not being requested in conjunction with any other entitlement that requires review or approval by the planning commission.

1. Prior to the community development director making a decision, written notice of the application shall be sent to owners of all properties adjacent to and directly across the street from the exterior boundaries of the subject property, as shown on the county’s latest equalized assessment roll. If the project site is located within a multiple-tenant residential, commercial, or industrial center, all tenants and property owners shall also receive notice of the application. The notice shall specify the date by which objections or other comments to the application should be filed with the community development director, which date shall be at least ten working days from the date the notice is mailed.

2. If objections are received which cannot be resolved by the community development director, the matter shall be referred to the planning commission.

3. The community development director’s decision shall be made and mailed to the applicant and anyone who filed written objections or comments on the application within thirty days after the application is determined to be complete. The decision shall set forth the facts and reasons for the granting, denial, or referral to the planning commission of the administrative adjustment. The director may impose reasonable conditions.

4. The community development director’s decision shall be considered final unless appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.72.

D. Approving Authority – Planning Commission. The planning commission shall be the approving authority in the circumstances set forth below. In such cases, the planning commission will notice and hear the matter in accordance with Sections 18.48.030(D), (E) and (F) and shall base its decision on the factors set forth in Section 18.50.030.

1. The planning commission shall be the approving authority if objections are received and cannot be resolved pursuant to subsection C of this section.

2. The planning commission shall be the approving authority if the administrative adjustment application is being processed in conjunction with a separate entitlement that requires planning commission review or approval.

3. The planning commission’s decision shall be considered final unless appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.72.

E. Time Limits for Development. The construction or occupancy of land or buildings granted under the administrative adjustment shall be utilized within a period not to exceed twelve months from and after the date of approval, and if not so developed and utilized, such administrative adjustment shall automatically become null and void at the expiration of such period. The permittee may apply in writing to the community development director for a one-time extension, not to exceed six months, prior to the expiration of the utilization period. Only one such extension shall be permitted. (Ord. 1762 § 1 (part), 2015)

Chapter 18.52
AMENDMENTS
Sections:

18.52.010    Authorized.

18.52.020    Initiation of proceedings – Fees.

18.52.030    Procedures.

18.52.040    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.52.050    Deleted.

18.52.060    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.52.070    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.52.080    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.52.010 Authorized.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good land use and zoning practices require, the council may amend, supplement or change the land use designation, regulations, zone boundaries or classifications of property established by this title in accordance with the procedures of the California Government Code as supplemented herein. (Ord. 1738 § 53 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-3.2601)

18.52.020 Initiation of proceedings – Fees.
A. An amendment, supplement, or change to the land use element of the general plan, this title and/or the official zoning map may be initiated by:

1. A motion of the council;

2. A motion of the commission;

3. Staff; or

4. An application by one or more owners of the property or properties proposed to be changed, which applications shall be filed on forms furnished by the city and accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

B. For an amendment or change to the general plan land use designation or the official zoning map, each application shall include or be accompanied by the following:

1. A map showing the particular property or properties for which the amendment or change is requested and substantially the adjoining properties and public streets and ways within a radius of three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries thereof;

2. Photographs, drawings, and other supporting documents;

3. A copy of documents on any conditions, easements or restrictions of record which would affect the permitted uses of the property if rezoned as requested and the date or dates (if any) of the expiration thereof; and

4. A statement substantially showing the reasons for the requested amendment or change and why or how such amendment or change will serve the public interest, necessity, convenience, or general welfare.

C. For amendments not involving land use designation or zone changes, each application shall include:

1. A reference to the particular provision of the existing law which it is proposed to amend, delete, change, or add to;

2. A statement clearly showing the requested amendment or change; and

3. The reasons for the proposed amendment or change.

D. Pursuant to Chapter 18.44, a site plan is required to be submitted and approved along with the requested amendment or zone change when there is a specific development project being requested in conjunction with such change. (Ord. 1738 § 53 (part), 2012: Ord. 1683 § 85, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; Ord. 1629 § 25, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2602)

18.52.030 Procedures.
Zone changes and general plan amendments shall be processed in accordance with state planning and zoning law (Government Code Section 65000 et seq.), as the same may be amended from time to time. The following procedures are in addition to the requirements of such law:

A. Hearings may be continued from time to time as the planning commission or city council deems necessary or desirable.

B. If the decision of the city council is to refuse or deny the requested amendment, the city council shall adopt a resolution setting forth its decision.

C. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.

D. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the state planning and zoning law. When notice is mailed in accordance with Government Code Section 65091 to adjacent property owners, such notice shall also be mailed in the same time frame to all lessors, occupants and businesses of real property within three hundred feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed general plan amendment or zone change. (Ord. 1738 § 53 (part), 2012)

Chapter 18.54
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

18.54.010    Scope.

18.54.020    Compliance.

18.54.030    Certificates of occupancy.

18.54.035    Amortization and discontinuance of nonconforming massage establishments.

18.54.040    Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses.

18.54.050    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.54.060    Repealed by Ord. 1738.

18.54.010 Scope.
The procedures for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title shall include those set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 10-3.2701)

18.54.020 Compliance.
All departments, officials and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses or certificates of occupancy, where required by law, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. No such permit, license or certificate of building uses or purposes, where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title, shall be issued. Any such permit, license or certificate, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void. (Prior code § 10-3.2703)

18.54.030 Certificates of occupancy.
A. For Buildings. No building erected, moved, enlarged or altered shall be occupied, used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the building official.

B. Statement. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all laws and with the provisions of this chapter. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building official. (Ord. 1738 § 54, 2012: Ord. 1683 § 92, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2704)

18.54.035 Amortization and discontinuance of nonconforming massage establishments.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all massage establishments which have a valid certificate of operation under Chapter 5.48 prior to March 10, 2015, shall be considered to be nonconforming and shall be required to apply for a conditional use permit no later than March 10, 2018.

B. A nonconforming massage establishment use shall terminate if it is discontinued for a period of ninety consecutive days or if the massage establishment fails to timely apply for and obtain a conditional use permit.

C. Notification of the termination shall be provided to the owner(s) of the business and the owner(s) of record of the property upon which a massage establishment is located, hereafter referred to as the “interested parties.” Notice shall be provided in writing by the community development department, served by certified, return receipt first class mail, of the pending termination. The notification shall contain the following information:

1. The location of the nonconforming massage establishment, including street address and assessor’s parcel number;

2. The section of this code requiring the termination;

3. The effective date of said termination; and

4. The process of appeal of said termination.

D. Any interested party may appeal the proposed termination pursuant to the following administrative procedure:

1. Within thirty calendar days of service of the notification of the proposed termination, the interested party may file a written appeal to the community development director. The request shall state all reasons, including but not limited to alleged abridgements of the appellant’s constitutional rights, and why the termination should not be made effective.

2. Within thirty calendar days of service of said appeal, the community development director shall meet with the interested party and/or his/her representative to discuss the termination and the appeal. Notice of the meeting shall be provided to all interested parties and shall be given at least five calendar days before the meeting. No later than ten calendar days following the meeting, the community development director shall provide written notice of his/her decision to all interested parties.

3. No later than fifteen days of service of said written decision by the community development director, any interested party may appeal the decision to the city council by submitting a written notification of the appeal to the city clerk and paying an appeal fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council.

4. No later than forty-five days from the receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall place the appeal on the city council’s agenda and shall cause notice of said appeal to be published once.

5. The city council shall hear the appeal at a regular meeting of the council. Based on the merits of the case, the city council shall render a written decision with findings of fact and said decision shall be considered final. The city shall take no action toward termination of a nonconforming use, structure or lot pending any appeal action. (Ord. 1757 § 12, 2015)

18.54.040 Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses.
Where lots, buildings, or uses are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, it is the intent and purpose of this section to declare such lots, buildings, and uses to be nonconforming for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare.

A. Definitions.

“Change of land use” means a change from one land use category to another, such as from industrial to commercial.

“Intensification of use” means a change in the use of a building or site where the new use is required to have more off-street parking spaces than the former use, regardless of whether there is a change in land use, or a change in the operating characteristics of a use (for example, hours of operation), which generate more activity on the site.

“Nonconforming lot” means any lot which was lawfully created but, by reason of any subsequently adopted ordinance or regulation, does not conform to the provisions of the zone in which it is located.

“Nonconforming building” means any building or structure, or any portion thereof, which was lawfully constructed but, by reason of any subsequently adopted ordinance or regulation, does not conform to the provisions of the zone in which it is located.

“Nonconforming use” means any use which was lawful at the time it was established but, by reason of any subsequently adopted ordinance or regulation, does not conform to the provisions of the zone in which it is located. Nonconforming uses shall also include residential uses, which exceed the lot area per dwelling unit or density standard of the residential zones.

“Subsequently adopted ordinance or regulation” means any ordinance or regulation changing the development standards or a zone of the property.

B. Continuation of Nonconforming Lots, Buildings, and Uses.

1. Lots. Any use permitted in the zone in which the lot is located shall be permitted, subject to all the other property development standards of the zone.

2. Buildings.

a. A nonconforming building may be continued and maintained under the development standards that existed when the building was constructed, provided there is no change of land use, intensification of use, addition or other physical change to the structure except for such repairs and maintenance as may be necessary for the structural integrity and safety of the structure, or as may be required by law.

b. Where a building is nonconforming because of a change in zoning of the property, the building may be used for any purpose allowed, or conditionally allowed, in the new zone without full compliance with the new development standards subject to the following:

i. The building shall comply to the extent feasible with the new development standards;

ii. The building shall be in full compliance with the previously applicable development standards;

iii. In the case of noncompliance with off-street parking and loading facilities, the building shall be subject to the provisions of subsection E of this section; and

iv. Any addition or enlargement to the building shall require compliance with all current property development standards of the zone.

c. When a nonconforming building is for any reason removed from the land, all future buildings or structures erected on such land shall conform to all the property development standards of the zone.

d. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, a building nonconforming as to the property development standards of the zone it is located in, and which is demolished as a result of the enforcement of seismic safety regulations, may be reconstructed with the same nonconforming standards of the original building; provided, however, the same floor areas in the reconstructed building shall be occupied by similar or less intense uses as in the original building, and reconstruction shall be commenced within two years after obtaining a permit for demolition and shall be completed within two years after obtaining a permit for reconstruction; and provided, further, neither the footing nor any portion of the replacement building shall encroach into any area planned for the widening or extension of existing or future streets as determined by the council upon the recommendation of the community development director.

3. Uses.

a. Legally established nonconforming uses shall be allowed to continue, but shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the building or lot upon which the nonconforming use exists.

b. Legally established nonconforming uses may continue until such time as the property upon which such use is located is redeveloped with a conforming use. Such nonconforming use shall be completely terminated before a conforming use is permitted. If a property contains a conforming use and a nonconforming use, the conforming use shall not be enlarged or expanded until the nonconforming use is removed.

c. If a legal nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty days, any future use of such building or lot shall be in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone.

d. When a building or structure, which is nonconforming due to use and/or applicable development standards, is partially destroyed by fire, explosion, earthquake or other natural disaster, such building may be restored to the condition it was in immediately prior to the occurrence of such damage, and the use thereof may be continued, provided the cost of reconstruction shall not exceed fifty percent of the market value of the building or structure, said market value determined as per the county assessment roll immediately prior to the occurrence of the damage. The reconstruction shall be started within one year after the date of such damage and shall be pursued diligently to completion. Neither the footings nor any portion of the replacement building shall encroach into any area planned for widening or the extension of any existing or future street.

C. Nonconforming Uses of Land. A nonconforming use of land, where no buildings or structures are involved, and when deemed by the commission to be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare, shall be completely terminated or so altered that it will be in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone. Such nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded in any way either on the same or adjoining property, and, if such nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty days, any further use of the land shall be in conformity with this chapter.

D. Nonconforming Fences, Hedges and Walls. Nonconforming fences, hedges, and walls, which do not conform to the corner cutback provisions of this chapter, shall be modified to allow adequate site visibility for traffic safety purposes.

E. Nonconforming Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities.

1. Where off-street parking or loading facilities for existing buildings do not conform to the provisions of this title, a change in land use or intensification of use in an existing building may only be allowed subject to the following:

a. The applicant pays for a parking study to be commissioned by the city which shows that the number of spaces being provided is sufficient for the specific tenant or use being proposed; and

b. A declaration of restrictions is recorded against the property which provides that there shall be no change in tenant or use allowed without a subsequent parking study that verifies that the number of parking spaces provided is sufficient for the new tenant or use; the specific restriction will depend on whether the parking study was limited to a specific tenant or a general use category; and

c. The applicant complies with any conditions required by the parking study to ensure there is sufficient parking.

d. The community development director shall approve the parking study if the parking reduction is not being requested in conjunction with any other entitlement that requires review or approval by the planning commission. If planning commission review or approval is required, the parking study shall be reviewed in the same manner as and in conjunction with the other entitlements.

2. Nothing herein prevents the use of an administrative adjustment for parking in accordance with Chapter 18.50 or a parking variance in accordance with Government Code Section 65906.5.

3. A change in the number of parking spaces due solely to ADA compliance shall not create or intensify any nonconformity relating to parking.

F. Reversion of Nonconforming Uses. Any portion of a nonconforming building or use which is altered or changed to a conforming use shall not thereafter be used for a nonconforming use.

G. Nonconforming Uses Under a Variance or Conditional Use Permit. Those nonconforming uses and buildings which are existing under a variance or a conditional use permit granted pursuant to this chapter or any previous ordinance shall be permitted to continue under the conditions and regulations imposed in such permit or variance. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2015: Ord. 1683 § 93, 2006; Urg. Ord. 1682; prior code § 10-3.2705)

Chapter 18.56
HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
Sections:

18.56.010    Purpose.

18.56.020    Home occupations permitted.

18.56.030    Home occupations prohibited.

18.56.040    Mandatory conditions.

18.56.050    Procedure.

18.56.060    Appeals.

18.56.070    Revocation of permits.

18.56.010 Purpose.
The purpose of a home occupation permit is to allow certain occupations, except large family day care homes, to be conducted within a residential dwelling and/or an accessory building, by the residents thereof, and to ensure that said occupations are incidental and secondary to the residential use and are compatible with the area in which the dwelling is located. (Prior code § 10-3.2801)

18.56.020 Home occupations permitted.
The following home occupations shall be permitted provided they do not violate any of the provisions of Section 18.56.040:

A. Office uses, such as contracting and consulting, when the residence is used for the sole purpose of receiving mail, telephone calls, and bookkeeping;

B. Crafts and hobby uses, such as photography, artwork and home crafts;

C. Services, including but not limited to computer services, tutoring, music lessons and day care;

D. Off-premises sales and vending, such as import/export, product distributing and swap meet vendors; and

E. Large family day care, provided:

1. In addition to the parking required for the dwelling where the large family day care home is conducted, one off-street parking space for each employee who drives to the program and who requires a parking space shall be provided,

2. It is not located within three hundred linear feet of an existing large family day care home. This requirement shall be disregarded if the applicant can demonstrate that:

a. The existing large family day care home is operating at full capacity,

b. A need exists for a particular service not provided by the existing large family day care home,

3. It complies with the noise element of the city’s General Plan,

4. It has been licensed for such use by the state of California;

5. It complies with all State Fire Marshal requirements for building and safety which apply to large family day care homes, and with all local building and fire codes which apply to single-family residences. (Ord. 1738 § 25, 2012; prior code § 10-3.2802)

18.56.030 Home occupations prohibited.
The following home occupations are expressly prohibited in any zone:

A. Real estate, insurance, law and medical offices;

B. Beauty shops, massage parlors, private clubs, dance studios and dating services;

C. The repair or construction of motor vehicles and appliances, machine shops and cabinet shops;

D. On-premises sales and vending; and

E. Any business which shall be deemed to be incompatible with the surrounding land uses and which may adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood in which such business is located. (Prior code § 10-3.2803)

18.56.040 Mandatory conditions.
A home occupation permit may be granted only if all the following conditions are met:

A. There shall be no generation of traffic, parking, sewerage, or water use in excess of what is normal for a residential use.

B. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the residential dwelling, and the home occupation shall not be visible from the street.

C. The home occupation shall not create a hazard to persons and/or property or become a nuisance.

D. There shall be no outside storage or display of anything, including signs, related to the home occupation.

E. No required parking space, either in a garage or otherwise, shall be preempted, nor shall more than one room in a dwelling be utilized to conduct the home occupation.

F. The community development director may impose such additional conditions as deemed necessary to safeguard the health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood.

G. The provisions of this section shall not apply to large family day care homes. (Prior code § 10-3.2804)

18.56.050 Procedure.
The procedure for obtaining a home occupation permit shall be as follows:

A. Filing of Applications. An application for a home occupation permit shall be filed with the community development department on forms provided by the planning division. As a part of the application, the applicant, if not the owner of the property, shall furnish a written statement from the property owner or his representative agreeing to the conduct of the subject business.

B. Fees. The applicant shall pay to the City a filing fee established by City Council resolution to defray the costs incurred by the City in processing the home occupation permit application.

C. Reviews and Decisions. Within thirty days after the date on which the application was filed, the community development director or his/her designee shall review the application to determine if the proposed use meets all of the requirements set forth in subsection E of Section 18.56.020. If it is determined that all such requirements are met, the community development director shall issue the permit. (Ord. 1629 § 26, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2805)

18.56.060 Appeals.
The decision of the community development director or his/her designee may be appealed by the applicant or an affected person to the commission and council. Such appeal shall be filed with the community development department within ten days after the date of the decision by the community development director. Upon the receipt of such an appeal, the community development director shall place the matter for consideration on the commission agenda of the first regular meeting of the commission following ten days written notice to the appellant or applicant. The commission shall either approve the application with conditions or deny the application based on its findings. The decision of the commission shall be final, unless it is appealed to the council pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.72 of this code. (Prior code § 10-3.2806)

18.56.070 Revocation of permits.
The community development director may revoke any home occupation permit for noncompliance or for any violation of the conditions set forth in granting such approval. A written notice of intention to revoke shall be mailed to the applicant not less than ten days before the revocation. The business license office shall be notified of the revocation of any home occupation permit. The applicant may appeal the decision to revoke the home occupation permit to the commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 18.56.060. (Prior code § 10-3.2807)

Chapter 18.58
SIGNS
Sections:

18.58.010    Scope.

18.58.015    Purposes and interests to be served.

18.58.018    Basic policies.

18.58.020    Definitions.

18.58.030    Signs allowed without permits.

18.58.040    Signs allowed with permits.

18.58.050    Prohibited signs.

18.58.060    Design standards.

18.58.070    Permit requirement and procedures.

18.58.080    Appeals.

18.58.090    Nonconforming signs.

18.58.100    Removal of signs.

18.58.110    Procedure for removal.

18.58.010 Scope.
This Chapter regulates signs, as defined in this Chapter, which are placed on private property, or on property owned by public agencies other than the City and over which the City has zoning authority, whenever such signs or devices are visible from any public right of way. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2901)

18.58.015 Purposes and interests to be served.
Among the purposes and interests to be served by this Chapter are the following:

A. To serve, protect and enhance the public health, safety and welfare of the City of Gardena and the people who live in it, visit it, or conduct business in it;

B. To promote and accomplish the goals, policies and strategies of the City’s General Plan;

C. To serve the City’s interest in community esthetics by balancing that interest against the signage needs of businesses and persons who wish to express a message or provide information by displaying a sign;

D. To serve the City’s interest in traffic safety by promoting the free flow of traffic and protecting motorists, cyclists and pedestrians from injury and property damage which could be caused, in whole or in part, by cluttered, distracting, confusing, or illegible signage;

E. To prevent personal injury and property damage from signs which are improperly placed or constructed, or poorly maintained;

F. To prevent the depreciation of property values which could be caused by dilapidated, abandoned, inappropriate and illegal signage;

G. To protect, preserve and enhance property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by governing the appearance of the streetscapes that affect the public image of the City;

H. To prevent interference with the proper conduct of legitimate businesses in the City that may result from the erection and placement of poorly designed signs which are unsightly, improperly located, disproportionate in scale or disharmonious with adjacent signs or structures and therefore tend to be both economically and aesthetically undesirable;

I. To promote the use of signs which positively contribute to the aesthetics of the community, are appropriate in scale to the surrounding buildings and landscape, and to advance the City’s goals of quality development;

J. To provide design standards regarding the non-communicative aspects of signs, which are consistent with applicable provisions of City, county, state and federal law.

K. To provide flexibility to those who wish to express a message by displaying a sign, encourage variety, and create an incentive to relate signage to the basic principles of good design;

L. To assure that the benefits derived from the expenditure of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets, sidewalks, public parks, public rights of way, and other public places and spaces, are protected by exercising reasonable controls over the physical characteristics and structural design of signs;

M. To improve the visual environment for the citizens and residents of, and visitors to the City;

N. To protect prominent views within the community;

O. To preserve and protect the residential character of residential neighborhoods by preventing commercial signs, other than real estate signs, in such areas. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003)

18.58.018 Basic policies.
The policies, principles, rules and regulations stated in this section apply to all signs within the regulatory scope of this Chapter, and to all provisions of this Chapter, notwithstanding any more specific provisions to the contrary.

A. MESSAGE NEUTRALITY POLICY

It is the City’s policy to regulate signs in a manner which is consistent with the free speech provisions of the United States constitution and the liberty of speech provisions of the California constitution, by enacting regulations which are content neutral as to noncommercial messages and viewpoint neutral as to commercial messages.

B. ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS

All administrative and quasi-adjudicative interpretations of this Chapter are to be exercised in light of the City’s message neutrality policy. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this Chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a “structure” as defined in the building code, then the Community Development Director, Planning Commission, and/or City Council, as applicable, shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this Chapter.

C. MESSAGE SUBSTITUTION

Subject to the owner’s consent, a noncommercial message of any type or content may be substituted for any allowed commercial message or any allowed noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this Chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or particular land use; it does not create a right of substitution of one commercial message in place of another; it does not create a right to display an off-site commercial message sign, and it does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted.

D. PERMITS

No person shall erect, place or maintain any sign in violation of this Chapter. To insure compliance with this section, a sign permit shall be required for any sign, except as provided herein. The procedure regarding application for and processing of sign permits is set forth in section 18.58.070, and the procedure for appealing sign related decisions is set forth in section 18.58.080. Even if a given sign is exempted from sign permit requirements, it is still subject to all other applicable permit requirements, including, but not limited to, grading, plumbing, electrical, building, fire, encroachment, and similar safety codes.

E. PURPOSE OF PERMITTING

All permitting and approval processes required by this Chapter are intended to insure compliance with this Chapter and various safety codes, and to prevent the loss of time, effort and materials which might otherwise be invested in an illegal sign.

F. INDEPENDENT ENFORCEABILITY OF NON-COMMUNICATIVE ASPECTS OF SIGNS

All rules and regulations concerning the non-communicative aspects of signs, such as location, size, height, illumination, spacing, orientation, density, etc., stand enforceable independently of any permit or approval process. In the event that the permitting procedures of this Chapter should be ruled unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, in whole or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, then the rules and regulations stated in this Chapter as to the non-communicative aspects of signs shall remain in place, valid and enforceable.

G. BILLBOARD POLICY

It is a fundamental policy of the City of Gardena to completely prohibit the construction, erection or use of any billboards, as defined herein, other than those that legally exist in the City, or for which a valid permit has been duly issued and has not expired, as of the date on which this provision is first adopted. No permit shall be issued for any billboard that violates this policy, and the City will take immediate abatement action against any billboard constructed or maintained in violation of this policy. The City Council affirmatively declares that it would have adopted this billboard policy even if it were the only provision in this Chapter. The City Council intends for this billboard policy to be severable and separately enforceable even if other provision(s) of this Chapter may be declared, by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable. This provision does not prohibit agreements to relocate presently existing, legal billboards, as encouraged by California Business and Professions Code section 5412.

H. LAND OWNER’S CONSENT

No sign may be displayed on private real property without the consent of the legal owner of the real property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this policy, “land owner” or “owner” means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property.

I. LEGAL NATURE OF SIGNAGE RIGHTS AND DUTIES

As to signs mounted on or attached to land within the regulatory scope of this Chapter, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this Chapter attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This provision does not modify or affect the law of fixtures, sign-related provisions in private leases (so long as they are not in conflict with this Chapter), or the ownership of sign structures.

J. SIGN PROGRAMS

Sign programs for specific developments, specific plans, special sign or overlay districts, when approved by the Community Development Director, Planning Commission and/or City Council, as applicable, may modify the rules stated in this Chapter as to sign location, size, height, illumination, spacing, density, orientation or other non-communicative aspects of signs, but may not override or modify any of the Basic Policies stated in this section. All the provisions of this section shall automatically apply to and be deemed a part of any sign program approved after the date on which this provision is initially adopted.

K. SEVERANCE

If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion or provision of this Chapter is held invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other provision of this Chapter that can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this Chapter, the City Council affirmatively declares that it would have approved and adopted this Chapter, and each separate provision thereof, even without any portion which may be held invalid or unenforceable. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003)

18.58.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases have the meanings stated in this section. The definitions stated herein apply to differing forms of the word or phrase, as required by context.

“Abandoned sign” means any sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of 90 days which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the business premise where the display is located.

“Accessory use,” in the context of this Chapter, means a sign which is an accessory to, and clearly incidental to, the principal use on the same or adjoining parcel, lot, or property. In the context of commercial messages on signs, it means an onsite sign.

“Air activated signs” means those signs which are inflated or inflatable, as well as those which are activated by wind or forced air or gas.

“Animated sign” means any sign which is designed and constructed to give a message through a sequence of progressive changes of parts by either action or motion, flashing, or color changes requiring electrical energy or electronic or manufacturers’ sources of supply. Does not include hand held signs or commercial mascots.

“Area of sign” means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares, rectangles, circles or ellipses, which enclose the extreme limits of the message or copy area of a sign, together with any frame, background area of the sign, structural trim, or other material, color or condition which forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. For the purposes of this Chapter, only one face of a double-faced sign shall be utilized to determine the area of such sign.

“Banner” means any pennant, streamer, sign, picture, figure, or other object, made of flexible material, which is suspended or otherwise designed for decoration or advertisement or to attract the attention of passersby.

“Billboard” means a permanent structure sign, located on private property, on which is displayed offsite commercial messages, as well as any permanent structure which is a principal use (as opposed to an accessory use) of the property on which it is built, on which messages may be displayed. A billboard may be freestanding or attached to other structures.

“Business center” means a legal, nonresidential land use with multiple establishments that are connected by location within a common building, or that share parking spaces located on private land, or that share a common access to the public right of way.

“Canopy sign” means a sign or advertising device painted on or applied to and attached flat against the vertical side of a canopy, or erected on the roof surface of a canopy, and which does not extend below the lowest point of the canopy material. Such sign shall be considered the same as a projecting sign for purpose of regulating number and area of such sign.

“Changeable copy sign” means a sign which is characterized by changeable copy, regardless of the method of attachment.

“Commercial mascot” means humans or animals used as advertising devices for commercial establishments, typically by the holding or wearing of insignia, masks or costumes associated with the commercial establishment. Includes sign twirlers, sign clowns, etc.

“Construction sign” means a sign erected and maintained within a construction project, typically used to identify those individuals or businesses directly connected with the construction project and information regarding direction, price or terms.

“Directional sign” means a sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

“Director” means the City’s Community Development Director, or designee.

“Establishment” means a legal, nonresidential use of land, to conduct a commercial or noncommercial activity. By way of example and not limitation, “establishment” includes stores, offices, churches, schools, hospitals, manufacturing facilities, etc. Does not include home or hobby occupations.

“Expired sign” means a sign whose message refers to an event or a particular date, and such date is more than three days past.

“Flashing sign” means an illuminated sign which exhibits a changing light or color effect by blinking or any other such means so as to provide a nonconstant illumination.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign which is placed on the ground or has as its primary structural support one or more columns, poles, uprights or braces in or upon the ground. Includes ground, monument and pole signs.

“General advertising” means the business of renting or otherwise providing display space to commercial advertisers located other than the place where the advertising will be displayed.

“Governmental signs” means those signs by which a governmental entity provides notice to the public. Such signs typically indicate traffic rules, directions and distances, and notices of public hearings, etc.

“Height of sign” or “sign height” means the vertical distance measured from the grade level at the base of the sign structure to the highest point of such sign.

“Identification sign” means a sign which serves to identify the name, address and lawful use of the premises upon which the sign is located. Includes signs indicating the name of residents on residential uses.

“Illuminated sign” means any sign illuminated by an artificial light source, including internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs.

“Legally required signs” means those signs which are required to be placed or displayed, by a body of law other than this Chapter. By way of example only, such signs typically include notices of eviction or condemnation, notice of change of ownership, etc.

“Marquee sign” means a sign attached to or constructed to a marquee, canopy, or awning projecting from and supported by the building. Such sign shall be considered the same as a projecting sign for purpose of regulating number and area of such sign.

“Noncommercial speech” means a message which is not commercial in nature. Such messages typically relate to debatable matters of public concern, such as, by way of example and not limitation, advocacy on politics, religion, arts, science, philosophy, commentary on governmental policy, etc.

“Noncommunicative aspects” means those elements of a sign which are not an integral part of the message presentation, such as location, size, height, orientation, spacing, density, physical construction type, etc.

“Offsite sign” or “off-premises sign” means a sign advertising or directing attention to an establishment, business, merchandise, commodity, service, activity, entertainment or attraction which is not sold, offered, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is located or displayed. The onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial speech.

“Onsite sign” or “On-premises sign” means a sign advertising or directing attention to an establishment, business, merchandise, commodity, service, activity, entertainment or attraction which is sold, provided or performed on the property where the sign is located or displayed. The onsite / offsite distinction applies only to commercial speech.

“Portable sign” means a sign which is not permanently affixed, anchored or secured to either the ground or a structure which remains in place.

“Projecting sign” means any single-faced or double-faced sign which is suspended from or attached at an angle to the face of a building and projecting out as opposed to being mounted flat on the surface of a building. Includes awnings attached to buildings, marquees, canopies, and under canopy signs.

“Qualifying street frontage” means the total street frontage of property fronting on a public right-of-way, except that in the case of corner or through lots, only one street frontage shall be used for purposes of calculating allowable sign area.

“Real estate sign” means a sign indicating that real property is available for sale, exchange, rent or lease. Such signs typically state that real property, or any interest therein, is for sale or exchange, or for lease or rent for a period longer than one week, and the names and contact information for persons involved in such economic transaction.

“Roof sign” means any sign which is supported or constructed wholly upon the roof or over the eaves of a building, or which projects above the parapet of the building to which it is attached.

“Safety codes” means those codes which have been duly adopted by the City of Gardena, and which are currently in effect, which regulate matters of safe development and construction, such as, by way of example and not limitation, grading, building, electrical and plumbing codes.

“Sign” is any device, fixture, placard or structure, including its component parts, which draws attention to an object, product, place, activity, opinion, person, institution, organization, or place of business, or which identifies or promotes the interests of any person, and which is to be viewed from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way or parking area. The following are not within the definition of ‘sign’ for the regulatory purposes of this Chapter:

1. Public property and public use property: Signs placed on land or other property owned by the City, or in which the City holds the present right of possession or control, or land which the City holds in trust, as well as all public rights of way;

2. Interior signs: Signs or other visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof, provided the building or enclosed structure is otherwise legal;

3. Architectural features: Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts);

4. Symbols embedded in architecture: Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal;

5. Personal appearance: Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, costumes (but not including commercial mascots);

6. Manufacturers’ marks: Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale;

7. Fireworks, etc.: the legal use of fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this Chapter;

8. Mass transit signage: Advertisements or banners mounted on trains or duly licensed mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the City;

9. Certain insignia on vehicles and vessels: On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel;

10. Special event signage: Signs used in conjunction with annual and period events as defined and regulated by Chapter 5.04, section 5.04.278.

11. Newsracks and newsstands.

“Temporary sign” means a sign which by nature of its physical structure is not intended to be permanent, and/or does not qualify as a structure requiring a permit under the safety codes. Such signs are typically made of lightweight or flimsy materials and mounted or attached in such a manner that given long term exposure to wind, sun and weather, such signs will deteriorate.

“Under-canopy sign” means a sign suspended above the walkway under a canopy or awning of a building to identify a business, profession or industry conducted on the premises. Such sign shall be considered the same as a projecting sign for purpose of regulating number and area of such sign.

“Wall sign” means any sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the face of, or erected and confined within the limits of, the outside wall of any building and supported by such wall or building and which displays only one advertising surface.

“Warning sign” means a sign which is required or authorized by law to provide warning or notice. Typical examples include “beware of dog,” “danger high voltage,” “no trespassing,” etc.

“Window sign” means any sign placed inside or upon a window and/or door facing the outside and which is intended to be seen from the exterior. A window sign may be permanent or temporary.

“Working day” means a day when Gardena City Hall is open to the public during regular hours. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2902)

18.58.030 Signs allowed without permits.
The signs described in this section are not subject to the permit requirement of section 18.58.070, and may be displayed in all zones of the City, subject to the limitations set forth in this section. All signs allowable under this section shall not be illuminated.

A. Construction signs which meet these requirements: maximum number per project under construction: one; maximum area: 32 square feet; maximum height (if free standing): 10 feet; minimum setback from property line: five feet; maximum display time: from the time a grading or building permit is issued and remains valid and unexpired, until the construction project is completed or abandoned.

B. Real estate signs, subject to the following:

1. On single family residential properties and other single residential uses: maximum number per parcel: one; maximum size: six square feet; maximum height (if freestanding) five feet; setback from property line (if freestanding): at least five feet;

2. On multiple-family dwellings and subdivisions of fewer than five lots or units: maximum number per parcel or lot: one; maximum size: twenty square feet; maximum height if freestanding: ten feet; setback from property line (if freestanding): five feet; maximum display time: until thirty days after the sale, rental or lease of all the units advertised;

3. In subdivisions of five or more lots or units, and on commercial and industrial properties: maximum number per parcel or lot: one; maximum size: thirty two square feet; maximum height if freestanding: ten feet; minimum setback from the property line (if freestanding): five feet; maximum display time: not more than thirty days after all the units have been sold, rented or leased.

C. Certain other signs on residential uses: in lieu of all or part of real estate signage allowable under 18.58.030.B, any legal residential use may display:

1. Noncommercial message signs (including but not limited to political and religious messages), subject to: allowable types: wall, window, projecting, freestanding, banner; number: not limited; cumulative maximum area: as determined under 18.58.030.B (however, during the period of time beginning 45 days before a general or special election and continuing until three days after such election, the cumulative total area may be increased by four square feet); number: not limited; maximum height if freestanding: five feet; minimum setback from property line: five feet.

2. Also, in lieu of part or all of the allowable real estate and noncommercial message signs, residential uses may display temporary signs pertaining to properly permitted garage sales, yard sales, moving sales, etc., subject to: location - only on the parcel where the sale is to be conducted; display time: sunrise to sunset on the day the sale is conducted.

3. Identification signs.

4. This subsection does not authorize or allow signs for home or hobby occupations, or any commercial messages other than real estate and garage sales, etc.

D. Governmental signs not exceeding two square feet in area, unless another body of law requires a larger size, in which case the minimum size under such law shall control;

E. Warning signs not exceeding two square feet in area;

F. Legally required signs. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2903)

18.58.040 Signs allowed with permits.
The signs described in this section may be constructed and displayed within the City, subject to the limitations set forth in this section, only upon the prior issuance of a valid sign permit. The permit procedure is stated in section 18.58.070; the procedure for appealing sign permit decisions is stated in section 18.58.080. If a sign is listed in this section, and also listed as “prohibited” in section 18.58.050, then the prohibition shall prevail. In case of overlap or conflict between the provisions of subsection A or B with subsection D of this section, then subsection D shall prevail. The signs described in this section are also subject to all other applicable permit and approval requirements, such as permits required by safety codes, and such additional approvals and permits as may be required by other governmental units.

A. Multi Unit Residential Uses. Condominiums, stock cooperatives, and other types of multiple-family dwellings may display one non-illuminated sign not exceeding twenty square feet in area and, if freestanding, ten feet in height; such sign must be located not less than five feet inside the property line.

B. Nonresidential Uses. A legal nonresidential use or establishment may display up to any two of these three basic sign types: freestanding, wall, projecting. The requirements and limitations for each type are stated following.

1. Freestanding sign: In case of overlapping or conflicting provisions within this subsection, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.

a. Qualifying street frontage: fifty feet minimum;

b. Maximum area: based on linear feet of qualifying street frontage as follows, provided a freestanding sign shall have a sign area of at least 25 square feet:

i. Properties with qualifying street frontage between fifty and seventy five feet: one-half square foot of sign for each linear foot of qualifying street frontage;

ii. Properties with qualifying street frontage more than seventy five feet and less than one hundred linear feet of qualifying street frontage: three-fourths square foot of signage for each linear foot of qualifying street frontage;

iii. Properties with qualifying street frontage over one hundred feet of qualifying street frontage: one square foot of signage per linear foot of qualifying street frontage, up to a maximum of one hundred fifty square feet of sign area;

c. Maximum height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign, including its mounting or its supporting structure, shall not exceed thirty feet;

d. Setback: No freestanding sign shall be closer than fifteen feet to any side property line;

e. Number: one per lot, parcel or use; except:

i. A corner property having one of its qualified street frontages in excess of three hundred linear feet (combined frontage on two streets) may have one additional freestanding sign whose area shall be determined in accordance with subsection B(1)(b) of this section;

ii. An interior property having a qualified street frontage in excess of three hundred linear feet may have, in lieu of a single freestanding sign, two freestanding signs of equal sign area, height, and design, provided the height of each sign shall not exceed fifteen feet;

f. Electronic animation: Upon approval of a conditional use permit, a mixed use commercial center with a minimum lot area of two acres and a minimum gross leaseable building area of thirty thousand square feet may incorporate an electronically animated message system as part of a free-standing sign. In considering an application for a conditional use permit, the Director, Commission or City Council, as applicable, shall base their decision only the on the non-communicative aspects of the proposed sign.

2. Wall sign: In case of overlapping or conflicting provisions within this subsection, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.

a. Qualifying: Wall signs shall be permitted only on establishments fronting on and/or oriented toward one or more public street or highway. Where a ground-floor establishment fronts only on a parking lot, alley, open mall, landscaped open space or other public right-of-way, the exterior building wall facing such area shall be considered a building frontage for purposes of computing permitted wall sign area;

b. Attachment: A wall sign shall be erected, constructed or installed so that it is either integrated into the wall or flat against the wall to which it is attached; it shall not extend more than twelve inches from the wall to which it is attached;

c. Maximum number: one, except a single occupancy in a corner location, or a business occupying a corner location in a business center, may have one additional wall sign of the same size as the first wall sign; in such case, the second wall sign shall be placed along the side frontage.

d. Maximum length or width: The length of a wall sign shall not exceed seventy percent of the length or width of the wall upon which it is mounted.

e. Window signs: each establishment may display window signs not exceeding 25% of the window surface area. If the window signs are permanent, then they shall count toward to the total amount of allowable wall signage. If the window signs are temporary, then they may be displayed not more than 10 days in any calendar month. The Director may require special permit provisions, applicable to temporary window signs on nonresidential uses, for the convenience of the City and the users; such special provisions may include an annual schedule of when temporary window signs are planned to be on display, and a log of when such signs are actually displayed. Permits for temporary window signs may be authorized for a maximum of one year.

f. Banners: display duration: not to exceed 15 consecutive days or 60 total days in any twelve month period; all banners displayed on a given parcel, lot or land use shall count toward the total amount of allowable wall signage; construction standards: all banners shall be attached to a wall pursuant to subsection B(2)(b) of this section such that no banner shall impede traffic or project over the public right of way or over the property line.

g. Maximum area:

i. Single occupancy or establishment on a parcel: The total area of a wall sign shall not exceed one and one-half square feet per linear feet of qualified building frontage for a single occupancy;

ii. Business center: The total area of a wall sign shall not exceed one and one-half square feet of sign per linear foot of qualified building frontage; in addition, a second wall sign of up to fifteen percent of the total sign area of the first may be permitted.

iii. Establishments located on the second floor: one half square foot of sign area for each linear foot of leasehold frontage, up to a maximum of fifteen square feet; the width of such sign shall not exceed seventy percent of leasehold frontage.

iv. Establishments located without direct access to a public street or highway shall be permitted a maximum of three square feet of sign area;

v. Any building, such as an office building, containing establishments which front only on an interior mall or hallway and having a limited number of entrances, shall be considered a single establishment for the purpose of computing the wall sign area permitted on the exterior walls of such building, except as otherwise provided in Section 18.46.030.C(22)(g) of this code.

3. Projecting sign:

a. Maximum number: one;

b. Maximum area: for a single occupancy on a parcel or each tenancy in a business center: one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage; however, in no event may any projecting sign exceed fifty square feet.

c. Maximum projection: No projecting sign, or part thereof, shall extend more than five feet from the wall to which it is attached; no sign may project above the roof line or parapet of the building to which it is attached;

d. The encroachment rules, stated in section 18.58.060.A, B, and C apply to all projecting signs allowable under this subsection.

C. Directional Signs. In addition to all the other signs permitted by subsections A and B of this section, directional signs may be located as necessary to guide drivers and pedestrians to an establishment, parking, etc.; however, no directional sign may exceed six square feet in sign area or project above the roof line or parapet of any building to which the directional sign is attached; if the directional sign is freestanding, its height may not exceed eight feet.

D. Special Zones. The following sign restrictions shall apply to the nonresidential uses in the home business (H-B) zone and the commercial-residential (C-R) zone, and prevail over provisions stated above in subsections A and B:

1. H-B Zone. Only one ground or one wall sign advertising the nonresidential use on the premises shall be permitted in the H-B zone. A freestanding sign shall not exceed eight square feet in area or ten feet in height. A wall sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area and shall not be affixed or mounted onto any residential structure.

2. C-R Zone. A wall sign advertising the nonresidential use on the premises shall be permitted in the C-R zone, subject to the design standards of 18.58.040.B.2; however, except that the maximum number is one per lot, parcel or use, and the size shall not exceed fifty square feet.

E. Special Uses – Gasoline Service Stations. Establishments legally selling motor vehicle fuel may display price indicators, as described in California Business and Professions Code sections 13470 et seq., in addition to signage which is otherwise allowed. If freestanding, the maximum area of all such price indicators shall not exceed one quarter square foot for each linear foot of qualifying street frontage. Any freestanding gasoline price signs allowable under this provision shall be placed in a position such that they do not interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and not project above the roof or parapet of the building or structure from which the motor fuel is sold.

F. Special Uses – Drive-Ins and Drive-Throughs. Establishments which provide goods or services to customers while the customers are in their motor vehicles may, in addition to the signage otherwise allowed, display an additional sign located near the customer driveway, which shall not exceed 32 square feet in 8 feet in height. Such signs may be equipped with sound emitting and / or sound receiving devices, may be illuminated, and may consist in whole or in part of changeable copy elements. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2904)

18.58.050 Prohibited signs.
The following signs shall not be permitted, constructed, erected or allowed to remain on display in the City:

A. Billboards, as defined herein.

B. Signs displaying offsite commercial messages.

C. Commercial mascots.

D. Abandoned signs.

E. Expired signs.

F. Traffic hazards. Signs which pose significant hazards to the safety of vehicle and pedestrian traffic by virtue of any of the following factors, or any combination of them:

1. The sign is confusingly or deceptively similar to a recognized traffic sign;

2. The sign is located so as to block or impair drivers’ view of the road, sidewalk, or traffic signs and signals.

3. The physical structure of the sign is in such a dilapidated or structurally unsound state that it poses an immediate threat to the safety of persons or property, from events such as falling down, being blown by wind, etc.

G. Flashing or animated signs, unless expressly authorized by other provisions of this Chapter.

H. Signs erected in a public right-of-way.

I. Home or hobby occupation signs.

J. Portable signs.

K. Air activated signs.

L. Roof signs. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2905)

18.58.060 Design standards.
When a sign will encroach onto an adjoining property, the sign must also be authorized by an encroachment permit. The Director may include the encroachment authorization in a sign permit.

A. Encroachment rules - public property. No freestanding sign or projecting sign may extend over or encroach into any public street, public sidewalk, other public property, or beyond a building line, except a distance as determined by the clearance of the bottom of the sign to the level of the grade immediately below, as follows:

1. Clearance less than eight feet: no encroachment allowed;

2. Clearance of eight feet: maximum one foot encroachment; and

3. Clearance exceeding eight feet: for each additional one foot of clearance, an additional six inches of encroachment, to a maximum projection of five feet.

B. Encroachment rules - private property used by the public. No sign may project more than six inches from the face of a building over private property used or intended to be used by the general public, unless there is a minimum of eight feet clearance from the bottom of the sign to the grade immediately below the sign, or a minimum of fourteen feet clearance from the bottom of the sign to a vehicular traffic way immediately below the sign.

C. Encroachment rules - private property not used by the public. No sign may project over the property line of the property on which it is mounted.

D. Lighting. All lighting and illumination of signs, when allowed, shall comply with all applicable safety codes. All external lighting shall be hooded and directed to the sign face and away from adjacent properties. On uses where the sign is visible from a residential zone, the illumination shall be shielded to minimize the flow of light into the residential zone.

E. Construction. All signs, sign frames, sign appurtenances, and supporting construction shall be designed and constructed in compliance with all applicable safety codes.

F. Maintenance. All signs and advertising structures shall be maintained in a good and safe structural condition. The owner of any property on which a sign is located and those persons responsible for the maintenance of the sign shall be jointly and severally responsible for the condition of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall be required to keep such area clean, sanitary, and free from noxious or offensive substances, rubbish, and flammable waste materials. The Director is authorized to inspect and order the painting and repair of a sign which may constitute a hazard to the health, safety or public welfare by reason of maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence; the Director’s decision in this regard shall be appealable to the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 18.58.080. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2906)

18.58.070 Permit requirement and procedures.
The Director shall develop and provide to any person upon request a standard form for applying for a sign permit. The same form may be used both for the application and the decision. Use of any such standard form shall be optional for the applicant. A single form may be used for multiple signs on the same lot or parcel.

A. Any person seeking a permit for a sign, for which a permit is required under this Chapter, shall submit to the Director a written application for such sign permit. A sign permit application is complete only when it is accompanied by the appropriate application fee, in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, and provides the following information:

1. Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the proposed sign, the applicant, property owner and, if known, sign contractor;

2. Address and zoning district of the property where the sign is proposed to be constructed and displayed;

3. Accurate and scaled site plan showing the location of property lines, buildings, parking areas, driveways, landscaped areas, utility poles and wires, and existing and proposed signs;

4. Accurate and scaled building elevation showing existing and proposed building signs;

5. Accurate and scaled plans, details and samples showing the location, dimensions, materials, and illumination of each proposed sign;

6. Existing and proposed sign area of each individual sign and the combined area of all signs (including those already existing or previously permitted) in relation to the maximum allowed sign area;

7. The property owner’s consent to the proposed sign, in writing (which may be provided by the owner’s signature on the application, or by the applicant providing signage-related portions of a duly executed lease);

8. Application fee in accordance with the current fee schedule;

9. A statement as to whether the sign is intended to be used primarily for commercial or noncommercial speech; if commercial message, the commercial operation with which the sign message will be associated;

10. A statement or graphical description as to whether the sign, or any part of it, is to be used for changeable or changing copy;

11. A statement or graphical description as to whether the proposed sign, or any part of it, is to be used to display a trademark or service mark which has been registered either with state or federal authorities, and if so, a copy of the registration; in cases where such trademark or service mark has been registered, a copy of the registration and a sample of the mark;

12. A statement or graphical description as to whether the proposed sign, or any part of it, is proposed to utilize any of the following physical methods of message presentation: sound or odor; smoke or fumes or steam; rotating or moving elements; activation by wind or forced air; neon or other fluorescing gases; flashing or strobing lighting; liquid crystal displays or other video-like methods; use of animals or persons as part of the display;

13. A statement as to whether the same property or parcel has been the subject of a sign repair or removal order issued by the Director within the past ten years, and if so, the result of such order.

B. Notice of incompleteness: If a sign permit application fails to fully comply with section 18.58.070.A, then the Director shall give written notice of incompleteness to the applicant of such incompleteness, within fifteen working days from receipt of an application. In such notice, the Director shall specify the points of incompleteness, with references to applicable provisions of this Chapter. Following such notice, the applicant shall have a maximum of ten calendar days in which to resubmit the application in completed form without paying a new application fee. For any particular sign, an application may be submitted a maximum of three times (i.e., initial application plus two revisions) to cure a problem of incompleteness. If, after three tries, a sign permit applicant still has not presented a complete application, then the applicant must start anew and pay the application fee. If no notice of incompleteness is given within fifteen working days from receipt of the application, then the application shall be deemed complete as of the date of submission. Notice of incompleteness may be given by phone call, email, mailed letter, or any other method reasonably expected to provide notice.

C. Time limits for definite decision: Once a sign permit application is complete, the Director shall make a decision to deny, approve, or conditionally approve the application, and give written notice of the decision to the applicant, within forty five working days of the date on which a complete application was first submitted. Such time for decision may be waived by the applicant.

D. Approval, conditional approval and denial: The Director shall approve a sign permit application which fully complies with this Chapter and the all other applicable laws, rules, regulations and permit requirements. The Director may approve a sign permit application upon conditions relating to non-communicative aspects of the proposed sign, on the basis that the application contains one or more material misstatements of fact, or on the basis that it is proposed to be used for offsite commercial messages. For any sign permit application which does not comply with this Chapter and all other applicable laws, rules, regulations and permit requirements, the Director shall deny the application, and sent written notice of such decision, detailing the reasons for denial, to the applicant, within the time period stated under “time limits for definite decision.” If the Director fails to provide written notice of decision within the required time, then the application shall be deemed denied; upon such event, the applicant may then appeal to the Planning Commission within the time period that would be applicable if the Director had issued a decision.

E. Permits issued in error: in the event a sign permit is issued in error, i.e., issued even though the sign did not conform to this Chapter and all other applicable law, then the permit may be summarily cancelled by the City, upon notice to the applicant, at any time before the applicant has actually performed substantial work on the physical construction of the sign. Within thirty calendar days of notice of cancellation, the applicant may apply for a permit for a fully compliant sign without paying the registration fee anew; however, in the event that the erroneous issuance was based upon a material misstatement of fact in the application, then the application fee must be paid anew.

F. Expiration of sign permits: A duly issued sign permit shall be valid for one year. If the permitted sign is completed and receives all necessary inspection approvals within one year of issuance, then it shall be presumed permanent, but still subject to revocation under the provisions of this Chapter or any other applicable law. However, permits for temporary window signs on nonresidential uses shall be valid for a maximum of one year.

G. Permit revocation: if a permit is issued for a sign, and the sign is not constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit, or with the passage of time the sign falls out of compliance with the terms of the permit, then the Director may issue to the permit holder a notice of revocation, stating the details of noncompliance. The sign owner shall then have thirty calendar days in which to bring the sign into compliance; if such compliance is not achieved within thirty days, then the Director may revoke the permit and order the sign removed.

H. Timeliness of decision. Any applicant may waive any of the requirements for decision stated in this section. Unless timeliness of decision is waived by the applicant, if the Director fails to reach a decision on a sign permit application within the required time, then the application shall be deemed denied as of the last date on which the Director could have rendered a timely decision. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2907)

18.58.080 Appeals.
A. Appeal of Director’s Decision to Planning Commission: Any person or body, public or private, may appeal any sign related decision of the Director to the Planning Commission. Such appeal, accompanied by the appropriate appeal fee (as set by City Council resolution) shall be filed with the Director within ten days after the applicant is given notice of the Director’s decision. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Director shall place the matter for consideration on the agenda of the first regular meeting of the Planning Commission following fifteen working days’ written notice to the appellant and/or applicant.

B. Hearing of the Appeal by the Planning Commission. Unless time is waived by the appellant, the Planning Commission shall hear and decide the appeal not later than thirty working days after the appeal is filed. The Planning Commission’s decision shall be in writing and shall state findings in support of the decision. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final, unless timely appealed to the City Council. Until an appeal has run its full course, the status quo shall be maintained, unless the subject sign poses an immediate and serious threat to the public safety by virtue of its physical condition. Unless timeliness of decision is waived by the application, if the Commission fails to decide a proper appeal within the required time, the appeal shall be deemed denied as of the last date upon which the Planning Commission could have timely reached its decision.

C. Appeal of Planning Commission’s Decision to City Council: Any person or body, public or private, may appeal any sign related decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council. Such appeal, accompanied by the appropriate appeal fee (as set by City Council resolution) shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten calendar days after the date of the decision of the Planning Commission. Unless time is waived by the appellant, the matter shall be heard and decided by the City Council not more than thirty calendar days following receipt of the appeal. The City Council’s decision shall be in writing and shall state findings in support of the decision. The decision of the City Council shall be final as to the City. Unless timeliness of decision is waived by the applicant, if the City Council fails to reach a decision within the required time, then the appeal shall be deemed denied as of the last date on which the Council could have timely reached its decision.

D. Judicial review: Any person or body, public or private, may seek judicial review of any sign related decision of the City Council pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; Ord. 1629 § 27, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2908)

18.58.090 Nonconforming signs.
A. Grandfathering: Every sign lawfully existing on October 10, 1985, and which does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter shall be deemed a legal nonconforming sign. Such signs shall be permitted to remain in place, so long as the nonconforming elements are not expanded. If a nonconforming sign is removed or replaced, the new sign shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.

B. No relocation or structural alteration to any part of any nonconforming sign, other than the change of copy or sign face, shall be permitted, unless such sign is brought into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2909)

18.58.100 Removal of signs.
A. In the event any sign regulated by this Chapter meets any of the following criteria, the community development director may require such sign to be removed or made to comply with the provisions of this Chapter without compensation pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 18.58.110:

1. Any sign erected without first complying with the non-communicative aspects of laws and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use;

2. Any sign which was lawfully erected or painted anywhere in the City whose use has ceased or has been abandoned by its owner for a period of not less than ninety days;

3. Any sign which has been damaged and the damage cannot be repaired within thirty days after the date of its destruction at a cost of less than fifty percent of the cost of complete replacement with a new sign that conforms to all current requirements; this provision does not apply to damage by vandalism;

4. Any sign for which there has been an agreement between the sign owner and the City for its removal as of any given date;

5. The sign meets the definition of “expired sign;”

6. The sign meets the definition of “abandoned sign;”

7. Any sign which is or is likely to become a danger to the public or is unsafe by virtue of the physical condition of its structure;

8. Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard not created by the relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the City.

9. The sign does not comply with the terms of the permit which authorized its construction. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1635, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1632, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2910)

18.58.110 Procedure for removal.
In the event the Director finds that any of the conditions of Section 18.58.100 exists, a written notice be given to the owner of the sign to take corrective measures so as to comply with the standards set forth in this Chapter within thirty calendar days after such notice. If such owner fails to take such corrective measures, the subject sign may be removed by order of the Director, which may order removal of the display face and / or the mounting structure, and the City’s cost of removal shall be charged jointly and severally to the owner of the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign was located. The Director may refuse to issue any subsequent building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit for the property on which the offending sign is located if such owner refuses to pay the costs so assessed. In cases where the sign poses and immediate peril to persons or property, the Director may cause such sign to be removed summarily without notice, and the City’s actual costs of removal may be charged jointly and severally to the owner of the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign was located. (Ord. 1638 § 2, 2003; Urg. Ord. 1637 § 2, 2003; prior code § 10-3.2911)

Chapter 18.60
TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
Sections:

18.60.010    Intent and purpose.

18.60.020    Procedure.

18.60.030    Conditions.

18.60.040    Burden of proof.

18.60.050    Nonresidential trailers.

18.60.060    Exemptions.

18.60.070    Extensions of time – Fees.

18.60.080    Revocation of permits.

18.60.090    Appeals.

    Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 1012, 1140, 1198 and 1223.

18.60.010 Intent and purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to permit at specific locations certain temporary activities and/or facilities that would otherwise be inappropriate as classified uses on a permanent basis. Such uses may be permitted for a period of four days to a maximum of six months, and an extension of six months or longer may be granted if good and valid reasons have been just established for such extension. It is further the intent to avoid incompatibility between such temporary uses and the surrounding areas by regulating such short-term land use activities so as to prevent or mitigate adverse effects associated with or resulting from such temporary uses. (Prior code § 10-3.3001)

18.60.020 Procedure.
The procedure for obtaining a temporary use permit shall be as follows:

A. Filing of Applications. An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed by the owner, lessee or other person having the right to the possession of the land for which the permit is sought. Such application shall be filed with the planning division on forms provided by the planning division. As part of the application, a plot plan shall be submitted which is drawn to scale and which designates all land uses on the property, the location of the proposed temporary activity/facility, utility connections, yards, off-street parking, and other information which the planning division may require.

B. Filing Fees. The applicant shall pay to the city a filing fee established by city council resolution to defray the costs incurred by the city in processing the temporary use permit application.

C. Findings and Decisions. The community development director or his duly appointed representative shall review the application, consult with those departments of the city which might have an interest in or jurisdiction over some aspect of the proposed temporary use, make any necessary investigation, and grant or deny the permit based on specific findings. (Ord. 1629 § 28, 2003; prior code § 10-3.3002)

18.60.030 Conditions.
In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the community development director may impose such conditions as he deems necessary to insure that the permit will be in accord with the findings required by Section 18.60.020C. Such conditions may involve any pertinent factors affecting the operation of such temporary use. In addition to such other conditions as the community development director may impose, it shall also be deemed a condition of every temporary use permit, whether such condition is set forth in the temporary use permit or not, that such approval shall not authorize the construction, establishment, alteration, moving onto, or enlargement of any permanent building, structure or facility. (Prior code § 10-3.3003)

18.60.040 Burden of proof.
In addition to the information required in the application, the applicant for a temporary use permit shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the community development director that the operation of the requested use at the location proposed and within the time period specified will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; and that the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate such temporary use without material detriment to the use, enjoyment or valuation of the property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site; and that sufficient off-street parking spaces are provided; and that the proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and quantity of traffic that such temporary use will or could reasonably generate. (Prior code § 10-3.3004)

18.60.050 Nonresidential trailers.
A temporary use permit for a nonresidential trailer may be issued in the following cases:

A. A nonresidential trailer used for a temporary office on property on which permanent facilities for persons occupying such trailer are being constructed; and

B. A nonresidential trailer used for a temporary office occupied only by employees of a business or manufacturer conducting business on property not normally open to the general public. (Prior code § 10-3.3005)

18.60.060 Exemptions.
The following temporary uses, for which a special permit must be granted by the council, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A. Carnivals, bazaars, fairs, festivals, pageants, exhibitions and religious observances provided such events do not exceed three days in duration;

B. Christmas tree sales sponsored by a public agency or nonprofit organization, such as religious, fraternal, educational or service groups directly engaged in civic, charitable or public service endeavors; and

C. Fireworks stands. (Ord. 1738 § 26, 2012; prior code § 10-3.3006)

18.60.070 Extensions of time – Fees.
When a request for an extension of time within which to comply with any requirement or condition imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is filed for approval, a fee in an amount established by city council resolution shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the processing of such request. (Ord. 1629 § 29, 2003; prior code § 10-3.3007)

18.60.080 Revocation of permits.
The community development director may revoke any temporary use permit for noncompliance or for any violation of the conditions set forth in granting such permit. A written notice of intention to revoke shall be mailed to the permittee not less than ten days before the date of revocation. The applicant may appeal the decision to revoke a temporary use permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 18.60.090. (Prior code § 10-3.3008)

18.60.090 Appeals.
Any person or body, public or private, may appeal the decision of the community development director to the commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the planning division within ten days after the date of the decision of the community development director. Upon the receipt of such an appeal, the community development director shall place the matter for consideration on the agenda of the first regular meeting of the commission following ten days’ written notice to the appellant and/or applicant. The decision of the commission shall be final. (Prior code § 10-3.3009)

Chapter 18.62
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sections:

18.62.010    Permitted locations.

18.62.020    Definitions.

18.62.030    Permit required.

18.62.040    Application.

18.62.050    Investigation – Recommendation.

18.62.060    Meetings, hearings and notices.

18.62.070    Requirements for permit issuance.

18.62.080    Development and design standards.

18.62.090    Operational requirements.

18.62.100    Measurement of distance.

18.62.110    Inspections.

18.62.120    Continuing duty to supply information.

18.62.130    Revocation.

18.62.140    Moratorium after revocation/denial.

18.62.150    Discontinued use.

18.62.160    Regulations nonexclusive.

18.62.170    Violation and penalty.

18.62.180    Existing adult-oriented businesses.

18.62.010 Permitted locations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, adult-oriented businesses shall only be allowed to locate in the M-1 (industrial) and M-2 (general industrial) zones, subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Adult arcade” means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means any establishment which:

1. As a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually-oriented merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, slides, films or other written, oral or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on a matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts; or

2. Advertises the availability of the type of material described in subsection 1 of this definition and such advertisement is visible from the outside of the building.

“Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant or similar establishment which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, videos, slides or other photographic reproductions or visual representations, which are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

D. “Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel which: (1) provides to its patrons through television, cable or satellite transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, photographic reproductions or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts; (2) advertises the availability of the type of material described in subsection (1) of this definition so such advertisement is visible from the outside of the building; and (3) rents, leases or lets any room for less than a six-hour period or more than once in a twenty-four-hour period.

E. “Adult model studio” means any premises where there is furnished, provided or procured a figure model or models who pose for the purpose of being observed, viewed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, filmed, video-taped, or similarly depicted by any person who pays a consideration or gratuity in any form for the right or opportunity to so depict or observe the figure model. “Adult model studio” shall not include any live art class or any studio or classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree under Section 94300 et seq. of the California Education Code.

“Adult motion picture theater” means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a regular and substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult-oriented business” means any establishment which as a regular or substantial course of conduct performs or operates as an adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, adult cabaret, adult model studio, adult hotel/motel, or any other business establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. “Adult-oriented business” does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. “Adult-oriented business” shall also include any establishment which, as a regular or substantial course of conduct, provides or allows performers, models, actors, actresses or employees to appear in any place in lingerie or similar attire which does not opaquely cover specified anatomical parts.

“Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.

“Director” means the community development director or his or her designee.

“Individual viewing area” means any area designed for occupancy of one person for the purpose of viewing performances, pictures, movies, videos or other presentations.

“Person” means person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or any other forms of business organization or group(s).

“Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” means a person who:

1. Within the two years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or the date of the revocation notice provided pursuant to Section 18.62.130 has been convicted of any misdemeanor or felony offense which relates directly to the operation of an adult-oriented business;

2. Within the two years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or the date of the revocation notice provided pursuant to Section 18.62.130, has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with an adult-oriented business or has been subject to an injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance under any applicable laws, including Penal Code Section 11225 et seq.;

3. Within the two years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or the date of the revocation notice provided pursuant to Section 18.62.130, has been convicted of any offense which is classified as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual battery or abuse, rape, distribution of material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or lewd conduct, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290.

“Planning commission” means the planning and environmental quality commission of the city.

“Qualifying interest” means: if the applicant is a corporation, each officer, director, and stockholder owning a minimum of ten percent of the stock of the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, each partner, including limited partners; if the applicant is some other form of business enterprise, all individuals owning a minimum of a ten percent ownership interest therein.

“Regular and substantial course of conduct” and “regular and substantial portion” means any adult-oriented business where one or more of the following conditions exist:

1. The area(s) devoted to the display of sexually oriented material or merchandise exceeds twenty-five percent of the total display area of the business; or

2. The business presents any type of live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts, or performers, models or employees appearing in public dressed only in lingerie, on any four or more separate days within any twelve-month period; or

3. At least twenty-five percent of the annual gross receipts, as defined by Section 993(f) of the Internal Revenue Code, of the business are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of services, products, sexually oriented material or merchandise, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;

4. This section shall not apply to any video store or bookstore which physically separates sexually oriented material from non-sexually oriented material and does not advertise such sexually oriented material.

“Religious institution” means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.

“School” means any public or private institution of learning which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education for any grades of kindergarten through twelfth.

“Sexually oriented material” means any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.

“Sexually-oriented merchandise” means sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery-operated vaginas, and similarly sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

“Specified anatomical parts” means:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

“Specified sexual activities” means:

1. Actual or simulated sex acts including intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral or anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, anilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pedophilia, piquerism, sodomy or zooerastia; or

2. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

3. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast; or

4. Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or

5. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or

6. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; or

7. Striptease, or the removal of clothing; or

8. The wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models dressed only in lingerie to the point where specified anatomical areas are exposed. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.030 Permit required.
A. No adult-oriented business shall be permitted to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on business within the city unless the owner of the business first obtains an adult-oriented business permit and a business license from the city.

B. No adult-oriented business shall be sold, transferred or assigned, voluntarily or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation or any other entity, and any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to be void unless an adult-oriented business permit is obtained by the purchaser, transferee or assignee. For purposes of this section, an acquisition by any person, group, partnership or other entity of at least ten percent of the adult-oriented business shall be considered a sale, transfer or assignment. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.040 Application.
Applicants for an adult-oriented business permit shall file a written application on a form supplied by the community development department, signed by the property owner or authorized representative under penalty of perjury. The applicant shall be required to show proof of identification. Said application form shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall submit mailing labels for all real property owners within a three-hundred-foot radius of the real property boundaries on which the adult-oriented business is to be located. Said mailing labels shall be as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll or as shown on more recent records of the county assessor or tax collector. The information requested in subsections (B), (C), (D), (F) and (G) of this section as to the applicant shall be supplied for all individuals with a qualifying interest as well as for the person(s) having management or supervision of the adult-oriented business. The application shall contain the information specified below:

A. The name(s) and mailing address(es) of the property owner(s), and the property location, including assessor’s parcel number;

B. The name, birth date and birth place of the applicant;

C. Fingerprints and thumbprints of the applicant;

D. The residence and business addresses and phone numbers of the applicant;

E. The name(s) of the person(s) having the management or supervision responsibility of applicant’s business;

F. Whether the applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct as defined in Section 18.62.020 and if so, the dates and details relating to the disqualifying conduct;

G. Whether the applicant holds or within the last two years has previously held any other permits, licenses, or entitlements for an adult-oriented business from another city or county, and if so the names and locations of such businesses and whether such permit, license or entitlement is still in effect or has been suspended, revoked or abandoned;

H. The name and nature of the business and activities proposed to be conducted on the property. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as set forth in its Articles of Incorporation;

I. The proposed hours of operation;

J. The form(s) of security proposed;

K. The manner of enforcing age restrictions;

L. A detailed plan showing the location of all walls and partitions, including the height and the material of construction as well as any lighting and surveillance requirements;

M. The location of all doors and windows, including sizes, materials and coverings if any;

N. All exterior elevations, including colors, signage and any other appurtenances; and

O. All other information required by the community development director to provide an explanation as to how the proposed project will comply with the requirements contained in Section 18.62.080. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.050 Investigation – Recommendation.
A. Upon receipt of a properly filed application, the community development department shall immediately send photocopies of the application to all other city departments and agencies responsible for enforcement of police, health, fire, building codes and other applicable laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant and the proposed adult-oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this chapter. Said investigation shall be completed within twenty-five days of receipt of the application by the community development department. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall forward its recommendation on the application to the community development department, and in the event of disapproval, state the reasons therefor.

B. Based on its own investigation and that of the other departments or agencies the community development director shall include a recommendation in the staff report as to whether said application should be approved, conditionally approved or denied. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.060 Meetings, hearings and notices.
The planning commission and city council shall hold public hearings on the adult-oriented business permit application.

A. The hearings shall be noticed as required by Government Code Section 65091.

B. At the hearings, the applicant, the city and any interested person shall be entitled to present relevant evidence and testify under oath and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The planning commission and city council shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the planning commission’s recommendation or the city council’s decision.

C. The planning commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing within thirty days from the date on which the application is submitted and determined to be complete by the community development department or is deemed complete by operation of law. This time period may not be extended and the hearing may not be continued without the written authorization of the applicant. At the conclusion of the hearing the planning commission shall make a recommendation approving, conditionally approving or denying the issuance of the adult-oriented business permit based upon the requirements contained in this chapter, as well as other applicable zoning and building requirements. Said recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council.

D. The city council shall hold a duly noticed public hearing within twenty-one days following the planning commission hearing or any such extension agreed to in writing by the applicant in accordance with subsection C of this section. This time period may not be extended and the hearing may not be continued without the written authorization of the applicant.

E. Within five calendar days of the close of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a resolution approving, conditionally approving, or denying the issuance of the adult-oriented business permit based upon the requirements contained in this chapter, as well as other applicable zoning and building requirements.

F. The applicant shall be provided with written notification of the City Council’s decision and the reasons therefor within three working days of the date of the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision of the city council is final and that any judicial action challenging the decision must be commenced in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8.

G. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant by personal service or by registered mail, return receipt requested. Notices shall be provided to any other interested party who has requested the same by regular mail. (Ord. 1601 § 65, 2000; Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.070 Requirements for permit issuance.
The city council shall issue an adult-oriented business permit if the following requirements are met:

A. The adult-oriented business is located in the M-1 or M-2 zone.

B. The adult-oriented business is not located within one thousand feet of:

1. Any other adult-oriented business. No more than one adult-oriented use may be operated from any one business;

2. A massage establishment;

3. A bar that is not connected with a bonafide eating place, hotel or motel;

4. A school;

5. A park or playground;

6. A church, chapel or other publicly recognized place of worship.

C. The adult-oriented business is not located within five hundred feet of any residentially zoned property in the city.

D. The adult-oriented business is not located within two hundred fifty feet of any residential use in the city which is not in a residential zone.

E. Neither the applicant, any individual with a qualifying interest nor any person having management or supervision of the adult-oriented business has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application.

F. Neither the applicant, any individual with a qualifying interest nor any person having management or supervision of the adult-oriented business has engaged in disqualifying conduct.

G. Neither the applicant, any individual with a qualifying interest nor any person having management or supervision of the adult-oriented business is less than eighteen years of age.

H. The adult-oriented business will comply with all the provisions of this chapter as well as other applicable zoning and building requirements. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.080 Development and design standards.
The adult-oriented business shall comply with all applicable development and design standards for the zone in which it is located in addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter.

A. If the adult-oriented business is the sole use on a lot, no landscaping shall exceed thirty inches in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet above the ground notwithstanding any landscaping requirements to the contrary.

B. The adult-oriented business shall comply with the city’s sign regulations and all other applicable zoning requirements.

C. The adult-oriented business shall not be located in whole or in part within any portable or mobile structure or pushcart.

D. The adult-oriented business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors the front entrance and all parking lot areas. If the adult-oriented business is located in a multitenant development, the security system shall only be required to visually record and monitor that portion of the parking lot which corresponds to the number of spaces which would be required for the business based on its size. The spaces to be monitored shall be those which are in closest proximity to public entrances for the business with the exact location to be determined by the community development department. Recordings made pursuant to this requirement shall be required to be maintained for a minimum of a thirty-day period.

E. All outside areas, including the parking lot shall be adequately illuminated during all hours of operation and for an additional two hours after closing. Artificial lighting shall be required to provide an intensity of not less than six footcandle at ground level.

F. All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business which are accessible to the public shall be open to public view at all times, with the exception of restroom facilities. “Accessible to the public” shall include, but not be limited to, those areas which are only accessible to members of the public who pay a fee and/or join a private club or organization.

G. The adult-oriented business shall not display any sexually oriented material or sexually oriented merchandise which would be visible from any location other than from within the adult-oriented business.

H. The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult-oriented material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult-oriented material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

I. All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of fifteen footcandle, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level. However, such lighting shall not be installed so as to prevent the viewing of adult material in an individual viewing area or in an adult arcade or theater.

J. Any adult-oriented business which allows customers to remain on the premises while viewing any live, filmed or recorded entertainment, or while using or consuming the products or service supplied on the premises, shall conform to the following requirements:

1. Exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times; and

2. Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an entrance/exit to the business.

K. The following additional requirements shall pertain to any adult-oriented business which has at least one individual viewing area:

1. The application for the adult-oriented business permit shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet. Each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the adult-oriented business to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches; and

2. The interior shall be configured in such a manner so that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If two or more manager’s stations are designated, then the interior shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station(s) may be made without the prior approval of the community development director, and no views shall be obstructed by doors, walls, display racks or other materials; and

3. All individual viewing areas within the adult-oriented business shall be visible from a continuous and visually accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing into the individual viewing area at all times in order to enforce all rules and regulations; and

4. Individual viewing areas shall be operated and maintained without any hole or other opening or other means of direct communication or visual or physical access between the interior space of two or more individual viewing areas; and

5. Notwithstanding Section 18.62.180, lawfully existing nonconforming uses shall not be required to construct a manager station or stations provided that all other provisions of this section are complied with and that all areas within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times.

L. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities:

1. No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons; and

2. Separate dressing room facilities shall be provided for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use; and

3. An entrance/exit shall be provided for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons; and

4. Access shall be provided for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle shall be provided for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers; and

5. Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.090 Operational requirements.
A. The adult-oriented business shall not conduct or sponsor any special events, promotions, festivals, concerts or other similar events which would increase the demand for parking beyond the approved number of spaces for the particular use.

B. The adult-oriented business shall not conduct any massage, acupuncture, tattooing, acupressure, fortune-telling or escort services on the premises nor shall any such business be conducted from the same premises as the adult-oriented business.

C. The adult-oriented business shall not allow admittance of any person under the age of eighteen if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one if liquor is served. The age restrictions shall be posted accordingly at the entrance to the adult-oriented business.

D. No solicitation of trade may be made at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented business by any means other than signage which complies with the city’s sign regulations.

E. All required permits and licenses shall be conspicuously posted at a location where they may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business.

F. The adult-oriented business shall not operate between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m.

G. A manager(s) or other individual must be present at all times the business is operating; said person shall be responsible for all actions of the business while on duty.

H. The names of all managers, plus a twenty-four hour emergency contact shall be provided to the police department.

I. No person may be employed by the adult-oriented business if within the last two years that individual is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct.

J. No adult-oriented business may be used for the purpose of conducting a private club during such hours as the business is not open to the public.

K. Any adult-oriented business which allows customers to remain on the premises while viewing any live, filmed or recorded entertainment, or while using or consuming the products or service supplied on the premises, shall conform to the following requirements:

1. At least one security guard shall be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds and parking areas, at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than fifty persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty inside the premises. The security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter, and notifying the police department of any violations of law observed. Any security guard required by this subsection shall be uniformed in such manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a doorperson, ticket seller, ticket taker, or admittance person while acting as a security guard hereunder; and

2. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open.

L. The following additional requirements shall pertain to any adult-oriented business which has at least one individual viewing area:

1. At least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present; and

2. No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

M. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities:

1. No patron shall be permitted within six feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. “Entertainer” shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any person who, without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business;

2. No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer while on the premises; and

3. No person may give a live performance depicting specified anatomical parts or involving specified sexual activities unless that person has obtained an adult performer’s license pursuant to Chapter 5.72 of this code. The permittee shall provide the names of all such persons who perform at the adult-oriented business to the city police department within ten business days of the first performance. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.100 Measurement of distance.
A. The distance between an adult-oriented business and the uses listed in Section 18.62.070(A) through (D) shall be measured in a radius, without regard to intervening structures, from the property lines of the parcel on which the adult-oriented business is located to the nearest property line of such uses.

B. Once an adult-oriented business lawfully obtains an adult-oriented business permit to locate in the M-1 or M-2 zones, the subsequent establishment of any use listed in Section 18.62.070(A) through (D) within the restricted distances shall not render the adult-oriented business nonconforming. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.110 Inspections.
The permittee shall permit officers of the city of Gardena, Los Angeles County, and each of their authorized representatives to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the adult-oriented business is open for business or occupied. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or opened for business. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.120 Continuing duty to supply information.
Permittees shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this chapter in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the community development department, shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.130 Revocation.
A. Revocation Grounds. The community development director shall revoke an adult-oriented business permit when he or she discovers that any of the following have occurred:

1. The adult-oriented business has been operated in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter and, if the violation is of a continuous nature, the business continues to be operated in violation of such provision for more than ten days following the date written notice of such violation is mailed or delivered to the permittee, or if the violation is of a noncontinuous nature two or more additional violations of the same provision, or four or more violations of any other of the provisions of this chapter occur within any twelve-month period; or

2. The application is found to contain incorrect, false or misleading information; or

3. A court of competent jurisdiction has found the adult-oriented business to constitute a public nuisance; or

4. Any ground exists which would have constituted grounds for denial of the original application under Section 18.62.070; or

5. If, on one or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons has (have) been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor offense, which offense has occurred as a result of or has originated from such persons’ activity on the premises or property on which the adult-oriented business is located, and the person or persons were employees or agents of the adult-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; or

6. The permittee or any employee of the permittee has knowingly allowed prostitution, or solicitation for prostitution, on the premises; or

7. That the adult-oriented business has employed minors.

B. Revocation Notice. Upon determining that the grounds for permit revocation exist, the community development director shall furnish written notice of the revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the revocation, and shall state that the permittee may file an appeal of the director’s decision with the city clerk within twenty calendar days after the date of the notice and that absent a timely appeal, the revocation by the community development director is final. A timely appeal shall stay the revocation pending final decision by the city council.

C. Appeal. Upon receipt of a written appeal setting forth the grounds of the appeal and an appeal fee set in an amount to be determined by the city council, the city clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the appeal to be heard before the city council within twenty-one calendar days of receipt of such request. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be provided as required by Government Code Section 65091 and to any other interested party who has requested such notice. This time period may not be extended and the hearing may not be continued without written authorization of the permittee.

D. Hearing. At the hearing, the permittee, the city and all interested persons shall be entitled to present relevant evidence and testify under oath. The city council’s determination shall be based on the same factors as specified in Section 18.62.070. The city council shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the determination.

E. Within twenty-one calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall rule on the appeal and set forth its decision in writing, along with the reasons therefor. The applicant shall be provided with written notification of the decision and the reasons therefor within three working days of the decision.

F. The notice shall specify that the decision of the City Council is final and that any judicial action challenging the decision must be commenced in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8.

G. Notices of the revocation and of the decision, if appealed, shall be delivered by personal service or sending the same, certified mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, to the permittee as that name and address appear on the permit. In addition, the notices shall be posted at the location of the adult-oriented business. (Ord. 1601 § 66, 2000; Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.140 Moratorium after revocation/denial.
If an adult-oriented business permit is revoked or denied, the applicant shall not be issued a new permit for a minimum period of two years from the date of revocation or denial, unless the city council finds that the basis for such revocation or denial has been corrected. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.150 Discontinued use.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this code, if an adult-oriented business is abandoned for a period of six consecutive months, the city council shall, after public hearing, have the authority to revoke the adult-oriented business permit. The public hearing shall be noticed in accordance with Government Code Section 65091. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.160 Regulations nonexclusive.
The regulations set forth in this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of adult-oriented businesses as adopted by the city council of the city of Gardena. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.170 Violation and penalty.
A. Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner, permittee, or operator or employee of the permittee, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, permittee employer or operator, or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way, who operates or conducts or who participates in the operation of an unpermitted adult-oriented business, or who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues shall be regarded as a separate offense for which the full penalty may be imposed.

B. Any establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult-oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

18.62.180 Existing adult-oriented businesses.
A. Any adult-oriented business lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which becomes a nonconforming use by reason of the adoption of this chapter shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with all the development and design standards set forth in Section 18.62.080 no later than one hundred eighty days following the date of written notice as provided in subsection C of this section (the “Section 18.62.080 amortization period”), unless an additional extension of said amortization period or waiver of conditions is granted upon application therefor pursuant to this section.

B. Any adult-oriented business lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which becomes a nonconforming use by reason of the adoption of this chapter shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the zoning classification and distance requirements set forth in Section 18.62.070 no later than twenty years following the date of written notice as provided in subsection C of this section (the “Section 18.62.070 amortization period”), unless an additional extension of said amortization period or waiver of conditions is granted upon application therefor pursuant to this section. An adult-oriented business maintained as a nonconforming use that is sold, transferred or assigned may continue to be so maintained for the duration of the Section 18.62.070 amortization period subject to all other provisions of this chapter.

C. Any adult-oriented business which becomes a nonconforming use by reason of the adoption of this chapter shall be notified in writing of its nonconforming status by the director of community development by certified mail or personal service. Such notice shall be given to the property owner of record upon which such business is located, the owner of the business, and the holder of the business license for such business (to the extent such parties are different and are identifiable and accessible). Such notice shall also identify the applicable amortization periods as provided in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, and include a copy of this section describing the process for requesting an extension of such amortization periods. Failure of any person to actually receive such notice shall not effect the validity of any proceedings pursuant to this section.

D. Any application for an extension of the Section 18.62.070 and/or Section 18.62.080 amortization periods or for waiver of conditions must be filed by either the owner of the property upon which the business is located, the owner of the business, or the holder of the business license for the business, within one hundred eighty calendar days following the date of the notice. Such application shall be made in writing to the city clerk, shall include all of the information required by subsection E of this section, and shall be accompanied by the required application fee as established by the city council. The amortization periods specified in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall be final and conclusive for all purposes in the absence of a timely filed application pursuant to this subsection D. A timely application shall stay the relevant amortization period.

E. A complete application shall include: (1) a written request for an extension of the applicable amortization period or periods which specifies the additional length of time requested for amortization or the specific conditions to be waived and the justification therefor, including but not necessarily limited to information relevant to the criteria for such extension as listed in subsection G of this section; (2) the signature of the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that all of the information upon or submitted with the application is true and correct to the best of his or her information and belief; and (3) the required application fee.

F. The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city council within forty-five calendar days following the receipt of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Government Code Section 65091.

G. At the hearing, the city council shall receive the evidence and testimony regarding the criteria set forth in this subsection and shall determine whether the imposition of conditions or the amortization period or periods constitute an unconstitutional taking of property. If the city council determines that an amortization period or imposition of any of the conditions does constitute a taking, the city council shall prescribe a reasonable amortization period in which to bring the business into compliance or shall waive conditions provided that the use during the extension period or the waiver of conditions will not jeopardize, endanger, or otherwise constitute a menace to the public safety. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate the unreasonableness of the amortization period or the imposition of conditions so as to constitute an unconstitutional taking. Applicant shall supply any records requested by the city council in making its determination.

H. Approval of any extension of the amortization periods specified in subsections (A) and (B) of this section may be conditioned upon phased compliance with certain requirements of these sections by various dates. Failure to comply with any such conditions or requirements of the extension within the time limit(s) specified in the extension decision shall be deemed an automatic expiration of the relevant amortization period without further notice, hearings or orders; provided, however, in no event shall an amortization period expire prior to the dates set forth in subsections (A) or (B) of this section, as applicable.

I. The city council shall issue its decision within thirty days of the close of the hearing. The city clerk shall send written notice of the decision to the applicant within three working days of the decision by first class mail, postage prepaid. The decision shall include written findings in support of the council’s determination and shall be based upon the evidence presented at the hearing. The notice shall specify that the decision of the city council is final and that any judicial action challenging the decision must be commenced within ninety days after the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

J. The provisions of Sections 18.62.090 and 18.62.110 shall apply to existing adult-oriented businesses from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

K. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any adult-oriented business lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which becomes a nonconforming use by reason of the adoption of this chapter shall be subject to the nonconforming provisions of Chapter 18.54 of this code. (Ord. 1498 § 3 (part), 1996)

Chapter 18.64
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ARCADES
Sections:

18.64.010    Definitions.

18.64.020    Amusement devices as incidental uses.

18.64.030    Amusement arcades – Where and how permitted.

18.64.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. “Amusement device” means any mechanical or electrical machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or for which playtime is sold, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, with or without registering a score, for the purpose of testing the operator’s skill. “Amusement device” includes, but is not limited to, video games, pool tables, air hockey, foosball, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all similar skill testing devices. “Amusement device” does not include amusement rides, sound or music devices, vending machines, movie machines, publication dispensing devices or bowling alleys.

B. “Amusement arcade” means any place, location, or premises where either the primary use is the availability and public operation of amusement devices or where five or more amusement devices are available for public use and operation. (Prior code § 10-3.3201)

18.64.020 Amusement devices as incidental uses.
Amusement devices as an incidental or accessory use shall be limited to four or less devices per establishment. (Prior code § 10-3.3202)

18.64.030 Amusement arcades – Where and how permitted.
A. Amusement arcades shall be permitted to operate only where expressly permitted by this code and shall not operate within the city without first obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.46. In addition to the conditional use permit required by this section, the owner of the amusement devices must also receive a permit in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 5.12. For any amusement arcade which also constitutes a poolroom, billiard or social club, the applicant must also receive a permit from the city council in accordance with Section 5.08.310.

B. Amusement arcades shall be prohibited from locating within three hundred feet of each other.

C. Amusement arcades shall only be permitted with adequate bicycle parking facilities and adult supervision. (Ord. 1738 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1601 § 21, 2000; prior code § 10-3.3203)

Chapter 18.66
CANNABIS PROHIBITION AND PERSONAL CULTIVATION REGULATIONS/PERMITTING
Sections:

18.66.010    Purpose.

18.66.020    Definitions.

18.66.030    Prohibition.

18.66.040    Personal cultivation – Regulations and permit.

18.66.050    Violation.

18.66.060    Violation – Misdemeanor.

18.66.070    Public nuisance.

18.66.080    Civil penalties.

18.66.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to expressly prohibit the establishment of commercial cannabis uses in the city relating to medical cannabis and adult use cannabis as well as to impose reasonable regulations on personal cultivation in private residences and accessory structures and impose a permitting scheme.

B. The city council finds that the prohibition on commercial cannabis activity is necessary for the preservation of and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. The prohibition of such uses is within the authority conferred upon the city council by state law and is an exercise of its police powers to enact and enforce regulations for the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

18.66.020 Definitions.
A. “Authorized grower” shall mean a person twenty-one years and older who is authorized by, and in compliance with, state law and the provisions of this chapter relating to the cultivation of cannabis for personal use.

B. “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis, and any product containing cannabis. “Cannabis” includes cannabis that is used for medical, nonmedical, or other purposes. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.

C. “Commercial cannabis activity” means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, packaging, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products for nonmedical, medical or any other purpose, and includes the activities of any business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code or any other provision of state law that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses.

D. “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

E. “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.

F. “Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a space within a building that complies with the California Building Code (“CBC”) as adopted by the city of Gardena, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBC, a structure that has a complete roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two-inch by four-inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths-inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of the mil or inches, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement. If skylights are used, security bars shall be added to the skylights. The structure must provide complete visual screening.

G. “Indoors” means within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

H. “MAUCRSA” means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, as codified in Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 26000 et seq.) as the same may be amended from time to time.

I. “Outdoors” means any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

J. “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, collective, cooperative, nonprofit, trust, estate, association, club, receiver, syndicate, society, or other organization. The term “person” shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson.

K. “Private residence” means a house, apartment unit, condominium, mobile home, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence. (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

18.66.030 Prohibition.
A. Commercial cannabis activities, whether or not for profit, are expressly prohibited in all zones in the city of Gardena, including all specific plan areas and overlay zones. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, allow or engage in a commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the city. This prohibition includes any type of business enterprise where cannabis is complimentarily provided as part of any other non-cannabis-related business activity.

B. A property owner shall not rent, lease, or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real property in the city. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the city.

C. To the extent not already covered by subsection A of this section, all deliveries of cannabis are expressly prohibited within the city of Gardena. No person shall conduct any deliveries that either originate or terminate within the city, but the city shall not prohibit the use of city streets where the delivery does not originate or end within the jurisdictional limits of the city.

D. This section is meant to prohibit all activities for which a state license is required pursuant to the MAUCRSA. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a state license is required under the AUMA, including any local license to a non-profit entity pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 26070.5.

E. Except as provided in Section 18.66.040, all cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited in all zones in the city of Gardena. (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

18.66.040 Personal cultivation – Regulations and permit.
A. An authorized grower shall be allowed to cultivate marijuana for personal use only within a private residence or a fully enclosed and secure accessory structure to a private residence, subject to the following regulations in addition to any regulations of state law:

1. The marijuana cultivation area shall be contained within one single room that shall not exceed one hundred fifty square feet.

2. The room must be securely locked and accessible only to individuals residing in the residence who are twenty-one years of age or older.

3. The marijuana plants shall not come within twelve inches of the ceiling or any cultivation lighting.

4. Marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred watts in total for the total cultivation area within the residence.

5. The use of gas products such as but not limited to CO2, butane, methane, or any other flammable or nonflammable gas for marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited.

6. There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of marijuana cultivation outside the private residence or accessory structure from the public right-of-way or any adjoining property, including but not limited to:

a. Visual observation of any marijuana plants;

b. Any form of signage indicating that marijuana plants were being grown inside the residence or accessory structure;

c. Visual observation of any equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation;

d. Unusual odors, smells, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus;

e. Any light emanating from cultivation lighting.

7. The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where the marijuana cultivation occurs.

8. The authorized grower shall not participate in marijuana cultivation in any other location within the city.

9. The residence shall include fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for marijuana cultivation.

10. The marijuana cultivation area shall be in compliance with the provisions of the applicable building and construction codes as set forth in Title 15. The building official may impose additional conditions to meet such codes if necessary, including but not limited to installation of fire suppression sprinklers and ventilation and filtration systems that prevent plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure.

11. The marijuana cultivation area shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes.

12. Cultivation shall be limited to six marijuana plants, mature or immature, per private residence or a fully enclosed and secure structure. The limit of six plants per private residence shall apply regardless of how many individuals reside at the private residence.

13. The marijuana plants and any marijuana in excess of twenty-eight and one-half grams produced by plants must be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private residence or accessory structure which space is not visible from the public right-of-way by normal unaided vision.

B. No person shall cultivate marijuana in any private residence unless and until such person first secures a permit from the general services department and pays such fee as may be required and set forth by resolution of the city council.

C. The permit application shall be in a form approved by the city and shall, at a minimum, include:

1. The person’s name and date of birth as verified by a valid driver’s license, state-issued identification card, or passport;

2. A site-plan of the residence and accessory structure if applicable, which may be hand drawn, indicating where the plants will be located;

3. A description of the method used to secure the plants;

4. An identification of any special lighting or other equipment that will be used to aid in the cultivation of the plants;

5. If the applicant is the owner of the private residence, proof of such ownership; and

6. If the applicant is not the owner of the private residence, a copy of the lease or other rental agreement, along with a signed statement from the owner that the applicant has permission to cultivate plants in accordance with the provisions of AUMA and this chapter.

D. No outdoor cultivation of marijuana plants shall be allowed in the city of Gardena, even for personal use. (This section shall be of no further force or effect and shall be deemed repealed upon a determination by the California Attorney General that nonmedical use of marijuana is lawful in the state of California under federal law.) (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

18.66.050 Violation.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property within the city to cause or allow such property to be used in a manner which violates this chapter. (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

18.66.060 Violation – Misdemeanor.
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

18.66.070 Public nuisance.
Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 or any other remedy available to the city. (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

18.66.080 Civil penalties.
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this chapter, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief or the city may pursue administrative fines and penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.20 against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to the prevailing party. (Ord. 1781 § 2 (part), 2017)

Chapter 18.68
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Sections:

18.68.010    Definitions.

18.68.020    Transportation demand and trip reduction measures.

18.68.030    Monitoring.

18.68.040    Enforcement.

18.68.050    Exception.

18.68.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Alternative transportation” means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.

“Applicable development” means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 18.68.020.

“Buspool” means a vehicle carrying sixteen or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule.

“The California Environmental Quality Act” (CEQA), means that statute contained in Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. and the Guidelines contained in Section 15000 et seq. of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations which requires all jurisdictions in the state of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development.

“Carpool” means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis.

“Developer” means the individual/organization who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner.

“Development” means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which exceed the thresholds defined in Section 18.68.020 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.

“Employee parking area” means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. Unless specified in the city zoning/building code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted Type of Use to Employees

 

Commercial

30%

Office/professional

85%

Industrial/manufacturing

90%

“Preferential parking” means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles.

“Property owner” means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent.

“South Coast Air Quality Management District” (SCAQMD) is the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties).

“Tenant” means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project.

“Transportation Demand Management” (TDM) means the alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

“Trip reduction” means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles.

“Vanpool” means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis.

“Vehicle” means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. (Ord. 1465 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 10-3.3301)

18.68.020 Transportation demand and trip reduction measures.
A. Applicability of Requirements. Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all of the applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures. Should any of the requirements herein conflict with the requirements of Part 11 – California Green Building Standards Code, as adopted and amended by the city of Gardena, the most restrictive requirement shall prevail.

B. Development Standards.

1. Nonresidential developments of twenty-five thousand square feet or more shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the city:

a. A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

i. Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

ii. Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators;

iii. Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

iv. Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;

v. A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.

2. Nonresidential developments of fifty thousand square feet or more shall comply with subsection B(1) of this section and in addition shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:

a. Not less than ten percent of employee parking area, shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of city. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided, that at all times at least one space for projects of fifty thousand square feet to one hundred thousand square feet and two spaces for projects over one hundred thousand square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.

b. Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet, two inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas.

c. Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city.

3. Nonresidential developments of one hundred thousand square feet or more shall comply with subsection B(1) and (2) of this section and in addition shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:

a. A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers;

b. Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development;

c. If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided to the satisfaction of the director of transportation. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit station/stops;

d. Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite.

4. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. (Ord. 1792 § 6, 2018; Ord. 1465 § (part), 1993: prior code § 10-3.3302)

18.68.030 Monitoring.
All facilities and improvements required to be constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be shown on building plans for the development and shall be monitored by the community development department in the same manner that the department currently monitors the requirements of Titles 15 and 18 of this code. (Ord. 1465 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 10-3.3303)

18.68.040 Enforcement.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1465 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 10-3.3304)

18.68.050 Exception.
This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed “complete” by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a Notice of Preparation for a Draft EIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1465 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 10-3.3305)

Chapter 18.70
WIRELESS FACILITIES
Sections:

18.70.010    Regulation of wireless facilities.

18.70.020    Payment of consultant fees.

18.70.010 Regulation of wireless facilities.
All new wireless facilities, and any modifications, collocations, expansions or other changes to existing wireless facilities, whether located on private property, public property, or within the public rights-of-way, shall be subject to the applicable permits, standards, procedures and other requirements as specified in the policy adopted by resolution of the city council. Wireless facilities shall not be subject to the site plan review procedure of Chapter 18.44. (Ord. 1805 § 4 (part), 2019)

18.70.020 Payment of consultant fees.
All applicants for wireless facilities shall be required to reimburse the city for all reasonable consultant costs related to the processing of applications pursuant to this chapter in addition to the application fee. (Ord. 1805 § 4 (part), 2019)

Chapter 18.72
APPEALS
Sections:

18.72.010    Appeals – General.

18.72.020    Who may appeal.

18.72.030    Appeal procedure.

18.72.040    Decision.

18.72.050    Calls for review.

18.72.010 Appeals – General.
A. This provisions of this chapter shall apply to any decision of the community development director or planning commission not expressly covered by any other provision of this title or not expressly made final by any other provision of this title.

B. Decisions of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission.

C. Decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.

D. For purposes of this chapter, “appellate body” shall mean the planning commission or city council, depending upon which body is hearing the appeal. (Ord. 1738 § 56 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-1.16)

18.72.020 Who may appeal.
Any person, partnership, corporation, public entity, or applicant aggrieved by a planning and environmental quality commission decision may appeal any appealable decision of the community development director or the planning commission. (Ord. 1738 § 56 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-1.17)

18.72.030 Appeal procedure.
A. Time. Unless specifically made different by another section of this code, all appeals shall be filed within ten days after the final action of the decision being appealed from. The date of the notice of the decision shall be the final action. If not appealed within such time, the action shall become final.

B. Form. An appeal from a decision of the community development director shall be filed with the community development department and an appeal from a decision of the planning commission shall be filed with the city clerk within the prescribed period. The community development director or city clerk, as appropriate, shall set a date, time and place for a public hearing. A call for review by a member of the council may be filed orally at any council meeting.

C. Fees. Upon filing of an appeal the appellant shall pay a fee established by city council resolution for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the proceedings. Members of the city council shall not be required to pay a fee.

D. Hearings – Notices. If a noticed public hearing was required for the decision being appealed from, then notice of the hearing before the appellate body shall be given in the same manner.

E. Hearings. A hearing shall be commenced before the appellate body within forty-five days after the filing of the appeal.

F. Tie Vote. A tie vote before the city council shall be considered a denial of the appeal, or no action on a call for review, and the decision of the planning commission shall stand. (Ord. 1762 § 3, 2015: Ord. 1738 § 56 (part), 2012: prior code § 10-1.19. Formerly 18.72.040)

18.72.040 Decision.
A. The appellate body may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as should be made.

B. The decision of the appellate body shall be made within fourteen days after the close of the hearing. Findings shall be required where such findings are required of the decision being appealed from.

C. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the appellant. Any decision of the planning commission shall include information regarding the right of appeal to the city council and provide that a failure to file an appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. The decision of the city council shall be considered final. (Ord. 1738 § 56 (part), 2012)

18.72.050 Calls for review.
A. As an additional safeguard to avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this code, any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling of the planning commission may be called up for council review upon written request by one member of the council within the time specified for an appeal.

B. No filing fee shall be required of a council member who calls for review of an action of the planning commission.

C. A call for review shall be processed in the same manner as an appeal. (Ord. 1738 § 56 (part), 2012)

 